THE CODE OF THE CITY OF SALEM, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Published in 1993 by Order of the Council 
____________ 
Adopted: July 12, 1993 
Effective: August 1, 1993 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SALEM, VIRGINIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
James E. Taliaferro 
Mayor 
____________ 
W. Mac Green, Vice-Mayor 
Carl E. Tarpley, Jr. 
Alexander M. Brown 
Howard C. Packett 
Council 
____________ 
Randolph M. Smith 
City Manager 
____________ 
Stephen M. Yost 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Forest G. Jones 
Assistant City Manager/Clerk of Council 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Salem, Virginia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1969 Code, as supplemented through July 8, 1991, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the disposition tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1969 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 
CDB:1 
CDC:1 CODE DISPOSITION TABLES CDT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Charles Vignos, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Stephen Yost, City Attorney, Mr. Forest G. Jones, Assistant City Manager/Clerk of Council, and Ms. Joyce Bailey of the City Manager's office, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
Adopting Ordinance 
Ordinance of July 12, 1993 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Salem, Virginia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the Council of the City of Salem, Virginia: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Salem, Virginia" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 106, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 9, 1992, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person who violates any provision of the Code of any ordinance of the City shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Nothing in this ordinance shall repeal the items delineated in Section 1-11 of "The Code of the City of Salem, Virginia," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 106, nor shall it repeal any ordinances or resolutions establishing rates, charges, fees, or costs. 
    Section 7. Ordinances adopted after November 9, 1992, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective August 1, 1993. 
    Upon a call for an aye and a nay vote, the same stood as follows: 
Howard C. Packett - Aye 
Alexander M. Brown - Absent 
Carl E. Tarpley, Jr. - Aye 
W. Mac Green - Aye 
James E. Taliaferro - Aye 
Passed: July 12, 1993 
Effective: August 1, 1993 
/s/ James E. Taliaferro 
      Mayor   Attest: 
/s/ Forest G. Jones 
      Clerk of Council   City of Salem, Virginia 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. of Include/Omit Supp. No. Supp. No. 17  2-14-2011(1) Include 17  2-14-2011(2) Include 17  3-14-2011(1) Include 17  3-14-2011(2) Include 17  4-11-2011(1) Include 17  4-11-2011(2) Include 17  6-13-2011 Include 17 10-24-2011 Include 17 12-12-2011 Include 17 Supp. No. 18  1-23-2012 Include 18  2-13-2012 Include 18  2-24-2012 Include 18  2-27-2012 Include 18  6-25-2012(1) Include 18  6-25-2012(2) Include 18 10-22-2012(1) Include 18 10-22-2012(2) Include 18 Supp. No. 19 10- 8-2012 Include 19 10-22-2012(3) Include 19  2- 7-2013 Include 19  3-25-2013 Include 19  5-28-2013 Include 19  6-10-2013 Include 19 Supp. No. 20  6- 9-2014 Include 20  8-11-2014 Include 20  8-25-2014 Include 20  2- 9-2015 Include 20  3-23-2015 Include 20  6- 8-2015 Omit 20 10-12-2015 Include 20 11- 9-2015(1) Include 20 11- 9-2015(2) Include 20  1-25-2016(1) Include 20  1-25-2016(2) Include 20  6-13-2016 Include 20  7-25-2016 Include 20  8-22-2016(1) Include 20  8-22-2016(2) Include 20  8-22-2016(3) Include 20  8-22-2016(4) Include 20  8-22-2016(5) Include 20  9-26-2016(1) Include 20  9-26-2016(2) Include 20 11-14-2016(1) Include 20 11-14-2016(2) Include 20 11-14-2016(3) Include 20  1- 9-2017 Include 20  1-23-2017(1) Omit 20  1-23-2017(2) Include 20  2-13-2017(1) Include 20  2-13-2017(2) Include 20 Supp. No. 21  7-10-2017(1) Include 21  8-14-2017(1) Include 21  9-25-2017(1) Include 21 11-13-2017(1) Include 21 11-13-2017(2) Include 21  2-26-2018(1) Include 21  4- 9-2018(1) Include 21  4- 9-2018(2) Include 21  4- 9-2018(3) Include 21  5-14-2018(1) Include 21  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
An Act to provide a Charter for the City of Salem, and to repeal chapter 288 of the Acts of Assembly of 1924, approved March 20, 1924, as amended, which provided a Charter for the Town of Salem, Virginia. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia: 
[1.] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is Acts 1968, ch. 150, page 192, approved on March 8, 1968, as adopted by the General Assembly. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Statutory fees of attorney for the commonwealth, treasurer and commissioner of the revenue supersede municipal charter provisions, Code of Virginia, § 14.1-66; municipal charter provisions generally not affected by Code of Virginia, tit. 15.2, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1; municipal charter provisions not affected by law of planning, subdivision of land and zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-501; local governmental charters generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-833 et seq.; local governmental charters to be amended only as provided by designated statutes, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-833; municipal boundaries to be incorporated in charter by reference, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-836.2; relationship between certain statutory powers of cities and towns and charter powers, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-837, 15.2-840. 

CHAPTER 1. - INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1.1. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the limits of the City of Salem, in Roanoke County, as the same now are or may hereafter be established by law, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of Salem, and as such shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with and may have a corporate seal which the city may alter, renew or amend at its pleasure. 
Sec. 1.2. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the City of Salem shall be as set out in section 3, chapter 288, of the Virginia Acts of Assembly of 1924, and as added to in the following annexation orders of the circuit court of Roanoke County: 
(1)  G.W. Akers et al. v. Town of Salem et al., entered November 13, 1952, recorded in common law order book 20, at page 294, in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of Roanoke County. 
(2)  Town of Salem v. County of Roanoke, entered October 31, 1959, recorded in common law order book 22, at page 48, in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of Roanoke County. 
(3)  Town of Salem v. County of Roanoke et al., entered August 17, 1966, in common law order book 24, at page 159, in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of Roanoke County. 
(4)  James K. Washenberger et al., v. City of Salem et al., entered December 20, 1983, in common law order book 37, at page 1348, in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of Roanoke County. 
(5)  Voluntary Settlement Agreement of Roanoke County and the City of Salem entered December 18, 1987, in chancery order book 112, at page 360, in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of Roanoke County. 
(Res. No. 570, 9-8-86; Acts 1987, ch. 18, § 1; Res. No. 697, 11-12-90) 
CHAPTER 2. - POWERS GENERALLY 

Sec. 2.1. - General grant of powers. 
    The city shall have and may exercise all powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred upon or delegated to cities under the Constitution and laws of the commonwealth and all other powers pertinent to the conduct of a city government, the exercise of which is not expressly prohibited by the said Constitution and laws, and which in the opinion of the city council are necessary or desirable to promote the general welfare of the city and the safety, health, peace, good order, comfort, convenience and morals of its inhabitants, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated in this Charter, and no enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive, but shall be held to be in addition to this general grant of powers. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-839. 
Sec. 2.2. - Adoption of certain provisions of Code of Virginia. 
    The powers set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-837 through 15.2-915, as in force January 1, 1968, and any acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, are hereby conferred on and vested in this City of Salem. 
Editor's note- Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-908-15.2-915.1 have been repealed. 
Sec. 2.3. - Contractual relationships. 
    The city may enter into contractual relationships with the commonwealth and/or its departments, bureaus, boards and agencies, with neighboring political subdivisions, with authorities, including regional authorities, and with private agencies on such terms and for such periods as the city council may determine to be in the public interest in order to promote the education, health, safety, and general welfare of its residents. Such contracts may include, but shall not be limited to, schools, libraries, sewage collection and disposal, water supply, police and fire protection, mass or rapid transit, parks, playgrounds and open spaces. 
Sec. 2.4. - Eminent domain. 
    The powers of eminent domain set forth in Code of Virginia, title 15.2, Code of Virginia, title 25, chapter 1.1 and Code of Virginia, title 33, chapter 1, as amended, and all acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto, mutatis mutandis, are hereby conferred upon the City of Salem. 
(a)  In any case in which a petition for condemnation is filed by or on behalf of the city, a true copy of a resolution or ordinance duly adopted by the city council declaring the necessity for any taking or damaging of any property, within or without the city, for the public purposes of the city, shall be filed with the petition and shall constitute sufficient evidence of the necessity of the exercise of the powers of eminent domain by the city. The city may employ the procedures conferred by the foregoing laws, mutatis mutandis, and may, in addition thereto, proceed as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Certificates issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 33-70.3 to 33-70.11, inclusive, as amended, and acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto, may be issued by the city council, signed by the mayor and countersigned by the city treasurer. Such certificate shall have the same effect as certificates issued by the state highway com- missioner, under the aforesaid laws, and may be issued in any case in which the city proposes to acquire property of any kind by the exercise of its powers of eminent domain for any lawful public purpose, whether within or without the city; provided, that the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 33-70.1, as amended, shall not be used for the acquisition of lands, easements or related interests in property located outside of the city, except for the acquisition of said interests necessary for streets, water, sewer or utility pipes or lines or related facilities. 
(c)  In addition to the powers conferred by the aforesaid laws, such certificates may be amended or cancelled by the court having jurisdiction of the proceedings, upon petition of the city, at any time after the filing thereof; provided, that the court shall have jurisdiction to make such order for the payment of costs and damages, if any, or the refund of any excessive sums theretofore paid pursuant to such certificate as shall, upon due notice and hearing, appear just. The court shall have jurisdiction to require refunding bonds, for good cause shown by the city or any other person or party in interest, prior to authorizing any distribution of funds pursuant to any certificate issued or deposit made by the city. 
Editor's note- Code of Virginia, tit. 33, has been superseded by Code of Virginia, tit. 33.1. Code of Virginia, §§ 33-70.3-33-70.11 have been superseded by Code of Virginia, §§ 33.1-121-33.1-129. The state highway commissioner is now the commonwealth transportation commissioner. Code of Virginia, § 33-70.1 has been superseded by Code of Virginia, § 33.1-119. 
Sec. 2.5. - Acquisition and disposal of property for certain purposes. 
    The city is authorized to acquire, in any lawful manner, for the purpose of encouraging commerce, manufacture, education and the building of homes, lands within and without the city, not exceeding at any one time one thousand acres in the aggregate, and from time to time, to sell, dispose of, lease or donate the same or any part thereof for commercial, industrial, educational or residential uses and purposes, including any land now owned by the city. The city may also donate any land now or hereafter owned by the city for hospital purposes. 
Sec. 2.6. - Property assessments. 
(a)  The city council may provide for the annual assessment and reassessment of real estate for taxation. The city manager shall appoint an assessor of real estate to assess all real estate within the city for taxation. The city manager shall prescribe the duties and terms of his office, may remove him for cause, shall fix his compensation, which shall be payable out of the treasury of the city, and may provide for such technical and clerical assistance as may be necessary or advisable and for the payment of any other expenses that may be properly incident to the function of his office. 
(b)  All real estate shall be assessed at its fair market value and the taxes for each year on such real estate shall be extended on the basis of the last assessment made prior to such year, subject to such changes as may have been lawfully made. 
(c)  The assessor shall prepare the land books and extend the taxes thereon and perform all the duties required by law to be performed in respect to real estate assessments. The clerk of the circuit court shall furnish to the assessor the list of real estate transfers within the city. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3370, the circuit court of Salem, or the judge thereof in vacation, shall appoint for the city a board of equalization of real estate assessments, to be composed of five members, who shall be freeholders of the city and who shall be selected by the court or judge from the citizens of the city to serve staggered terms. Members shall be appointed for terms of three years with no more than two terms expiring in any one year. Initial terms may be for less than three years. All terms shall run from December 1 in the year of appointment until November 30 in the year of expiration, [and] the terms of the members first appointed shall begin on the day of appointment. Members shall hold over until a successor is appointed and qualified. Such court or judge thereof in vacation may reappoint any member upon the expiration of his term and shall fill any vacancy upon the board for the unexpired term. The members of the board shall receive per diem compensation for the time actually engaged in the duties of the board, to be fixed by the city council, and paid out of the treasury of the city; provided, the city council may limit the per diem compensation to such number of days as in its opinion is sufficient for the completion of the work of the board. Such board of equalization shall have and may exercise the power to revise, correct and amend any assessment of real estate made by the assessor in the calendar year in which they serve and to that end shall have all the powers conferred upon boards of equalization by Code of Virginia, Chapter 32 of Title 58.1, and any acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto. Notwithstanding such chapter, however, the board of equalization may adopt any regulations providing for the oral presentation, without formal petitions or other pleading or requests for review, and looking to the further facilitation and simplification of proceedings before the board. 
(e)  The City of Salem and any person aggrieved by any correction or assessment made by the assessor or the board of equalization may apply for relief in the manner provided by Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3382, 58.1-3982 and 58.1-3984, and any acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to any real estate assessable under law by the state corporation commission. 
(g)  All provisions of law relating to the assessment of real estate in cities not in conflict with the provisions of this section shall apply to the assessment made pursuant thereto. 
(Acts 1980, ch. 150, § 1; Acts 1980, ch. 391, § 1; Acts 1993, ch. 357, § 1) 
Sec. 2.7. - Differences in rate of taxation; taxing districts pursuant to article X, section 1 of state constitution. 
    The city council may, from time to time, provide for differences in the rate of taxation to be imposed upon real estate by the city within all or parts of areas added to its territorial limits. Such differences in the rate of taxation shall bear a reasonable relationship to differences between nonrevenue producing governmental services giving land urban character which are furnished in one or several areas in contrast to the services furnished in other areas of the city. In so doing the city council may, from time to time, establish such taxing districts as may be necessary to reasonably differentiate between those areas added to the territorial limits of the city receiving contrasting services as hereinabove provided, and having once established such taxing districts, the city council may, from time to time thereafter, alter, amend or abolish the same as the character or extent of such services are changed. 
(Acts 1974, ch. 144.) 
CHAPTER 3. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 3.1. - Election of councilmen. 
    On the first Tuesday in May 1974, and on the first Tuesday in May every two years thereafter, there shall be held a general municipal election, at which the members of the city council shall be elected. All other municipal elections that may be held shall be known as special municipal elections. 
(Acts 1973, ch. 141, § 1.) 
Sec. 3.2. - Nominations of candidates for council and other city offices. 
    No primary elections shall be held for the nomination of candidates for the office of councilman and for other city offices. All candidates for the office of council and all other city offices shall file their notice of candidacy and be nominated only by petition in the manner prescribed by the general laws of the Commonwealth. Candidates for council and city offices shall not be identified on the ballot by political affiliation. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Charter, registration, nominations and elections held under this Charter shall be in accordance with the general laws of the Commonwealth. 
(Ord. of 10-22-2012(3)) 
Sec. 3.3. - How regular municipal election for election of councilmen conducted. 
    The candidates in any regular municipal election for the election of councilmen, equal in number to the places to be filled, who shall receive the highest number of votes at such election, shall be declared elected. 
    In any such election, each elector shall be entitled to a vote for as many persons as there are vacancies to be filled, and no more. No elector shall in such election cast more than one vote for the same person. 
    In counting the vote, any ballot found to contain a greater number of names for the office of councilmen than the number of vacancies in the council to be filled shall be void, but no ballot shall be void for containing a less[er] number of names than is permitted hereby. 
Sec. 3.4. - Election of other city officers; filling of vacancies. 
    All other city officers required by the Constitution and general laws of the commonwealth to be elected by the qualified voters of the city shall be elected on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November preceding the expiration of the terms of office of their respective predecessors, for such terms as are prescribed by law. All such elective officers shall be nominated and elected as provided in the general laws of the commonwealth. The officers so elected or appointed shall qualify in the mode prescribed by law and shall continue in office until their successors are elected and qualified. 
Sec. 3.5. - Advisory referendum. 
    The city council, by majority vote of the entire council, may submit to the qualified voters of the city for advisory purposes, any question or group of questions relating to the affairs of the city. Any such advisory referendum shall be conducted in the manner provided for bond elections, but the results thereof shall not be binding upon the city council. There shall be no right of appeal from or recount of the results of an advisory referendum. 
CHAPTER 4. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 4.1. - Composition of council; staggered terms and term of office of councilmen. 
    The city council shall consist of five members. At the general municipal election held in May 1974, and every four years thereafter, two members shall be elected for terms of four years. At the general municipal election held in May 1976, and every four years thereafter, three members of council shall be elected for terms of four years. All members of the city council shall serve until their successors have been elected and have qualified. 
(Acts 1973, ch. 141, § 1.) 
Sec. 4.2. - Eligibility for office of councilman. 
    Any person qualified to vote in the city shall be eligible to the office of councilman. 
Sec. 4.3. - Filling of vacancies on council. 
    Vacancies in the city council shall be filled within thirty days, for the unexpired term, by a majority vote of the remaining members. Should, however, the remaining members cast a tie vote, or otherwise be unable to agree, the clerk of council shall, after the expiration of thirty days, certify this fact to the circuit court of Salem, and the court, or the judge thereof, shall proceed to enter an order appointing a qualified person or persons to fill such vacancy or vacancies. 
Sec. 4.4. - Election, term of office and duties of mayor. 
    At the first meeting of the city council in July of each even-numbered year, the city council shall elect from its members a mayor, who shall serve for a term of two years. The mayor shall preside at meetings of the city council and perform such other duties consistent with his office as may be imposed by the city council. He shall have a vote and voice in the proceedings of the city council, but shall have no power of veto. He shall be the official head of the city and he shall be clothed with all the powers and authority in civil and criminal matters as may be prescribed by the laws of the state. In times of public danger or emergency, he, or during his absence or disability, the city manager, may take command of the police and maintain order and enforce the laws, and for this purpose, may deputize such assistant policemen as may be necessary. During his absence or disability, except as above provided, his duties shall be performed by another member appointed by the city council. He shall authenticate by his signature such instruments as the city council, this Charter or the laws of the commonwealth shall require. 
(Acts 1973, ch. 141, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5. - Salaries of mayor and council. 
    The city council shall fix the salaries of the councilmen and the mayor. Salaries of councilmen and mayor shall be determined in the manner and within the amounts provided for in Code of Virginia, § 14.1-47.2. The salaries of the mayor and councilmen shall not be decreased during the term for which they were elected. 
(Acts 1973, ch. 141, § 1; Acts 1984, ch. 112, § 1) 
Sec. 4.6. - Meetings; quorum. 
(a)  On the first day of July following a regular municipal election, or if such day is a Sunday, then on the day following, the city council shall meet at nine o'clock a.m. at the usual place for holding the meetings of the city council, at which time the newly elected councilmen, after first having taken the oaths prescribed by law, shall assume the duties of their office. Thereafter, the city council shall meet at such times as may be prescribed by ordinance of [or] resolution; except, that they shall regularly meet not less than once each month. 
(b)  The mayor, any member of the city council or the city manager may call special meetings of the city council at any time upon giving at least twelve (12) hours' written notice thereof, with the purpose of such meeting stated therein, to each member served personally or left at his usual place of business or residence, or such meeting may be held at any time without notice, provided all members of the city council attend. No business other than that mentioned in the call shall be considered at such meeting, unless all members of the city council are present and first give their unanimous consent to the consideration of such business. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public, and any citizen may have access to the minutes and records thereof at all reasonable times. 
(d)  A majority of all members of the city council shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time, and compel the attendance of absentees. 
(Acts 1973, ch. 141, § 1) 
Editor's note- Executive or closed meetings may be held as provided in Code of Virginia, § 2.1-344. 
Sec. 4.7. - Votes to be recorded. 
    All votes and elections by the city council shall be viva voce and the vote shall be recorded in the journal of the council. 
Sec. 4.8. - Rules of procedure; journal of proceedings. 
    The city council may determine its own rules of procedure and may punish its own members for misconduct. It shall keep a journal of its proceedings. 
Sec. 4.9. - Council members to deal with administrative service through city manager. 
    Except for the purpose of inquiry, the city council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor any member thereof, shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. Any such orders or other interference on the part of the city council or any of its members with subordinates or appointees of the city manager, instead of dealing or communicating direct with the city manager, is prohibited. 
Sec. 4.10. - Interest of councilmen in contracts, sales, etc. 
    No member of the city council or other officer shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in the profits of any contract or work, or to be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, materials, supplies or services (other than official services). Any member of the city council or any other officer of the city offending against the provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than five hundred dollars or be imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the court, and shall forfeit his office. 
Editor's note- The subject matter of the above section is controlled by Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.1 et seq. 
Sec. 4.11. - Effect of conviction of councilman of felony. 
    Any member of the city council who shall be convicted of a felony while in office shall thereby forfeit his office. 
Sec. 4.12. - Council a continuing body. 
    The city council shall be a continuing body, and no measures pending before such body, or any contract or obligation incurred, shall abate or be discontinued by reason of the expiration of the term of office or removal of any of its members. 
CHAPTER 5. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 5.1. - Administrative and executive head of government; appointment; term of office; assistant city manager; absence or disability. 
    The city manager shall be the administrative and executive head of the city government. He shall be appointed by the city council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. The choice shall not be limited to inhabitants of the city or state. He shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall serve at the will of the city council. An assistant city manager may also be appointed by the city council for an indefinite period, who shall likewise serve at the will of the city council. He shall be responsible to the city manager for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by the city manager or under this Charter. During the absence or disability of the city manager and the assistant city manager, the city council shall designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of the office. 
(Acts 1975, ch. 144, § 1.) 
Sec. 5.2. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city coming within his jurisdiction under this Charter, the general law or the ordinances or resolutions of the city council. He shall have power and it shall be his duty: 
(a)  To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced. 
(b)  To appoint and remove such city officers and employees as the city council shall determine are necessary for the proper administration of the city, except those in the legal and judicial departments, and the clerical and other attendants of the city council. The city manager shall report each appointment and removal to the city council at the next meeting thereof following any such appointment or removal. 
(c)  To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise or any contract are faithfully kept and performed, and upon knowledge of any violation thereof, to call the attention of the same to the city council, whose duty it shall be forthwith to direct such steps as are necessary to protect and enforce the same. 
(d)  To exercise supervision and control over all city departments and divisions created herein, or that may be created by the city council, and have general supervision over all public improvements, works and undertakings, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
(e)  To attend all meetings of the city council, with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote. 
(f)  To recommend to the city council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(g)  To prepare the annual budget and keep the city council fully advised as to financial conditions and needs of the city. 
(h)  To make all such contracts in behalf of the city as may be authorized by this Charter, or in accordance with the provisions of the appropriation made by the city council or under continuing contracts or loans authorized under the provisions of this Charter, or pursuant to resolution or ordinance of the city council. 
(i)  Unless and until otherwise provided by the city council, to act as city purchasing agent. 
(j)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or be required of him by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Acts 1993, ch. 357, § 1) 
Sec. 5.3. - Temporary transfer of employees to other departments, etc. 
    The city manager may whenever the interests of the city require, irrespective of any other provisions of this Charter, assign employees of any department, bureau, office or agency to the temporary performance of duties in another department, bureau, office or agency. 
Sec. 5.4. - Council not to interfere in appointments or removals. 
    Neither the city council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to or his removal from any office or employment by the city manager or by any of his subordinates or in any way take part in the appointment of or removal of officers and employees of the city, except as specifically provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 5.5. - Relations with boards, commissions and agencies. 
    The city manager shall have the right to attend and participate in the proceedings of, but not to vote in, the meetings of all boards, commissions or agencies created by this Charter or by ordinance and any other board or commission the city council may designate. 
CHAPTER 6. - CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY 

Sec. 6.1. - Appointment and term of office of appointive officers. 
    The city council may appoint a city clerk, a city attorney and such other officers for the city as they may deem necessary. Unless otherwise provided by this Charter or by ordinance, such officers shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
Sec. 6.2. - Deputies and assistants. 
    Unless otherwise provided by this Charter or by general law, the city council may appoint such deputies and assistants to city officers as they may deem necessary. 
Sec. 6.3. - Appointment of one person to more than one office. 
    The city council may appoint the same person to more than one appointive office, at the discretion of the city council. 
Sec. 6.4. - Appointment of members of boards and commissions. 
    The city council shall appoint the members of such boards and commissions as are provided for in this Charter, unless otherwise provided. The city council may appoint all such other boards and commissions as may be deemed proper, and prescribe the powers and duties thereof. 
Sec. 6.5. - Filling of vacancies in offices. 
    Unless otherwise provided herein, vacancies in any offices provided for in this Charter shall be filled by the authority and in the manner provided herein for the original appointment or election of such officers. 
Sec. 6.6. - Compensation. 
    Unless otherwise provided by law, the city council shall fix the compensation of all city officers and employees. 
Sec. 6.7. - Oaths of office and official bonds. 
    Except as otherwise provided by general law or by this Charter, all elected or appointed officers of the city shall take the oath of office and execute such bond as may be required by general law, by this Charter, or by ordinance or resolution of the city council and file the same with the city clerk before entering upon the discharge of their duties. If the requirements of this section have not been complied with by any officer within thirty days after the term of office shall have begun or after his appointment to fill a vacancy, then such office shall be considered vacant. 
Sec. 6.8. - Residence of city officers and officials. 
    Every officer appointed by the city council, except the city manager or assistant city manager, and every appointed member of any board or commission shall, at the time of his appointment, be a qualified voter in the city. If any officer or appointee moves from the city, his office shall thereupon be deemed vacant. 
(Acts 1975, ch. 144, § 1.) 
State Law reference- Where officers shall reside, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-51 et seq. 
Sec. 6.9. - Failure of officers to perform duties. 
    If any officer of the city, whether elected by vote of the people or appointed by the city council or the city manager shall fail or refuse to perform any of the duties required of him by this Charter or by ordinance or resolutions of the city council, he shall be fined not less than five dollars nor more than one hundred dollars for each offense, and he and his sureties on his official bond shall be liable for all damages which may accrue to the city or any other person by reason of such failure or refusal. 
Sec. 6.10. - Officers to hold over [office] until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
    Whenever, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, any officer of the city, judge or member of any board or commission is elected or appointed for a fixed term, such officer, judge or member shall continue to hold office until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
Sec. 6.11. - City clerk. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be the clerk of the city council, shall attend all meetings thereof and shall keep a permanent record of its proceedings. He shall keep all papers, documents and records pertaining to the City of Salem, Virginia, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for. 
(b)  He shall be custodian of the city seal, shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal and shall attest the same. He shall give to the proper department or official ample notice of the expiration or termination of any franchise, contract or agreement. 
(c)  He shall, upon final passage, transmit to the proper departments or officials copies of all ordinances or resolutions of the city council relating in any way to such departments or to the duties of such officials. 
(d)  He shall perform such other duties as are required by this Charter or by the city council by ordinance or resolution. 
Sec. 6.12. - City attorney. 
(a)  The city attorney shall have the management, charge and entire control of all the legal affairs of the city and shall be the legal advisor of, and the attorney and counsel for, the city and all its officers in matters relating to their official duty. He shall give written opinions to any officer or department or official board or commission of the city, when requested to do so, and shall file a copy of the same with the city clerk. 
(b)  He shall conduct for the city all cases in court whenever the city is a party thereto, and upon request of the mayor or city manager, he shall appear before the municipal court to represent the city for violations of city ordinances. 
(c)  He shall prepare or officially pass upon all contracts, bonds and instruments in writing in which the city is concerned, and shall certify before execution as to the legality and correctness thereof. 
(d)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or by the city council. 
CHAPTER 7. - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 

Sec. 7.1. - Council to act only by ordinance or resolution; confinement to one subject. 
    Except in dealing with parliamentary procedure, the city council shall act only by ordinance or resolution, and with the exception of ordinances making appropriations, authorizing the contracting of indebtedness or codifying ordinances, shall be confined to one general subject. 
Sec. 7.2. - Introduction; enacting clause of ordinances. 
    Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in a written or printed form. The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the city council shall substantially be: "Be it ordained by the council of the City of Salem, Virginia." 
Sec. 7.3. - Procedure for adoption. 
    No ordinance, or resolution having the effect of an ordinance, or resolution suspending an ordinance, unless it is an emergency measure, shall be passed until it has been read at two meetings not less than five days apart; provided, that the requirement of a second reading, by the affirmative vote of three members of the city council, may be confined to the reading of the title only. Any ordinance or resolution read at one such meeting may be amended and passed as amended at the next such meeting, provided the amendment does not materially change the purpose and character of the proposed ordinance. The ayes and noes shall be taken and recorded upon the final passage of all ordinances or resolutions and entered upon the journal of the proceedings of the city council. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, an affirmative vote of a majority of the members elected to the city council shall be necessary to pass any ordinance or resolution. 
Sec. 7.4. - When ordinances to take effect; emergency measures. 
(a)  No ordinance passed by the city council shall take effect until at least ten days from the date of its passage; except, that the city council may, by the affirmative vote of three of its members, pass emergency measures to take effect at the time indicated therein. 
(b)  An emergency measure is an ordinance for the immediate preservation of the public peace, property, health or safety, or providing for the immediate and necessary daily operation of a city department. The fact that an emergency exists shall be stated in every such measure. Ordinances appropriating money may be passed as emergency measures, but no measure selling or conveying any real estate or making a grant, renewal, extension of a franchise or other special privilege or regulating the rate to be charged for its service by any public utility, shall be so passed. 
Sec. 7.5. - Recordation and authentication. 
    Every ordinance or resolution having the effect of an ordinance, when passed, shall be recorded by the city clerk in a book kept for that purpose and shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the city clerk. 
Sec. 7.6. - Evidence of passage; use as evidence in courts. 
    A record or entry made by the city clerk, or a copy of such record or entry duly certified by him, shall be prima facie evidence of the passage of any ordinance or resolution, its due publication and the terms thereof. 
    All ordinances and resolutions of the city council may be read in evidence in all courts and in all other proceedings in which it may be necessary to refer thereto, either from the original record thereof, from a copy thereof certified by the city clerk, or from any volume of ordinances printed by authority of the city council. 
CHAPTER 8. - FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8.1. - Public works or improvements; contracts for more than five thousand dollars. 
    Any public work or improvement costing more than five thousand dollars shall be executed by contract, except where a specific work of [or] improvement is authorized by the city council and directed to be done by force account. Such work shall be based on detailed estimates submitted by the department authorized to execute such work or improvement, and approved by the city manager. All contracts for more than five thousand dollars shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder in such manner and under such bond as may be prescribed by ordinance and after the city manager shall have made due advertisement for such time as the city council may prescribe, by newspapers or posted notices. But the city manager shall have the power to reject any or all of the bids and advertise again, and all advertisements shall contain a reservation of this right. 
    In an emergency requiring immediate action, the city manager may proceed to do the work by procuring the required labor and materials without the necessity of advertising. 
(Acts 1980, ch. 150, § 1; Acts 1980, ch. 391, § 1) 
State Law reference- Virginia Public Procurement Act, Code of Virginia, § 11-35 et seq. 
Sec. 8.2. - Bond issues generally. 
(a)  The city council may, in the name of and for the use of the city, contract debts and make and issue, or cause to be made and issued, as evidence thereof, bonds, notes or other obligations, upon the credit of the city or solely upon the credit of specific property owned by the city or solely upon the credit or income derived from property used in connection with any public utility owned and operated by the city. But except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no debt shall hereafter be contracted for a longer period than that of the probable life of the work or object for which the debt is to be contracted, to be determined by the director of public works and certified by him to the city council. No public improvement shall be considered to have a probable life of more than thirty years; except, that the probable life of public buildings other than schools may be forty years, concrete bridges forty years and parks or other real estate fifty years. 
(b)  Bonds issued for the refunding of previous issues shall in no case be for a greater period of time than thirty years. 
(c)  The city may issue bonds, hereafter called "serial bonds," payable in annual installments, the first of which shall be payable at any time the city council may prescribe in the ordinance authorizing the issue of such bonds, and the last of which shall be payable within the period of the probable life of the work or object for which the debt evidenced by such bonds was created, ascertained and certified as hereinabove provided. 
(d)  Pending the issuance and sale of any bonds, notes or other obligations authorized by this section, or in anticipation of the receipt of taxes and revenues of the current fiscal year, it shall be lawful for the city to borrow money temporarily and to issue notes or other evidences of indebtedness therefor, and from time to time to renew such temporary loans, or to use current funds, to be ultimately repaid from the proceeds of such bonds, notes or other obligations, or from the city taxes and revenues, as the case may be; provided, that the proceeds of sale of bonds shall not be used, except for the purposes set out in this subsection, or for permanent improvements and utilities or refunding matured issues, unless approved by vote of the people. 
(e)  The credit of the city shall not, directly or indirectly, under any device or pretense whatsoever, be granted to or in aid of any person, association or corporation. The city council shall not issue any bonds, notes or other obligations of the city, or increase the indebtedness thereof, to an amount greater than eighteen percent of the assessed valuation of the real estate in the city subject to taxation; provided, that in determining the limitation of the power of the city to incur indebtedness, there shall not be included the classes of indebtedness mentioned in subsections (a) and (b) of section 127 of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(f)  Bonds based solely upon the credit of specific property owned by the city or solely upon the credit of income derived from property used in connection with any public utility owned or operated by the city shall be issued subject to this Charter and any law applicable thereto. Any specific undertaking from which the city may derive revenue may be combined with any other undertaking from which the city may derive revenue for the purpose of financing any of such undertakings and said combined undertaking shall be a specific undertaking from which the city may derive revenue. 
(g)  Every ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds shall specify the purpose or purposes for which they are to be issued, the aggregate amount of the bonds, the term for which they shall be issued, and the maximum rate of interest to be paid thereon. Any such ordinance may be amended by ordinance at any time before the bonds to be affected by such amendment have been sold. All other matters relating to such bonds may be determined by resolution within the limitations prescribed by such ordinances or by this Charter. 
(h)  However, if there shall be omitted from this Charter any provision essential to the valid authorization, sale, execution and issuance of any of the bonds of the city, the provisions of the general law with reference to similar bonds shall supply such omission. 
(i)  Any bonds issued by the city under this Charter shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk under the seal of the city, and shall be made payable at the office of the city treasurer or such other place, in or out of the state, as the city council may provide. Such bonds shall be advertised by the city manager and sold by the city treasurer, under supervision of the mayor, city manager and city clerk, and the sale reported to and approved by the city council, and the proceeds from such sale shall be paid to the city treasurer. 
Editor's note- The reference to the Constitution of Virginia in subsection (e) of the above section is obsolete. A new Constitution became effective on July 1, 1971. 
Sec. 8.3. - Submission of budget; annual tax levy and appropriation ordinance. 
    The city manager shall, not less than thirty (30) days before the last regular meeting of the city council in the month of May of each year, submit to the city council for its information, a budget for the ensuing fiscal year, and before the end of each fiscal year, the city council shall lay its levy for the ensuing fiscal year on all property, real and personal, subject to taxation for city purposes. The city council shall, not later than July 1 following of each year, adopt its annual budget and pass its annual appropriation ordinance. 
(Acts 1985, ch. 23, § 1) 
State Law reference- Time for preparation and approval of budget, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-160. 
Sec. 8.4. - Preparation of budgets. 
    It shall be the duty of the head of each department, each board of [or] commission and each other office or agency supported in whole or in part by the city, including the commissioner of [the] revenue and the city sheriff, to file with the city manager, at such time as the city manager may prescribe, estimates of revenue and expenditure for that department, board, commission, office or agency for the ensuing fiscal year. 
Sec. 8.5. - School budget. 
    It shall be the duty of the school board to file its budget estimates with the city manager. The action of the city council on the school budget shall relate to its total only, and the school board shall have authority to expend in its discretion the sum appropriated for its use; provided, that if it receives an appropriation greater or less than its original request, it shall forthwith revise its estimates of expenditure and adopt appropriations in accordance therewith. The school board shall have power to order, during the course of the fiscal year, transfers from one item of appropriation to another; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to be in conflict with the provisions of the general law of the commonwealth. 
Sec. 8.6. - Disposition of unencumbered balance of appropriation; obligations to be in accordance with appropriation, etc. 
    At the close of each fiscal year, or upon the completion or abandonment at any time within the year of any work, improvement or other object for which a specific appropriation has been made, the unencumbered balance of such appropriation shall revert to the respective fund from which it was appropriated, and shall be subject to further appropriation; provided, that this does not prohibit the city council from giving the city manager permission to authorize such transfer within a department as may be necessary to meet unexpected obligations. No obligations shall be incurred by an officer or employee of the city, except in accordance with the provisions of the appropriation made by the city council or under continuing contracts and loans authorized under the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 8.7. - Certification of availability of funds as prerequisite to expenditure of money. 
    No contract, agreement or other obligation involving the expenditure of money shall be entered into, nor shall any ordinance, resolution or other [order] for the expenditure of money be passed by the city council or be authorized by an officer of the city unless the city treasurer shall first certify to the city council or to the proper officer, as the case may be, that the money required for such contract, agreement, obligation or expenditure is in the treasury or safely assured to be forthcoming and available in time to comply with or meet such contract, agreement, obligation or expenditure. No contract, agreement or other obligation involving the expenditure of money payable from the proceeds of bonds of the city shall be entered into until the issuance and sale of such bonds have been duly authorized in accordance with the provisions of this Charter in reference to city bonds. 
Sec. 8.8. - Contingent fund. 
    Provision shall be made in the annual budget and annual appropriation ordinance for a reasonable contingent fund for use in any of the affairs of the city. Such contingent fund shall be under the joint control of the city manager and the city council. 
Sec. 8.9. - Audit of accounts upon death, etc., of officer; annual audit. 
    Upon the death, resignation, removal or expiration of the term of any officer of the city, the city manager shall order an audit and investigation to be made of the accounts of such officer and report to the city council. 
    As soon as practicable after the close of each fiscal year, an annual audit shall be made of all accounts of all city officers. Such audit shall be made by qualified public accountants, selected by the city council, who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the financial affairs of the city or any of its officers or employees. The city council may at any time provide for an examination or audit of the accounts of any officer or department of the city government. 
CHAPTER 9. - PUBLIC PROPERTY AND FRANCHISES 

Sec. 9.1. - Transfer of franchises. 
    No public utility franchise granted by the city shall be transferable except with the approval of the city council expressed by ordinance. Copies of all authorized transfers and mortgages or other documents affecting the title or use of any such public utility shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after the execution and delivery thereof. 
Sec. 9.2. - Rights reserved to city in grant of franchises. 
    All grants, renewals, extensions or amendments of public utility franchises, whether so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the city: 
(a)  To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for misuse or nonuse or for failure to begin construction within the time prescribed, or otherwise to comply with the terms prescribed. 
(b)  To require proper and adequate extensions of plant and services and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest practical standard of efficiency. 
(c)  To establish reasonable rates and standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. 
(d)  To prescribe the form of accounts and at any time to examine and audit the accounts and other records of such utility, and to require annual and other reports by such public utility; provided, that if forms of account shall have been prescribed by the state corporation commission for public utilities throughout the state, the forms so prescribed shall be controlling so far as they go, but the city council may prescribe more detailed forms for the utilities within its jurisdiction. 
(e)  To impose such other regulations as may be conducive to the safety, welfare and convenience of the public. 
Sec. 9.3. - Extensions of public utilities. 
    All extensions of public utilities within the city shall become a part of the aggregate property of such public utility, shall be operated as such and shall be subjected to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain such extension shall terminate with the original grant. 
Sec. 9.4. - Applicability of state law; conflicts with jurisdiction of state corporation commission. 
    If there shall be omitted from this Charter any provision essential to the valid sale or granting, renewing, extending or amending of any franchise, privilege, lease or right of any kind to use any public property in the city, the provisions of the general law with reference to this subject shall supply such omissions; provided, that nothing contained in this Charter shall affect any franchise heretofore granted or any contract heretofore made with a public utility corporation, nor shall anything contained in this Charter be construed to conflict with the jurisdiction of the state corporation commission. 
CHAPTER 10. - COURTS AND ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 

Secs. 10.1 to 10.8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sections 10.1 to 10.8 were repealed by Acts 1975, ch. 144, § 2. 
CHAPTER 11. - PUBLIC EDUCATION 

Sec. 11.1. - School district. 
    The City of Salem shall constitute a separate school district. 
Sec. 11.2. - School board-Appointment and term of office of members. 
    The school board of the city shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed by the city council to serve staggered terms. Of the three members first appointed, one shall serve a term expiring at midnight, December 31, 1968, one shall serve a term expiring at midnight, December 31, 1969, and one shall serve a term expiring at midnight, December 31, 1970. 
    Additional appointees may be initially appointed to less than three-year terms, as council may determine. Upon the expiration of each term of office, their successors shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
    Provided, however, that if the city becomes a part of a school division composed of the city and one or more other cities or counties, the city council shall appoint the number of members of the division school board at the time and for such terms as may be prescribed by the general laws of the commonwealth. 
(Acts 1971, ch. 208, § 1; Acts 1980, ch. 150, § 1; Acts 1980, ch. 391, § 1) 
Editor's note- Code of Virginia, §§ 22.1-50 and 22.1-53, provide for a different number of members of the school board. 
Sec. 11.3. - Same-Powers. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the school board shall have all the powers and duties relating to the management and control of the public schools of the city provided by the general laws of the commonwealth, including the right of eminent domain within and without the city. None of the provisions of this Charter shall be interpreted to refer to or include the school board unless the intention to do so is expressly stated or is clearly apparent from the context. 
Sec. 11.4. - Same-Contracts with other school boards. 
    The school board, by and with the consent of the city council, shall have the right to contract with the school boards of other political subdivisions of the commonwealth to provide for the education of city children upon such terms and conditions as the respective school boards may agree, provided the same do not conflict with the Constitution of Virginia. 
Sec. 11.5. - Same-Control and title to property. 
    All recreation facilities and grounds located on property owned by the school board shall be under the exclusive control and supervision of the school board. The title to property and buildings devoted to public school purposes shall be in the school board. 
Sec. 11.6. - Same-Borrowing. 
    The school board may borrow, subject to the approval of the city council, from the literary fund of Virginia or from such other sources as may be available to it by general law. 
Sec. 11.7. - Definitions. 
    The terms "member of the school board" and "school board" shall have the same meaning as "school trustee" and "school trustees" as used in the Code of Virginia. The term "board" or "boards" as used in this Charter, shall not include the school board unless the school board is specifically named. 
CHAPTER 12. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 12.1. - Investigations as to city affairs. 
    The city council, the city manager and any officer, board or commission authorized by them or either of them, shall have power to make investigation as to city affairs, and for that purpose to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books and papers. 
    Any person refusing or failing to attend, testify or produce such books and papers may, by summons issued by such board or officer, be summoned before the municipal court by the board or official making such investigation, and upon failure to give satisfactory explanation of such failure or refusal, may be fined by the municipal court not exceeding one hundred dollars or imprisoned not exceeding thirty days, and such person shall have the right to appeal to the circuit court of Salem. Any person who shall give false testimony under oath at any such investigation shall be liable to prosecution for perjury. 
Editor's note- The references to the municipal court in the above section are obsolete. 
Sec. 12.2. - Who may administer oaths, etc. 
    The commissioner of the revenue, city clerk, city treasurer and city manager shall have power to administer oaths and to take and sign affidavits in the discharge of their respective official duties. 
Sec. 12.3. - Certain permits from council or manager involving variations from ordinances to be revocable. 
    Every permit given or authorized by the city council or city manager to vary from the ordinances of the city establishing fire limits and providing for the character of materials which may be used in the construction of buildings within such fire limits, and every permit authorizing a variance from the ordinances of the city relating to obstruction in, over and under, or encroachments on the streets, alleys, parks and other public grounds and property of the city and every permit authorizing a variance from any other ordinance of the city, shall be deemed to be a license and not a franchise or grant, and shall be revocable at the will of the city council. 
Sec. 12.4. - Actions against city for damages, etc. 
(a)  No action shall be maintained against the city for damages for any injury to any person or property alleged to have been sustained by reason of the negligence of the city, or any officer, agent or employee thereof, unless a written statement, verified by oath of the claimant, his agent or attorney, or the personal representative of any decedent whose death is a result of the alleged negligence of the city, its officers, agents, or employees of the nature of the claim and the time and place at which the injury is alleged to have occurred, or to have been received, shall have been filed with the mayor or an attorney appointed by the city council for this purpose, and the city is hereby authorized to appoint such an attorney, within sixty days after such cause of action shall have accrued. Where the claimant is an infant or non compos mentis, or the injured party dies within such sixty days, such statement may be filed within one hundred twenty days. No officers, agents or employees of the city shall have authority to waive such conditions precedent or any of them. 
(b)  In any action against the city to recover damages against it for any negligence in the construction or maintenance of its streets, alleys, lanes, parks, public places, sewers, reservoirs or water mains, where any person or corporation is liable with the city for such negligence, every such person or corporation shall be joined as defendant with the city in such action brought to recover damages for such negligence, and where there is a judgment or verdict against the city, as well as the other defendant, it shall be ascertained by the court or jury which of the defendants is primarily liable for the damages assessed. 
(c)  If it is ascertained by the judgment of the court that some person or corporation other than the city is primarily liable, there shall be a stay of execution against the city until execution against such person or persons or corporation or corporations shall have been returned without realizing the full amount of such judgment. 
(d)  If the city when not primarily liable, shall pay such judgment, in whole or in part, the plaintiff shall, to the extent that such judgment is paid by the city assign the judgment to the city, without recourse on the plaintiff, and the city shall be entitled to have execution issued for its benefit against the other defendant or defendants who have been ascertained to be primarily liable, or may institute any suit to enforce such judgment, or an action at law, or scire facias to revive such judgment. 
(e)  No order shall be entered or made, and no injunction shall be awarded by any court or judge to stay proceedings of the city in the prosecution of their works, unless it is manifest that they, their officers, agents or servants are transcending the authority given them in this charter, and that the interposition of the court is necessary to prevent injury that cannot be adequately compensated in damages. 
(f)  The city council is authorized and empowered to compromise any claim for damages or any suit or action brought against the city. 
Sec. 12.5. - Delivery of property, books, etc., to successor in office or city clerk. 
    Any person holding a city office and vacating the same on account of removal or otherwise shall deliver over to his successor in office, or to the city clerk, all property and books and papers belonging to the city or appertaining to such office which may be in his possession or under his control, and in case of his failure to do so within ten days after he shall have vacated the office, or within such time thereafter as the city council shall elect, and upon due notification or request of the city clerk, he shall forfeit and pay to the city a sum not in excess of five hundred dollars, to be sued for and recovered with costs, and all books, records and documents used in such office by virtue of any provisions of this act or of any ordinance or resolution of the city council, or by order of any superior officer of the city, shall be deemed the property of the city as appertaining to such office, and the incumbent of such office and his sureties on his bond shall be responsible therefor. 
Sec. 12.6. - Settlement of controversies among city officers. 
    In the event the city manager or other officer elected by the city council, in the administration of their respective duties, shall disagree or have any controversy with any of the officers of the city elected by the voters, such matter in dispute or controversy shall be referred to the city council for review and decision. 
Sec. 12.7. - Code references. 
    All references in this Charter to the Code of Virginia are to the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended. 
Sec. 12.8. - Continuation of officers and boards. 
    The present members of the city council and all other city officials and board and commission members shall continue to hold office until their successors shall have been elected or appointed and shall have qualified as provided by this Charter. Any member of the city council shall be eligible for re-election. 
Sec. 12.9. - Ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations continued in effect. 
    All ordinances and resolutions of the city and the former Town of Salem and all rules, regulations and orders legally made by any department, board, commission or officer of the city or of the former Town of Salem, in force at the effective date of this Charter, insofar as they or any portion thereof are not inconsistent therewith, shall remain in force until amended or repealed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 12.10. - Validation and ratification of bonds, taxes and contracts. 
    All bonds issued and sold, [and] all contracts, agreements and obligations made at any time prior to the enactment of this Charter or any amendment thereto by the council and government of the city and the former Town of Salem, not inconsistent with the Constitution of Virginia and general law, all taxes assessed and levied when the city was a town, and when the city was in transition from the status of a town to that of a city of the second class to the effective date of this Charter and its amendments, are hereby validated, ratified and confirmed; and all proceedings authorizing the issuance of bonds, notes or other obligations of the City of Salem heretofore had are hereby validated, ratified and confirmed and shall not lapse or terminate or be otherwise affected by reason of any of the provisions contained in this Charter, and such bonds, notes or other obligations may be authorized, sold or issued in accordance with the provisions of law in force prior to the effective date of this Charter as amended, or in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 12.11. - Original appointment of certain officers. 
    Upon this Charter becoming effective, the judge of the twentieth judicial circuit shall pass an order entered in term time or vacation, appointing a circuit court clerk, a city sheriff, a commonwealth's attorney, a commissioner of the revenue and a city treasurer for the city, whose terms of office shall extend until the next regular general election for such officers, for respective offices of circuit court clerk, city sheriff, commonwealth's attorney, commissioner of the revenue or city treasurer, as the case may be. The clerk of the circuit court, city sheriff, commonwealth's attorney, commissioner of the revenue and city treasurer shall assume their respective duties and take the oath of office prior to the first day of the next succeeding term of court. 
Editor's note- The City of Salem is in the 23rd judicial circuit. 
Sec. 12.12. - Severance clause. 
    If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this Charter shall, for any reason, be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment, order or decree shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this Charter, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, paragraph or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment, order or decree shall have been rendered. 
2. 
    Chapter 288 of the Acts of Assembly of 1924, approved March 20, 1924, as amended, is repealed. 
3. 
    An emergency exists and this Act is in force from its passage. 
Editor's note- Acts 1968, ch. 150, the act herein set out, was approved March 8, 1968. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Act 
Year Chapter Section   Section 
this Charter 1968 150 1.1, 1.2 2.1-2.7 3.1-3.5 4.1-4.12 5.1-5.5 6.1-6.12 7.1-7.6 8.1-8.9 9.1-9.4 10.1-10.8 11.1-11.7 12.1-12.12 1971 208 1 11.2 1973 141 1 3.1 
4.1 4.4-4.6 1974 144 2.7 1975 144 1 5.1 
6.8 2       Rpld 10.1-10.8 1980 150 1 2.6 
8.1 
11.2 391 1 2.6 
8.1 
11.2 1984 112 1 4.5 1985 23 1 8.3 1987 18 1 1.2 1993 357 1 2.6, 5.2  
Resolution 
Number Date Section   Section 
this Charter 570  9- 8-86 1.2(4) 697 11-12-90 1.2(5) (Ord.) 10-22-2012(3) 3.2(tit.)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Definitions and rules of construction, Code of Virginia, § 1-10 et seq.; authority to codify ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433; maximum penalty for violation of municipal ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1429; punishment for violation of various classes of misdemeanors, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-11. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Salem, Virginia" and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Salem City Code." 
(Code 1969, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Codification and recodification of ordinances, admission in evidence, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-37.3. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the interpretation and construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions of the city, the following rules of construction and definitions shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing with such surety, if any, as the council may direct, shall be sufficient. 
    City. The words "city" or "the city" shall mean the City of Salem in the State of Virginia. 
    Code of Virginia. The term "Code of Virginia" shall mean the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended from time to time. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 1-13.3, 1-13.3:1. 
    Council. The words "council" or "the council" shall mean the council of the City of Salem, Virginia. 
    County. The words "county" or "the county" shall mean the County of Roanoke in the State of Virginia. 
    Following. The word "following," when used by way of reference to any section, shall be construed to mean next following that section in which such reference is made. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.6. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females and to corporations as well as males. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.7. 
    Health director. The term "health director" means the director of public health of the county or his authorized representative. 
    In the city. The words "in the city" shall mean any territory the jurisdiction of which for the exercise of its regulatory power has been conferred on the city by public or private law. 
    May. The word "may" shall be permissive. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.13. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one person or thing; and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.15. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.16. 
    Occupant or tenant. The word "occupant" or "tenant" applied to a building or land shall mean any person who holds a written or oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Officers, etc. The title of an officer, department, board or commission shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Salem, Virginia." 
    Official time standard. Whenever particular hours are specified in this Code relating to the time within which any act shall or shall not be performed by any person, the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may be in current use in the city. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall include any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company, business, trust, joint venture or other legal entity. 
    Preceding. The word "preceding," when used by way of reference to any section, shall be construed to mean next preceding that section in which such reference is made. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.23. 
    Property. The word "property" shall mean real, personal or mixed property. 
    Public grounds. The words "public grounds" shall mean the parks and all public lands owned by the city, and those parts of public places which do not form travelled parts of streets. 
    Shall. The word "shall" shall be mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature, subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write, his name being written near it and being witnessed by a person who writes his own name as witness. 
    State. The words "state" or "the state" shall mean the State of Virginia. 
    Street. The word "street" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel in the city, including the streets and alleys, and, for law enforcement purposes, the entire width between the boundary lines of all private roads or private streets in the city which have been specifically designated "highways" by an ordinance adopted by the council. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.19. 
    Swear, sworn. The word "swear" or "sworn" shall be equivalent to the word "affirm" or "affirmed" in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.28. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense may include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Written, in writing. The words "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
(Code 1969, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.32. 
Sec. 1-3. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1969, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-17.1. 
Sec. 1-4. - Provisions of Code construed as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are in substance the same as those of the Code of the City of Salem, Virginia of 1969, and all ordinances adopted subsequent thereto and included in this Code, shall be construed as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1969, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - How Code divided. 
    The ordinances comprising this Code are classified according to subject matter and placed under appropriate chapter headings. Chapters of this Code are, in some instances, further divided into articles and articles are sometimes divided into divisions. In a few instances, subdivisions have been used. Each chapter, article, division and subdivision is composed of individual sections of similar subject matter. 
(Code 1969, § 1-4.1) 
Sec. 1-6. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1969, § 1-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.9. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing offenses. 
(a)  Misdemeanors are classified, for the purposes of fines or imprisonment, into four classes, as follows: 
(1)  Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(2)  Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(3)  Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(4)  Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The authorized punishments for conviction of a misdemeanor are: 
(1)  For class 1 misdemeanors, confinement in jail for not more than 12 months and a fine of not more than $2,500.00, either or both. 
(2)  For class 2 misdemeanors, confinement in jail for not more than six months and a fine of not more than $1,000.00, either or both. 
(3)  For class 3 misdemeanors, a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(4)  For class 4 misdemeanors, a fine of not more than $250.00. 
(c)  Wherever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the city shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(d)  Penalties in this Code or in other ordinances of the city shall not exceed the penalties prescribed by general law for a like offense. 
(e)  Except where otherwise provided, every day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the city shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Offenses defined in this Code for which punishment is prescribed without specification as to the class of the offense shall be punished according to the punishment in the section defining the offense. 
(Code 1969, § 9-1) 
Charter reference- Power of municipal corporation relative to penalties for violation of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-901, as adopted by Charter, § 2.2. 
State Law reference- Power of council to prescribe fines or other punishment for violation of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-13; enforcement of ordinances and regulations, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-901 et seq.; penalty for conviction of misdemeanor, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-11; payment of fines and costs on installment basis, etc., Code of Virginia, § 19.2-354 et seq. 
Sec. 1-8. - Corporate seal of city; execution of bonds, etc. 
(a)  The corporate seal of the city shall be a circle 13/4 inches in diameter, and just inside the outer rim of the circle the words "SALEM, VIRGINIA" with the design of a dove of peace carrying an olive branch in the center. On a flag, such seal shall be centered on a field of white with the dove of peace, circle and the words "Salem, Virginia" in gold against a background of royal blue. 
(b)  No other seal than that specified in subsection (a) shall be used as the official seal of the city until such seal shall have been changed by competent authority. Every paper issued by municipal authority requiring the city seal shall have affixed thereto the seal described in subsection (a). All bonds, contracts, deeds and other papers shall be executed in the name of the city by the mayor and the city seal shall be affixed and attested by the city clerk. 
(Code 1969, § 1-6) 
Charter reference- Authority of city with reference to corporate seal, § 1.1. 
Sec. 1-9. - Construction of repeal of former ordinance. 
    No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance, as to any offense committed against the former ordinance, or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, or any right accrued, or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued, or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect. 
(Code 1969, § 2-14) 
Charter reference- Ordinances and resolutions, ch. 7. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to state laws, Code of Virginia, § 1-16. 
Sec. 1-10. - Revival of repealed ordinance upon repeal of repealing ordinance. 
    When any ordinance which has repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect, unless the ordinance repealing it is passed during the same session of the council. 
(Code 1969, § 2-15) 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall repeal the following, when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Any annual tax levy or appropriation ordinance; 
(3)  Any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution of the city on any person or corporation; 
(4)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; 
(5)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; 
(6)  Any ordinance relating to the salaries of city officers or employees; 
(7)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, accepting or vacating streets or alleys in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance relating to the zoning plan map; 
(10)  The schedule of license fees; 
(11)  Any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this Code; 
(12)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
and all such provisions shall remain in full force and effect as if set out fully in this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by municipal personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them in a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted in the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - Courthouse security assessment. 
    As authorized by Section 53.1-120, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, effective November 1, 2002, the clerks of the city's district and circuit courts, respectively, shall assess and collect the sum of $10.00 as part of the costs in each criminal or traffic case in which the Defendant is convicted of a violation of any statute or ordinance. Such sums shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the case is heard, remitted to the city treasurer, and be he1d by the treasurer, subject to appropriation by city council to the sheriff's office for the funding of courthouse personnel. 
(Ord. of 10-14-02; Ord. of 7-28-03; Ord. of 6-11-07, eff. July 1, 2007) 
Sec. 1-14. - Fee for inmate processing. 
    Pursuant to authority granted in Code of Virginia § 15.2-1613.1, there is hereby assessed a sum of $25.00 as a part of court costs collected by the clerk of any city court from any individual admitted to the Roanoke County-Salem Jail or the Western Virginia Regional Jail following a conviction. The assessment shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the case is heard, remitted to the treasurer of the city and shall be used by the sheriff's office to defray the costs of processing arrested persons into the Roanoke County-Salem Jail or the Western Regional Jail. 
(Ord. of 9-13-2010(3), eff. 10-1-2010) 
Sec. 1-15. - Assessment for electronic summons system. 
    Pursuant to authority granted in Section 17.1-279.1 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, the clerks of the city's district and circuit courts, respectfully, shall assess and collect the sum of $5.00 as part of the costs in each criminal or traffic case in which a defendant is charged with a violation of any statute or ordinance. This assessment shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed, remitted to the treasurer of the city and held by such treasurer subject to disbursements by city council to the city police department solely to fund software, hardware and associated equipment costs for the implementation and maintenance of an electronic summons system. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. of 8-25-2014 shall be in full force and effect on October 1, 2014. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Electrical inspector, § 18-186 et seq.; plumbing inspector, § 18-286 et seq.; license inspector, § 22-56; elections, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; fair housing board, § 42-61 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 46; library, ch. 50; planning, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; taxation, ch. 82; board of real estate tax relief review, § 82-48; powers and duties of school board relative to traffic and parking, § 86-5; utilities, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- The Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-340 et seq.; State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.1 et seq.; Virginia Public Procurement Act, Code of Virginia, § 11-35 et seq.; liability insurance or self-insurance for officers, employees, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1518; photographing, recording, etc., of records, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1412; purchase of recycled paper, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-938; municipal ordinances generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1427; fiscal year, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2500; creation of service districts, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2400; fee for bad checks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-106; oath of local officers, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1522, 49-1; budget procedures, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2500 et seq.; Public Finance Act of 1991, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2600 et seq.; Virginia Public Records Act, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-76 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Purchases in emergency cases; purchases exceeding $500.00. 
    The purchasing agent may, in emergency cases, make purchases in any department of the city government not to exceed $500.00 without specific permission from the council. For any purchases in excess of this amount, an order of the council shall be required. 
(Code 1969, § 2-56) 
Charter reference- City manager as purchasing agent, § 5.2(i). 
Sec. 2-2. - Transportation safety commission. 
    There is hereby created the Salem Transportation Safety Commission which shall consist of six members, one of whom shall be a member of the council of the city. The members shall be appointed for staggered terms of four years. No member shall be appointed for more than two four-year terms. 
(Code 1969, § 2-4.1) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 
Secs. 2-3-2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Election of councilmen, § 3.1; composition of council and terms of councilmen, § 4.1; eligibility for office of councilman, § 4.2; filling of vacancies on council, § 4.3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-36. - When regular meetings held. 
    The regular meetings of the council shall be held on the second and fourth Mondays of each month at 7:30 p.m.; should, however, any Monday on which a regular council meeting is scheduled to be held fall on a day designated as a legal holiday as fixed, defined and set forth in Code of Virginia, § 2.1-21, as amended, such council meeting shall be held on the following Tuesday at 7:30 p.m. of such day. 
(Code 1969, § 2-1) 
Charter reference- Council meetings, quorum, § 4.6. 
Sec. 2-37. - Exercise of power conferred on city; passage of ordinances relative to municipal affairs. 
    The council shall have full power and authority to exercise all the powers conferred upon the city and to pass ordinances relating to its municipal affairs, subject to the Constitution and general laws of the state and of the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-38. - Election, term and powers of vice-chairman. 
    On the July 1 following each regular municipal election, or if such day is a Sunday, then on the day following, the council shall elect one of its members as vice-chairman, who shall be ex officio vice-mayor. He shall be elected for a term of two years and when the mayor is absent or for any reason cannot act or perform such duties as mayor, he shall be invested with all the powers conferred upon the mayor. 
(Code 1969, § 2-3) 
Charter reference- Performance of duties of the mayor, during the absence or disability of the mayor, by another member of the council appointed by the council, § 4.4. 
Sec. 2-39. - Transfer of power in absence of mayor or vice-mayor. 
    In the absence or in case of the disability of both the mayor and vice-mayor, one of the other councilmembers shall be clothed with and shall have all the powers conferred upon the mayor and vice-mayor. 
(Code 1969, § 2-4) 
Secs. 2-40-2-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES FOR PROCEEDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of council to determine its own rules of procedure, § 4.8. 

Sec. 2-56. - Order of proceedings at regular meetings of council. 
    At a regular meeting of the council, the order of proceedings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Roll call. 
(2)  Reading and correction, if any, of the minutes of the preceding regular or special meeting or meetings. 
(3)  Reports of city officials. 
(4)  Reports of committees. 
(5)  Unfinished business. 
(6)  Communications and new business. 
(Code 1969, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-57. - Record of proceedings. 
(a)  The clerk of council shall keep a minute book wherein shall be kept a record of the proceedings of the council. The record of the proceedings of the council shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the clerk of council. 
(b)  Unless a reading of the minutes of a council meeting is requested by a member of the council, such minutes may be approved without reading if the clerk of council has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 2-6) 
Charter reference- Council to keep a journal of its proceedings, § 4.8. 
Sec. 2-58. - Book for transcription of general and permanent ordinances. 
    The council shall have all ordinances of a general and permanent nature transcribed into a book, which book shall be known as the "General Ordinance Book." 
(Code 1969, § 2-7) 
Sec. 2-59. - Introduction generally and withdrawal. 
    The name of the member of the council offering an ordinance, resolution or proposition to the council shall be recorded in the minute book, if the member so desires. The ordinance, resolution or proposition shall be stated by the chair before being acted on and the ordinance, resolution or proposition may be withdrawn by the mover before amendment or before action is had thereon by the council. 
(Code 1969, § 2-8) 
Sec. 2-60. - Majority vote required for passage of ordinance, etc. 
    Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, an affirmative vote of a majority of the members elected to the council shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1969, § 2-9) 
Sec. 2-61. - Appeal from decisions of chair. 
    An appeal to the council may be taken from any decision of the chair. Such appeal may be debated and the decision of the chair shall be final unless three-fifths of the members present vote against the decision. 
(Code 1969, § 2-10) 
Sec. 2-62. - Compelling attendance of members. 
    Any member of the council may compel the attendance of any absent member at any meeting of the council by serving a written notice upon the absent member to attend at once. The absent member may at the discretion of the council be fined $5.00, which shall be entered on the minutes of the council and be deducted from his salary; or in case there is no salary due him, the penalty may be collected by a suit against him, brought in the name of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 2-11) 
Charter reference- Power of council to compel attendance of absentees, § 4.6. 
Sec. 2-63. - Unauthorized withdrawal of member from council chamber. 
    No member of the council after being marked "present" shall absent himself from the council chamber or withdraw from such meeting unless a majority of the councilmembers present by actual vote grant him leave to withdraw from the meeting. Any member violating this section shall, in the discretion of a majority of the council, be subject to a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $10.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1969, § 2-12) 
Charter reference- Power of council to compel attendance of absentees, § 4.6. 
Sec. 2-64. - Recordation of ayes and nays. 
    At the request of any member of the council present at a meeting of the council, the ayes and nays on any question shall be recorded upon the minutes of the council. 
(Code 1969, § 2-13) 
Secs. 2-65-2-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- City officers and employees generally, § 6.1 et seq. 
Cross reference- Hindering, obstructing, etc., city officers, etc, § 58-16. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-86. - Causes for removal from office of officer appointed by council. 
    The council may remove from office any officer appointed by it for malfeasance, misfeasance, neglect of duty, incapacity or other good cause. 
(Code 1969, § 2-16) 
Sec. 2-87. - Payment of claims against city. 
(a)  Payments by the city shall be made only upon vouchers certified to by the head of the appropriate department or other division of the city government, and by means of warrants on the city treasurer, issued by the appropriate city officer and countersigned by the city manager; except, that when the city manager acts as director of finance, then such warrants shall be issued by the city treasurer and countersigned by the city manager. 
(b)  The director of finance or the city treasurer, if the city manager is acting as director of finance, shall examine all payrolls, bills and other claims and demands against the city and shall issue no warrant for payment unless he finds that the claim is in proper form, correctly computed and duly certified, that it is justly and legally due and payable and that an appropriation has been made therefor which has not been exhausted, or that the payment has been otherwise legally authorized, and that there is money in the city treasury to make payment. He may require any claimant to make oath to the validity of a claim. He may investigate any claim, and for such purpose may examine witnesses under oath and if he finds it is fraudulent, erroneous or otherwise invalid, shall not issue a warrant therefor. 
(Code 1969, § 2-16.1) 
Sec. 2-88. - Disclosure statements required to be filed. 
    In addition to those officials specified in Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.14, as amended, the following city employees shall file the disclosure statement required in Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.14: the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 2-16.2) 
Secs. 2-89-2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MERIT SYSTEM; DISCRIMINATION AND POLITICAL ACTIVITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Adoption of powers of municipal corporation as to retirement systems (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-849), § 2.2. 

Sec. 2-111. - Establishment of merit system. 
    In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters, and to place municipal employment on a merit basis so that the best qualified persons available shall be brought into the service of the city, a municipal merit system is hereby established. 
(Code 1969, § 2-17) 
Sec. 2-112. - Establishment of office of personnel; personnel director as head; responsibilities generally of personnel director. 
(a)  There is hereby established an office of personnel, which office shall be headed by a personnel director. The city manager shall act as personnel director. 
(b)  The personnel director shall be responsible for the following: 
(1)  The administration of all provisions of this division not specifically reserved to council. 
(2)  The performance of all duties essential to the effective administration of the personnel system. 
(3)  The preparation of rules for the consideration of council implementing the personnel system. 
(4)  The administration of such rules. 
(5)  The preparation and revision of a pay plan for the consideration and approval of council, which plan shall constitute the official schedule of compensation for all merit system employees. 
(6)  The certification of payrolls. 
(7)  The maintenance of an official roster of officers and employees and such other records as may be required. 
(Code 1969, § 2-18) 
Sec. 2-113. - Application of merit system to city officers and employees. 
(a)  This division shall apply to all persons employed by or connected with the city except the following: 
(1)  Those persons elected to municipal offices and those appointed to fill vacancies in such offices. 
(2)  Those persons occupying positions on appointive boards, commissions and committees. 
(b)  Officers, employees and persons not exempted in subsection (a) shall be under the city merit system; provided, however, that those persons occupying positions created by the Charter and filled by council appointment, department heads and those other employees exempt or partially exempt by the rules adopted pursuant to this division shall be governed by only those provisions of this division which clearly apply to them as interpreted and applied by the rules established under this division. 
(Code 1969, § 2-19) 
Sec. 2-114. - Formulation and adoption by council of procedural rules. 
    In addition to such other matters as may be necessary and proper to carry out the intent and purposes of this division, reasonable rules shall be formulated and adopted by council establishing specific procedures in connection with the following: 
(1)  The preparation and administration of a position classification plan covering all merit system positions. 
(2)  The preparation and administration of a pay plan covering all merit system positions. 
(3)  The announcement of vacancies and the acceptance of applications for employment. 
(4)  The examination of applicants. 
(5)  The appointment of persons to fill vacancies and provisions for temporary appointments. 
(6)  The evaluation and merit rating of employees and provisions for probationary periods. 
(7)  The transfer, promotion, demotion, suspension and reinstatement of employees. 
(8)  The separation of employees through resignation, layoff and dismissal. 
(9)  The establishment of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations, disciplinary measures, working conditions, outside employment and development of employee morale, welfare and training. 
(10)  The maintenance and use of necessary records and forms. 
(Code 1969, § 2-20) 
Sec. 2-115. - Appointments to positions of city employment generally. 
    Appointments to positions of city employment shall be of two types: permanent and temporary. Permanent employees shall have tenure as set forth in the rules formulated and adopted as provided in section 2-114, but temporary employees shall have no tenure or other privileges, as set forth in such rules. Appointments shall be made on the basis of merit and in accordance with procedures set forth in such rules. Appointments shall be made by the city manager, or by department heads upon approval of the city manager, as set forth in the provisions of such rules applicable. 
(Code 1969, § 2-21) 
Sec. 2-116. - Discrimination because of political opinion, etc. 
    No employee or person seeking employment with the city shall in any way be favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations, race, color, religious belief, sex or national origin. 
(Code 1969, § 2-28) 
Sec. 2-117. - Political activity-Generally. 
    Nothing in this Code shall prohibit or restrict the political activity of any city employee, except: 
(1)  Activities restricted under section 2-118 shall continue to be restricted. 
(2)  No fulltime employee shall participate in any political activity during his working hours. 
(3)  No fulltime employee shall participate in any political activity at any time while wearing a distinctive uniform, or other apparel, which is identifiable with the city. 
(4)  Electioneering in any city office, building or premises is prohibited; however, any activity not prohibited by the state election laws on the day of a primary or an election shall not be prohibited at polling places on city property. Also, these restrictions shall not apply to a mass meeting or a committee meeting of a political organization on city property having the permission of the city manager. 
(5)  The display of any political advertising material of any nature at any time in or on any property owned by the city is prohibited. 
(6)  Any fulltime employee shall be required to take a 30-day leave of absence prior to any primary, special or general election in which he is an announced candidate. This 30-day leave of absence may include any authorized leave due such employee. Otherwise, such leave of absence shall be without pay. 
(Code 1969, § 2-29) 
Sec. 2-118. - Same-Solicitation of contributions, etc. 
    No fulltime employee, whether under the merit system or not, shall, for any political purpose whatsoever, either directly or indirectly, solicit or receive or be in any manner concerned in soliciting or receiving any assessment, subscription or contribution, whether voluntary or involuntary, from any applicant for city employ or from or for the benefit of any person who may be a candidate for any municipal office, appointive or elective, or who is now occupying such office or who is at present an employee of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 2-30) 
Sec. 2-119. - Discharge of officer or employee for violation of division, etc. 
(a)  Any violation of this division or of the rules formulated and adopted under section 2-114 shall be sufficient grounds for the discharge of any officer or employee guilty of such violation. 
(b)  Any person who, by himself or with others, violates the provisions of section 2-117 or 2-118 shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. Any person who is convicted under this section shall for a period of five years be ineligible for appointment to or employment in a position in the city service and shall, if he is an employee of the city, immediately forfeit the position he holds. 
(Code 1969, § 2-31) 
Secs. 2-120-2-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-146. - Creation of certain departments. 
    The following administrative departments of the city are hereby created: 
(1)  Law. 
(2)  Finance. 
(3)  General governmental administration. 
(4)  Judicial administration. 
(5)  Public safety. 
(6)  Public works. 
(7)  Health and welfare. 
(8)  Parks, recreation and cultural. 
(9)  Community development. 
(10)  Public utilities. 
(11)  Engineering. 
(Code 1969, § 2-31.1; Ord. of 11-11-91(2)) 
Sec. 2-147. - Department heads; power of council as to functions, creation and combination of departments. 
(a)  At the head of each department of the city government there shall be a director; provided, that unless and until the city council shall otherwise provide by ordinance, the city manager shall be director of all departments except the department of law. Unless and until otherwise provided by ordinance, the city attorney shall be director of the department of law. 
(b)  The city council shall, by ordinance, determine and prescribe the functions of each department, and may create new departments, combine or abolish existing departments and establish new departments when, in its opinion, the proper administration of the city requires it. 
(c)  Except the directors of the department of law, who shall be appointed by and be immediately responsible to the city council, the director of each department shall be appointed by and be immediately responsible to the city manager for the administration of his department. Each director shall be chosen on the basis of his general executive and administrative experience and ability, and his education, training and experience in the class of work which he is to administer. 
(Code 1969, § 2-31.2; Ord. of 12-14-92(1)) 
Secs. 2-148-2-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY MANAGER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- City manager, § 5.1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-176. - Duties generally. 
    The duties of the city manager shall be such as are prescribed by the Charter and by the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city applying thereto. 
(Code 1969, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-177. - Duties as to engineering, etc., work. 
    The city manager shall be in charge of all engineering work of the city and shall be responsible to the council for all work done by contract or otherwise. He shall see that all work on its completion is properly inspected and he shall make and present to the council a report showing the location, character and cost of all work done by the city. 
(Code 1969, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-178. - Duties as to violations of Code, etc., and as to encroachments upon streets, etc. 
    The city manager shall take notice of any violation of this Code or other ordinances of the city as well as encroachment of buildings, walls or fences upon the streets, alleys or other public property and report such violations or encroachments to the council for such action as may be proper. 
(Code 1969, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-179. - Duties as to permits and work done pursuant thereto. 
    The city manager, or his duly authorized representative, shall issue and keep a record of all permits for connection with the water mains, sewers and electric light lines and for any other purposes whatever, and shall see that work done under such permits is carried out in a proper manner. 
(Code 1969, § 2-35) 
Sec. 2-180. - Authority to transfer funds. 
    The city manager may make or cause to be made transfers of funds within or between the several departments and divisions set forth in the annual appropriation ordinance. The city manager is further authorized to transfer funds within a department as may be necessary to meet unexpected obligations. 
(Ord. of 11-11-91(1)) 
Sec. 2-181. - Assistant city manager. 
    The office of assistant city manager is hereby created. The assistant city manager shall, during the absence or disability of the city manager, perform all the duties of the office of city manager and more especially shall be invested with the powers and charged with the duties as are set forth in the Charter and the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 2-37) 
Charter reference- Authority of city council to appoint assistant city manager, § 5.1. 
Secs. 2-182-2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE 

Sec. 2-201. - Creation of office; appointment. 
    There is hereby created the office of the director of finance. The director of finance shall be appointed by and be immediately responsible to the city manager as provided in section 2-147. 
(Code 1969, § 2-37.1; Ord. of 12-14-92(2)) 
Sec. 2-202. - Powers and duties. 
    The director of finance shall have direct supervision over the department of finance and administration of the financial affairs of the city, including the keeping of accounts and financial records, the collection of taxes, special assessments and other revenues, the custody and disbursements of city funds and monies, and shall perform such other duties as the city council may by ordinance provide. 
(Code 1969, § 2-37.2) 
Sec. 2-203. - Purchasing. 
    The director of finance shall, in addition to the duties prescribed in section 2-202, have supervision over the city purchasing agent. 
(Code 1969, § 2-37.3) 
Charter reference- City manager to act as purchasing agent until otherwise provided by city council, § 5.2(i). 
Secs. 2-204-2-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CITY ATTORNEY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- City attorney, § 6.12. 

Sec. 2-231. - Qualifications. 
    The city attorney elected by the council pursuant to the Charter shall be a licensed practicing attorney qualified to practice his profession in all the courts of the state. 
(Code 1969, § 2-38) 
Sec. 2-232. - Assistant city attorney. 
    The council may in its discretion appoint an assistant city attorney, with full power and authority to act as such. The assistant city attorney may not only represent the city in all legal matters during the absence or incapacity of the city attorney, but he may also represent the city in conjunction with or at the request of the city attorney or the council. 
(Code 1969, § 2-39) 
Charter reference- Power of city council to appoint deputies and assistants to city officers, § 6.2. 
Secs. 2-233-2-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CLERK OF COUNCIL[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- City clerk, § 6.11. 

Sec. 2-256. - Minute book for council and book for general and permanent ordinances. 
    It shall be the duty of the clerk of council to keep the general ordinance book, as referred to in section 2-58. It shall be the duty of the clerk of council to provide this book and the minute book with proper indexes. 
(Code 1969, § 2-40) 
Sec. 2-257. - Custody of contracts, etc. 
    The clerk of council shall be the custodian of all contracts taken by order of the council, and any papers which are required to be filed or kept by him. 
(Code 1969, § 2-41) 
Sec. 2-258. - Issuance of notices. 
    The clerk of council shall issue notices to property owners of contemplated improvements and of hearings before the council or any committee of the council, to be given such owners as provided in the Charter or by law, and shall issue such other notices as the council may direct. 
(Code 1969, § 2-42) 
State Law reference- Notice of assessment for local improvements, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-243 et seq. 
Secs. 2-259-2-285. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CITY TREASURER 

Sec. 2-286. - Deposit of monies, etc.; depositories. 
    All monies or funds collected by the city treasurer as city treasurer shall be deposited to the credit of the city in the Bank of Shawsville, Central Fidelity Bank, Charter Federal Savings and Loan, Coreast Savings Bank, Crestar Bank, Dominion Bank, First Virginia Bank Roanoke-West, Salem Bank and Trust, Signet Bank, and Virginia First Savings and Loan, which banks are hereby designated as depositories for all funds of the city. In addition, the following are authorized to collect city utility bills under procedures approved by the director of finance: General Electric Employees Federal Credit Union, Roanoke County Schools Employees Federal Credit Union, and Veterans Administration Employees Federal Credit Union. 
(Code 1969, § 2-44) 
Sec. 2-287. - Forms for withdrawal of funds from depositories. 
    All withdrawals of funds of the city from the depositories designated in section 2-286 shall be made by checks, warrants, vouchers or other forms as shall be prescribed by proper resolutions of the council. 
(Code 1969, § 2-45) 
Sec. 2-288. - Execution of warrants, etc. 
    Subject to section 2-87, all checks, warrants, vouchers and other forms for the withdrawal of funds of the city from depositories designated in section 2-286 shall be signed by the city treasurer and countersigned by the city manager, and in the absence of the city manager, such checks, warrants and vouchers shall be countersigned by the mayor or other councilmember. 
(Code 1969, § 2-46) 
Sec. 2-289. - Record of disbursements. 
    The city treasurer shall keep a record of all disbursements in a book so ruled as to show, in separate columns: 
(1)  The number of the warrant; 
(2)  Date; 
(3)  Amount; 
(4)  Name of drawee; and 
(5)  From what fund and on what account paid. 
(Code 1969, § 2-47) 
Sec. 2-290. - Account of monies received from special assessment. 
    The city treasurer shall keep a separate and distinct account of all monies received by him from special assessments for streets, sidewalks or other purposes. Such account shall show from whom the several amounts are received, when received, for what purpose and on what lot or parcel of land such assessment is paid. 
(Code 1969, § 2-48) 
Sec. 2-291. - Books to show condition of bonded and floating debt, etc. 
    The books of the city treasurer shall show: 
(1)  The condition of the funds of the city; 
(2)  The condition and amount of the bonded and floating debt of the city; and 
(3)  Any and all other accounts and statements necessary to a true and correct understanding of the financial condition of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 2-49) 
Sec. 2-292. - Additional accounts and financial records. 
    In addition to the accounts and financial records otherwise required to be kept by him, the city treasurer shall cause to be kept such other accounts and financial records in relation to the performance of his duties and in such manner as the director of finance may prescribe and as in his judgment may be necessary. 
(Code 1969, § 2-50) 
Sec. 2-293. - Books, accounts, etc., to be subject to inspection. 
    The books and accounts of the city treasurer and all papers relating to the financial transactions of the city shall at all times be subject to the inspection of the city manager or any member of the council or any person whom the council may appoint to examine such books and accounts and papers. 
(Code 1969, § 2-51) 
Sec. 2-294. - Monthly report. 
    The city treasurer shall, at one regular council meeting per month, submit to the council a written report, showing: 
(1)  All receipts and disbursements for the entire preceding month; 
(2)  The balance of monies on hand; and 
(3)  The exact state of the treasury on the last day of the preceding month. 
(Code 1969, § 2-52) 
Sec. 2-295. - Annual report. 
    At the last meeting of the council in each fiscal year, the city treasurer shall present to the council an annual report containing a full itemized statement of all receipts and disbursements from the date of the last preceding annual report and showing the precise condition of the treasury. 
(Code 1969, § 2-53) 
Sec. 2-296. - Assistant city treasurer. 
    The office of assistant city treasurer is hereby created. The assistant city treasurer shall, during the absence or disability of the city treasurer, perform all the duties of the office of city treasurer and more especially shall be invested with the powers and charged with the duties as are set forth in the Charter and the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 2-54) 
Charter reference- Power of city council to appoint deputies and assistants to city officers, § 6.2. 
Secs. 2-297-2-318. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - FEE FOR SERVICES 

Sec. 2-319. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ambulance shall mean any publicly or privately owned vehicle that is specially designed, constructed or modified and equipped for and is intended to be used for and is maintained or operated to provide immediate medical care to or transport of persons who are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless. 
    Emergency shall mean an unforeseen condition or circumstance in which there is a need for immediate medical care in order to prevent loss of life or aggravation of illness or injury. 
    Emergency medical services vehicle shall mean an ambulance, rescue squad vehicle, fire truck or other government owned vehicle which may be used for or is maintained or operated to provide immediate medical care to or transport of persons who are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless. 
    Patient shall mean an individual who is sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless. 
    Permit shall mean a permit issued by the City Manager or his designee, authorizing the operation of an ambulance. 
    Person shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, group of individuals acting together for a common purpose, or organization of any kind. 
(Ord. of 6-28-04) 
Sec. 2-320. - Charges for ambulance services. 
    City council may establish by resolution, upon recommendation of the city manager, reasonable fees for the provision of emergency medical services by all emergency medical service personnel, whether volunteers or paid public employees, and by all private ambulances operating under a permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 6-28-04) 
Sec. 2-321. - Permit required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated a private ambulance or emergency medical services vehicle from within the city to any other location within or outside the city, unless such person possesses a permit. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee, is authorized to determine and prescribe the areas of service within which a permit holder may operate within the city so as to assure adequate coverage throughout the geographical area of the city. Further, the number of permits for ambulances or emergency medical service vehicles in the city may be limited to achieve the objectives of this article. 
(c)  No permit shall be required for operation of a private ambulance or emergency medical services vehicle which is: 
(1)  Engaged in the transportation of a person from a point beyond the limits of the city to a location within the city; or 
(2)  Engaged in the transportation of a person through the city. 
(d)  No permit shall be required for operation of a private ambulance or emergency medical services vehicle when used to render assistance, at the request of the city, in the case of a major catastrophe or emergency with which the vehicles which have received a permit to operate in the city are insufficient or unable to cope. 
(Ord. of 6-28-04) 
Sec. 2-322. - Volunteer rescue squads and governmental agencies. 
    Volunteer rescue squads and the members thereof who are acting in such capacity and agencies of the city and their employees who are acting in any capacity of emergency services shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-28-04) 
Sec. 2-323. - Permit-Application. 
    Any person who desires a permit shall file a sworn application with the city manager, or his designee, on a form prepared and provided for that purpose. The application shall include evidence of compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter and such other information as the city manager, or his designee, shall require. 
(Ord. of 6-28-04) 
Sec. 2-324. - Same-Requirements. 
    No person shall be issued a permit unless he: 
(1)  Furnishes proof that he possesses a valid permit issued by the commonwealth to operate an ambulance or emergency medical services vehicle. 
(2)  Files a schedule of rates to be charged for services rendered under the permit which shall not be less than the charges authorized by section 2-320. 
(3)  Agrees in writing to comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter, other provisions of this Code, any reasonable rules and regulations developed by the city manager or his/her designee for the implementation of this article, and applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(4)  Agrees in writing to provide mutual aide assistance, if available, in any emergency situation upon the request of the city. 
(5)  Provides an appropriate certificate of insurance, or certificate of self-insurance where appropriate, indicating the following minimum coverages: motor vehicular liability insurance of $100,000.00 per occurrence and $300,000.00 aggregate and general liability insurance of $100,000.00 per occurrence and $300,000.00 aggregate. The certificate of insurance shall contain a clause obligating the company issuing the same to give 15 days notice in writing to the city manager before the cancellation of such policies. The city shall be named as an additional insured on such policies of insurance as its interests may appear. 
(Ord. of 6-28-04) 
Sec. 2-325. - Same-Issuance or denial. 
(a)  The city manager, or his designee, upon consideration of the requirements set forth in this chapter, shall grant or deny the request for permit. The decision of the city manager, or his designee, shall be in writing and he/she shall mail a copy thereof to the applicant at the address listed on his/her application. 
(b)  Any person who is denied a permit by a decision of the city manager may appeal the same to city council by written notice filed with the clerk of the council within 30 calendar days of mailing of the city manager's decision. Upon proper filing of such appeal, after such notice and hearing as city council may deem appropriate, the council may affirm, reverse, or modify the city manager's decision, or may remand the matter for further investigation or action. 
(Ord. of 6-28-04) 
Sec. 2-326. - Duty to give notice of change of circumstances. 
    The applicant for a permit or, if a permit has been granted, the holder of a permit shall immediately give notice in writing to the city manager of any change in the information set forth in the application for permit, including, without limitation, any change in rates, insurance coverage, or the ownership of 50 percent or more of the common stock of the corporation which has applied for or has received the permit. 
(Ord. of 6-28-04) 
Sec. 2-327. - Current holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity. 
    Any person, who, on the effective date of this ordinance, holds a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the city or the commonwealth licensing the operation of an ambulance or vehicle for the transportation of handicapped persons may, for a period of 60 calendar days after the effective date of this article, continue to operate same within the city. Thereafter such person shall be required to have a permit issued by the city manager, or his designee. 
(Ord. of 6-28-04) 
Sec. 2-328. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  Any permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the city manager, or his designee, after a hearing, for failure to comply with the provisions of Title 31.2, Chapter 4, Article 2.1 of the Code of Virginia or of this chapter of any other provisions of local, state or federal law or regulation. Such hearing shall be held after ten calendar days prior written notice, mailed to the permit holder at the address listed on his application or any subsequent written notification of change of address. After the hearing, the city manager, or his designee, shall render his decision in writing and shall mail a copy thereof to the permit holder at the address described above. The decision of the city manager, or his designee, shall be effective as of the date established in his decision and shall not be stayed pending the outcome of any appeal. 
(b)  Any permit holder affected by an adverse decision of the city manager may appeal the same to city council by written notice filed with the clerk of the council within 30 calendar days of mailing of the city manager's final decision. Upon proper filing of such appeal, after such notice and hearing as city council may deem appropriate, the council may affirm, reverse, or modify the city manager's decision, or may remand the matter for further investigation or action. 
(Ord. of 6-28-04) 
Sec. 2-329. - Sale, assignment, etc. prohibited. 
    No permit granted under this chapter may be sold, assigned, or transferred, nor shall it in any way vest in any person, other than the applicant to whom the permit is granted, any rights or privileges under the permit. For purposes of this section, the transfer of ownership of 50 percent or more of the common stock of a corporation which has been granted a permit shall be deemed to be a transfer of the permit. 
(Ord. of 6-28-04) 
Sec. 2-330. - Authorization to provide non-emergency services; response to emergencies permitted under limited conditions. 
(a)  The holder of a permit shall be authorized to respond to requests for non-emergency service. Response to emergencies shall not be permitted unless: 
(1)  A request is made by the patient or by someone on behalf of the patient. 
(2)  A request is made by an authorized representative of the city. 
(3)  A condition is coincidentally observed by the owner or operator of the ambulance which requires immediate attention. 
(b)  A permit holder who provides ambulance or emergency medical service under emergency conditions shall give immediate notice of such response at the time of response to the city's emergency dispatch/E-911 center. 
(Ord. of 6-28-04) 
Sec. 2-331. - Operations within the city. 
(a)  As a condition of the permit, the permit holder agrees to provide service throughout the geographic area designated by the permits. 
(b)  No permit holder shall refuse to transport any person in the city to any hospital emergency room, approved by the city manager or his/her designee, in the city or an adjoining city or county without just cause. For purposes of this section, the term "just cause" shall include unavailability of qualified personnel or vehicles and the inability or refusal of the patient to pay for the requested ambulance service. 
(Ord. of 6-28-04) 
Sec. 2-332. - Service logs. 
    Every permit holder shall maintain accurate service logs of operations undertaken in accordance with its permit. Such service logs shall include, with regard to each request for ambulance service, the time and date the request was received, the location of the patient on whose behalf the request was made, the time the ambulance arrived at the location, the destination and time of arrival at the destination. If the request was denied, the log shall indicate the reason for such denial. In addition, the service log shall include any other information required by the chief of the fire department or the city manager. Such logs shall be maintained for a period of three years and made available for inspection by authorized representatives of the city upon reasonable request. 
(Ord. of 6-28-04) 
Sec. 2-333. - Powers and responsibilities of the city manager. 
    The city manager, or his designee, is hereby authorized to exercise the following powers and responsibilities in order to effectively achieve the purposes of this article, as follows: 
(1)  To enter into contracts with any person for the administration and collection of any fees which are imposed by the city fire department or other city agency, by any volunteer rescue squad or other non-profit organization operating under any permit granted in accordance with this article; 
(2)  To establish reasonable rules and procedures for imposing and collecting authorized fees for the provision of emergency medical services; 
(3)  To write off as uncollectible any accounts which are reasonably deemed to be uncollectible; and 
(4)  To exercise such other reasonable powers and authority as shall be necessary for the proper administration of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-28-04) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22; intoxication in public, § 58-27; signs, ch. 66; taxation, ch. 82; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Local option elections, Code of Virginia, § 4-45 et seq.; local ordinances restricted, Code of Virginia, § 4-96; driving under influence of alcoholic beverages, drugs, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-132; determining alcohol or drug content of blood, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268; incorporation by reference of certain offenses, traffic rules, etc., Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313. 

Sec. 6-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted December 9, 1996, deleted § 6-1. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this section be and the same are hereby repealed. Formerly, such section pertained to licenses and derived from Ord. No. 11-24-80, § 14-46. 
Sec. 6-2. - Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in city parks. 
(a)  If any person in or upon the grounds of any city park shall drink any alcoholic beverage or have in his possession any alcoholic beverage, or any beverage in any container labeled as an alcoholic beverage, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. As used in this section, the term "alcoholic beverage" shall have the meaning set forth in Code of Virginia, § 4-2. 
(b)  This section shall not prevent any person from drinking alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof to another in any area approved by the state alcoholic beverage control board in any local public park at an event for which a banquet license or mixed beverage special events license has been issued or prevent, upon authorization of the licensee, any person from drinking his own lawfully acquired alcoholic beverages or tendering a drink thereof to another in approved areas and locations at events for which a coliseum or stadium license has been issued. 
(Code 1969, § 17-14.1) 
State Law reference- Drinking alcoholic beverages, or tendering to another, in public place, Code of Virginia, § 4-78. 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22; signs, ch. 66; taxation, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Bingo games and raffles, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.1 et seq.; minors in public places of amusement, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-432; public dancehalls, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-433. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC DANCEHALLS AND TEENAGE DANCEHALLS 

Sec. 10-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public dancehall means any place open to the general public where dancing is permitted; provided, however, that a restaurant licensed under Code of Virginia, §§ 4-98.1 and 4-98.2 to serve food and beverages having a dance floor with an area not exceeding ten percent of the total floor area of the establishment shall not be considered a public dancehall. 
    Teenage dancehall means any place exclusively open to those members of the general public between the ages of 13 and 19 years that is used primarily for dancing and for which an admission fee is charged or for which compensation is in any manner received. 
(Code 1969, § 3-10) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-32. - Certain dances excepted from application of article. 
    This article shall not be construed to apply to dances held for benevolent or charitable purposes or to dances conducted under the auspices of religious, educational, civic or military organizations. 
(Code 1969, § 3-11) 
Sec. 10-33. - Permit for operation, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct a public dancehall or teenage dancehall without a permit, which permit may be obtained from the city manager on satisfactory evidence that the applicant is a proper person to receive the permit. A permit issued to conduct a public dancehall shall not allow the permit holder to conduct or operate a teenage dancehall; nor shall the issuance of a permit to conduct a teenage dancehall authorize or allow the permit holder to conduct or operate a public dancehall. Such permit may be revoked at any time by the city manager upon a finding that the operation of the public dancehall or teenage dancehall contravenes public safety, peace and order, becomes a public nuisance, disturbs the peace, or upon the failure of the permit holder to comply with the requirements of this article. A permit to operate a teenage dancehall shall be valid only during the calendar year in which it is issued. 
(b)  There shall be an appeal to the council both from the action of the city manager in refusing to grant such a permit to the person applying therefor and from the action of the city manager in revoking such a permit after the granting of such permit. The appeal shall be by written application directed to the council and delivered to the clerk of council within ten days from the refusal of the city manager to grant such permit or within ten days from his revocation of such permit, as the case may be. In event of an appeal to the council, the decision of the city manager shall not be reversed unless the council is of the opinion that the city manager acted arbitrarily in the matter or without sufficient or satisfactory evidence. 
(Code 1969, § 3-12) 
Sec. 10-34. - Entry by persons under 18 in public dancehall. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person conducting a public dancehall, not specifically licensed and regulated as a teenage dancehall, to allow any person under the age of 18 years to enter or to remain in such dancehall while dancing is being conducted therein, unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, or by a brother or sister over the age of 18 years, except upon the written consent of the parent or legal guardian of such minor, and in such event there shall be a separate and independent written consent for each afternoon or evening such minor enters or remains in such dancehall while dancing is being conducted therein. 
(Code 1969, § 3-13) 
Sec. 10-35. - Teenage dancehalls-Generally. 
    A special category of dancehall is hereby created and designated as a "teenage dancehall." The operation of a teenage dancehall is governed by section 10-36. 
(Code 1969, § 3-10(b)) 
Sec. 10-36. - Same-Regulation. 
(a)  No teenage dancehall shall be operated except as follows: 
(1)  A teenage dancehall may not operate prior to 12:00 noon on any given day, nor shall it operate after 12:00 midnight on any given day. At 12:00 midnight the premises shall be vacated except for registered employees. 
(2)  Persons having reached the age of 20 years or over shall not be allowed to enter a teenage dancehall unless they are an employee or a parent or legal guardian of a person attending such teenage dancehall. 
(3)  An owner or operator of a teenage dancehall may restrict admission on Sundays between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. to persons age 16 and under after notification of such to the city manager. 
(4)  A copy of this section shall be posted in a prominent location inside the building or premises wherein a teenage dancehall is operated. 
(5)  Any person issued a permit to conduct a teenage dancehall shall be given a copy of this section and shall sign for and acknowledge receipt of such copy. 
(b)  The presence of persons under the influence of alcohol or other self-administered drugs or narcotics on the premises of a teenage dancehall, or the presence of alcohol, drugs or other narcotics or drug paraphernalia on the premises of a teenage dancehall shall be grounds for the automatic and immediate revocation of the permit to conduct or operate a teenage dancehall. Upon the discovery of alcohol, drug paraphernalia, narcotics or drugs or a person under the influence of alcohol, drugs or other self-administered drugs on the premises of a teenage dancehall, the city manager, assistant city manager, chief of police or his agent may cause all persons in the teenage dancehall to vacate the premises and may close the teenage dancehall. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of any permit to operate a teenage dancehall, a background investigation shall be conducted on the applicant of such teenage dancehall. All employees of such teenage dancehall shall likewise be required to have a police background investigation conducted on them. The names of all individuals who have been issued a permit to conduct or operate a teenage dancehall, along with names of all employees of such teenage dancehall, shall be maintained on file with the chief of police. 
(d)  No individual to whom a permit to operate a teenage dancehall has been issued, nor any employee of such teenage dancehall, may in any way hinder any fire prevention or law enforcement officer who wishes to inspect the premises of such teenage dancehall at any time such teenage dancehall is open. 
(Code 1969, § 3-13.1) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 46. 
Sec. 10-37. - When operation of public dancehall prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate or conduct a public dancehall where dancing, music or entertainment of any kind is furnished or afforded, after 2:00 a.m. 
(Code 1969, § 3-14) 
Sec. 10-38. - Construction of article with reference to license taxes. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as exempting any public dancehall or teenage dancehall from the payment of a license tax now imposed or which in the future may be imposed, whether such tax is for the purpose of raising revenue or for regulatory purposes. Such license tax shall be $600.00 per annum, not proratable, on the person operating or conducting any such public dancehall or teenage dancehall. 
(Code 1969, § 3-16) 
Cross reference- License for amusements generally, § 22-60. 
Sec. 10-39. - Construction of article with reference to disturbance of the peace, etc. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as permitting any person to so conduct or operate a public dancehall or teenage dancehall as unnecessarily to disturb the peace, comfort and ordinary rest of the citizens generally residing in the neighborhood of such dancehall. 
(Code 1969, § 3-17) 
Sec. 10-40. - Operation in manner other than as is provided for in article to constitute nuisance; violation a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(a)  To conduct or to operate a public dancehall or a teenage dancehall in any manner or mode other than as is provided in this article shall, in addition to being unlawful, constitute a nuisance, and be abatable as such, and this remedy shall be considered a cumulative one, and enforceable by the city in a proper proceeding to be instituted by, and in the discretion of, the council. 
(b)  Violations of this article shall be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 3-15) 
Secs. 10-41-10-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BINGO GAMES AND RAFFLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Nov. 14, 1994, has been treated as superseding the provisions of former art. III, §§ 10-66-10-70, which pertained to bingo. 

Sec. 10-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words shall have the following meanings: 
    Bingo means a specific game of chance played with individual cards having randomly-numbered squares ranging from one to 75, in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers on such cards conforming to a predetermined pattern of numbers selected at random. Such cards shall have five vertical rows headed respectively by the letters B.I.N.G.O., with each row having five randomly-numbered squares. 
    Building means a structure located on a single lot enclosed by a continuous exterior wall regardless of the configuration of the interior walls. 
    Calendar day means the period of 24 consecutive hours commencing at 12:01 a.m. and concluding the following 12:01 a.m. 
    Calendar week means the period of seven consecutive calendar days (as defined above) commencing at 12:01 a.m. on Sunday and ending at 12:01 a.m. the following Sunday. 
    Instant bingo means a specific game of chance played by the random selection of one or more individuals prepacked cards, with winners being determined by the preprinted appearance of the letters B.I.N.G.O. in any prescribed order on the reverse side of such card. 
    Jackpot means a bingo card played as a part of a bingo game defined in this section in which all numbers on the card are covered, each number being selected at random, and with no more than one free or "wild" number. 
    Landlord means any person or his agent, firm, association, organization, partnership, or corporation, or employee thereof, which owns and leases, or leases any premise devoted in whole or in part to the conduct of bingo games, and any person residing in the same household as a landlord. 
    Organization means any one of the following: 
(1)  A voluntary fire department or a voluntary rescue squad or auxiliary unit thereof which has been recognized by an ordinance or resolution of the city council as being a part of the safety program of the city; 
(2)  An organization operated exclusively for religious, charitable, community, or educational purposes; 
(3)  Association of war veterans or auxiliary units thereof organized in the United States; or 
(4)  A fraternal association operating under the lodge system. 
    Raffle means a lottery in which the prize is won by (i) a random drawing of the name or prearranged number of one or more persons purchasing chances or (ii) a random contest in which the winning name or preassigned number of one or more persons purchasing changes is determined by a race involving inanimate objects floating on a body of water, commonly referred to as a "duck race." However, nothing in this article shall prohibit an organization from using the state lottery department's Pick-3 number as the basis for determining the winner of a lottery. For purposes of this definition, "raffle" shall include determining the winner of a lottery by use of prepackaged pull-tab devices which are devices made completely of paper or paper products with concealed numbers or symbols that must be exposed by the player to determine wins or losses and may include the use of a seal which conceals a number or symbol that has been designated in advance as a prize winner including but not limited to pull-tab devices commonly known as a tip boards or seal cards. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.1. 
Sec. 10-67. - Annual permit required; application and processing fee; form of application. 
(a)  Prior to the commencement of any bingo game or raffle by a qualified organization as defined in this article, the organization shall obtain an annual permit from the commissioner of the revenue. The permit shall only be granted after a reasonable investigation has been conducted by the commissioner of the revenue or his authorized designee to determine that the organization is qualified and that the requirements of this article have been met. 
(b)  The application and processing fees for a bingo permit shall be a total of $200.00. The application and processing fees for a raffle permit shall be a total of $25.00. The application and processing fees for a pull-tab raffle permit shall be $200.00. Application for the permit shall be accompanied by a check in the amount of the application and processing fee payable to the treasurer. The bingo application fee may be waived by city council for those applicants certifying that the permit will be utilized only for conducting a one-day event per calendar year. 
(c)  Application for an annual permit shall be made on a form provided by the commissioner of the revenue. No permit shall be issued without all the information required by the form prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue. The form must be signed by all appropriate parties in the presence of the commissioner of the revenue or his designee. The application shall be a matter of public record. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.2. 
Sec. 10-68. - Requirement of issuance of permit; where valid; duration; permits subject to regulations. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit, the applicant organization shall meet each of the following requirements: 
(1)  Except for recently established volunteer fire and rescue companies or departments, as defined in this article, the organization shall have been in existence and met on a regular basis in the City of Roanoke, City of Salem, or County of Roanoke for a period of at least five years immediately prior to applying for a permit. The organization shall have a membership consisting of at least 50 percent residents of the commonwealth and shall furnish a complete list of its membership, identifying permanent place of residence for each member, in order for the local governing body to ascertain the percentage of state residents. In no case shall be the organization apply for or receive more than one permit. However, this requirement shall not apply (i) to any lodge or chapter of a national or international fraternal order or a national or international civic organization which is exempt under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code and which has a lodge or chapter holding a bingo permit issued in accordance with the Code of Virginia anywhere within this commonwealth, or (ii) where the commission of the revenue provides for the issuance of a bingo or raffle permit for school sponsored activities to booster clubs which have been operating for less than five years, and which have been established solely to raise funds for school-sponsored activities in public schools which are less than five years old. 
(2)  A permit shall be valid only in the city and only at the locations designated in the permit application. However, a permit may be issued to an organization which relocates its meeting place on a permanent basis from one jurisdiction to another and complies with the requirements of subsection (1) of this section and provided further that the organization was the holder of a valid permit at the time of its relocation. An organization which has obtained a permit under this article to conduct a raffle may sell raffle tickets both in and out of the city and may conducts its drawing either in the jurisdiction in which a majority of the tickets were sold or in the city, except that pull-tab devices as defined in section 10-66 used as part of a raffle may be sold only upon the premises owned or exclusively leased by such organization and at such times as it is not open to the public, except to members and their guests. 
(3)  The organization shall be operating as a nonprofit organization and shall have always been operated in the past as a nonprofit organization for a period of at least five years immediately prior to seeking a permit as hereinafter provided. 
(4)  Any organization whose gross receipts from all bingo or raffle operations exceed or can be expected to exceed $75,000.00 in any calendar year shall have been granted tax-exempt status pursuant to Section 501C of the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
(5)  Any organization which rents or leases property for the purpose of conducting bingo games or raffles must, as a condition of obtaining a permit, obtain as part of their lease permission of the owner of the rental property to the commissioner of the revenue or his designee, or any law enforcement officer to enter the property for an inspection of records and/or to monitor the conduct of the bingo game or raffle pursuant to section 10-71. 
(6)  An organization shall designate an individual who shall be responsible for filing the annual or quarterly financial report required by this article if the organization goes out of business or otherwise ceases to exist. If annual gross receipts at the time of the organization ceasing to exist or going out of business exceed $250,000.00, then this individual shall be responsible for attaching the report of an independent certified public accountant as required in section 10-71(d). 
(b)  All permits shall be issued on a calendar basis and unless otherwise provided shall be valid for one calendar year beginning on January 1. All applications for a permit shall be acted upon by the commissioner of the revenue within 60 days from the filing thereof. 
(c)  Upon completion of the application investigation and compliance by the applicant with this article, and at the discretion of the commissioner of the revenue, an annual permit may be issued. 
(d)  The commissioner of the revenue is authorized to issue regulations, which are not in conflict with the state or city Code, to ensure the public safety and welfare in the operation of bingo games or raffles. 
(e)  As a condition of receiving a permit, an organization shall use, during the annual financial reporting period as set forth in section 10-71, no less than five percent of gross receipts from bingo or raffle operations for (i) those lawful, religious, charitable, community, or educational purposes for which the organization is specifically chartered or organized or (ii) those expenses relating to the acquisition, construction, maintenance, or repair of any interest in real estate involving the operation of the organization and used for lawful, religious, charitable, community, or educational purposes. No less than ten percent of gross receipts averaged for three consecutive annual financial reporting periods, as provided by section 10-71 shall be used for such purposes. 
    If an organization fails to meet the above requirements relating to use of its bingo or raffle gross receipts, it shall not be granted a permit for the next calendar year. The failure to grant a permit for the next calendar year shall not relieve an organization of its responsibility to contribute the minimum percentage. 
    This subsection shall not be applicable to the annual financial reporting period as set forth in section 10-71 that begins October 1, 1994, and to all annual financial report periods thereafter. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.3. 
Sec. 10-69. - Frequency, duration, and conduct of bingo games. 
(a)  No organization shall hold bingo games more frequently than two calendar days in any one calendar week as defined in section 10-66, and further no organization shall hold bingo games or raffles between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a calendar day as defined in section 10-66. 
(b)  A special permit may be granted at the discretion of the commissioner of the revenue which entitles an organization to conduct more frequent operations during carnivals, fairs, and other similar events at its principal meeting place or any other site selected by such organization, which is located in the city and which is not in violation of any located zoning ordinance. 
(c)  The sponsoring organization shall accept only cash or, at its option, checks in payment of charges or assessments for players to participate in bingo games or raffles. However, no organization shall accept postdated checks in payment of any charges or assessments for players to participate in bingo games. No organization or any person on the premises shall extend lines of credit or accept any credit or debit card or other electronic fund transfer in payment of any charges or assessments for players to participate in bingo. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.4. 
Sec. 10-70. - "Instant bingo." 
(a)  Any organization qualified to conduct bingo games pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be authorized to conduct "instant bingo" as a part of such bingo game and only at such location and at such times as are specified in the bingo application permit for regular bingo games as defined in section 10-66. 
(b)  The gross receipts in the course of a reporting year from the playing of "instant bingo" shall not exceed 50 percent of the gross receipts of an organization's bingo operation. 
(c)  Any organization playing "instant bingo" shall maintain a record of the date, quantity, and card value of instant bingo supplies purchased as well as the name and address of the supplier of such instant bingo supplies. The organization shall also maintain a written invoice or receipt from a nonmember of the organization verifying any information required by this subsection. 
(d)  No organization shall sell an "instant bingo" card to any individual below 18 years of age. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.5. 
Sec. 10-71. - Reports of gross receipts and disbursements required; form of reports; failure to file; certificate of compliance; right of entry upon premises; records; independent accounting procedure. 
(a)  Complete records of all receipts and disbursements shall be kept by the individual designated on the permit application and shall be filed annually under oath with the commissioner of the revenue. The annual or quarterly financial report and other items required to be filed under this section shall be a matter of public record. All accountings shall be made on or before December 1 of each calendar year for which a permit has been issued. The accounting shall include a record of the gross receipts and disbursements of an organization for the year period which commenced on October 1 of the previous year and a record of all money in the possession of the organization that was derived from bingo, instant bingo, or raffles regardless of when the money was received. However, any organization whose gross receipts exceed $50,000.00 during any calendar quarter shall be required to file an additional accounting of its receipts and disbursements during such quarter no later than 60 days following the last day of the quarter. "Gross receipts," as used in this section, shall mean the total amount of money received from bingo, instant bingo, and raffle operations before the deduction of expenses or prizes. 
(b)  All reports of receipts and disbursements shall be made on a form prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue and acknowledged in the presence of a duly authorized notary public. The failure to file reports when due shall cause the automatic revocation of the permit, and no organization shall conduct any bingo game or raffle thereafter until the report is properly filed and a new permit is obtained, including payment of application and processing fee. 
(c)  The financial report shall be accompanied by a certificate, verified under oath, by the board of directors that the proceeds of any bingo games or raffles have been used for those lawful, religious, charitable, community, or educational purposes for which the organization is specifically chartered or organized and that the operation of bingo games or raffles has been in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Any organization having annual gross receipts from bingo games or raffles in excess of $250,000.00 as shown on its annual financial report, shall attach to such report an opinion of a licensed independent certified public accountant that (i) the annual financial report presents fairly, in all material respects, beginning cash, receipts, operating cost, use of proceeds, and ending cash; (ii) the proceeds of any bingo games or raffles have been used, in all material respects, for those lawful, religious, charitable, community, or educational purposes for which the organization is specifically chartered or organized; and (iii) the gross receipts have been used in all material respects in accordance with the provisions of this article. The failure to file the opinion of a licensed independent certified public accountant, when required, shall cause the automatic revocation of the permit and no organization shall conduct any bingo game or raffle thereafter until the opinion required by this subdivision is properly filed with the report and a new permit is obtained including payment of application and processing fee. The opinion required by this section is in addition to the audit fee required by section 10-72. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this article requiring an annual audit, the provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the commissioner of the revenue or his designee from performing unannounced audits or restrict any right of such official to secure records required to be maintained by the provisions of this article. Any such official shall have the authority to go upon the premises on which any organization is conducting a bingo game or raffle for the purpose of carrying out the duties imposed by this article including observation of the conduct of games. The application for the bingo or raffle permit shall constitute permission from, and authority granted by, such organization as well as the owner or lessee of the premises on which bingo or raffle is to be conducted to any law enforcement officer, the commissioner of the revenue and or his designee to enter upon such premises. Denial of access to the premises by the organization, the building owner, or any party shall result in the revocation of a permit. 
(f)  The organization shall maintain a written record for three years of the dates on which bingo or raffles are played or conducted, the number of people in attendance on each date and the amount of the receipts and prizes paid on each day. The organization shall also maintain a record of the name and address of each individual to whom a door prize, regular, or special bingo game prize, raffle prize, or jackpot from the playing of bingo or raffles is awarded, as well as the amount of the award. The organization conducting bingo or raffles shall also maintain an itemized record of all receipts and disbursements, including operating costs and use of proceeds incurred in operating bingo games or raffles. 
(g)  All records required to be maintained by this section shall be kept at the site at which bingo or raffles are conducted as set forth in the permit or at the organization's local address as listed on the application. All records shall be made available to inspection immediately upon the request of the commission of the revenue or his designee. Each organization shall designate a member on the application form to be responsible for providing access to these records. 
(h)  Any organization which ceases to exist or ceases its bingo or raffle operations must file all financial reports, disclosures, and audit fee payments within 30 days of ceasing operations, and on a quarterly basis until all its bingo or raffle funds have been disbursed. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.6. 
Sec. 10-72. - Audit of reports; fee. 
(a)  All reports filed pursuant to section 10-71 shall be audited by the commissioner of the revenue or his designee; however, any report field by an organization with gross receipts of less than $2,000.00 for the designated reporting period shall be exempt from the audit requirement. All reports shall be a matter of public record. 
(b)  An audit fee shall accompany each annual report, except any report filed by an organization with gross receipts of less than $2,000.00 for the designated reporting period. The fee shall be calculated on an annual basis and shall equal two percent of (i) the gross receipts which an organization reports pursuant to section 10-71 and (ii) the interest income on money that the organization has received from bingo, instant bingo, or raffle operations. However, in no case shall the audit fee be less than $25.00. 
(c)  The audit fee shall be payable to the city treasurer. All audit fees shall be separately accounted for and shall be used only for the purpose of auditing and regulating bingo games and raffles. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.7. 
Sec. 10-73. - Prohibited practices. 
    In addition to those other practices prohibited by this article, the following acts or practices shall also be prohibited under the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Except for reasonable and proper operating costs, including costs associated with providing clerical assistance in the conduct of bingo games or raffles for organizations composed of and for deaf or blind persons, publicizing the time and place of bingo games and raffles, and prizes, no part of the gross receipts derived by an organization, as herein defined, permitted to conduct bingo games or raffles may be used for any purpose other than (i) those lawful religious, charitable, community or educational purposes for which the organization is specifically chartered or organized and (ii) expenses relating to the acquisition, construction, maintenance, or repair of any interest in the real property involving the operation of the organization and used for lawful religious, charitable, community, or educational purposes. 
(2)  No organization shall enter into a contract with, or otherwise employ for compensation any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, or corporation of any classification whatsoever for the purpose of organizing, managing, or conducting bingo games or raffles. However, this subsection shall not prohibit the joint operation of bingo games under section 10-77. 
(3)  No person, firm, association, organization, partnership, or corporation shall pay or receive for use of any premises devoted, in whole or in part, to the conduct of bingo games or raffles any consideration in excess of the current fair market rental value of such property. For purposes of this article, no fair market rental value consideration shall be based upon or determined by reference to a percentage of the proceeds derived from the operation of bingo games or raffles no shall such consideration be based upon or determined by any reference to a percentage of the proceeds derived from the operation of bingo games or raffles nor shall such consideration be based upon or determined by any reference to the number of people in attendance at such bingo games or raffles. each day in violation of this subsection shall constitute a separate class 1 misdemeanor as set forth in section 10-74. 
(4)  No building or other premises shall be utilized in whole or in part for the purpose of conducting bingo games more frequently than two calendar days in any one calendar week except as follows: 
a.  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the playing of bingo pursuant to a special permit issued in accordance with section 10-69(b). 
b.  No building or other premises owned by an organization as defined by section 10-66 of this article and qualified as a tax-exempt organization pursuant to Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be utilized in whole or in part for the purpose of conducting bingo games more frequently than four calendar days in any one calendar week. 
(5)  Except for persons employed as clerical assistance by organizations composed of or for deaf or blind persons, only bona fide members of any such organization who have been members of such organization, as reflected on the organization's list of members filed with the commissioner of the revenue for at least 90 days prior to such participation, shall participate in the management, operation, or conduct of any bingo game or raffle. Notwithstanding the foregoing, employees of corporate sponsors of a qualified organization may participate in the management, operation, or conduct of one raffle per year. The spouse of any such bona fide member or a firefighter or rescue squad member employed by a political subdivision with which the volunteer firefighter or rescue squad member is associated may participate in the operation and conduct of a bingo game or raffle if a bona fide member is present. 
(6)  Except as provided herein, no person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the management, operation, or conduct of any such game or raffle. Persons employed by organizations composed of or for deaf or blind persons may receive remuneration not to exceed $30.00 per event for providing clerical assistance in the conduct of bingo games or raffles only for such organizations. An organization composed of or for deaf or blind persons that employs a person not a member to provide clerical assistance in the conduct of bingo games or raffles shall have in force fidelity insurance, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 38.2-120, written by an insurer licensed to do business in the commonwealth. Persons 18 years of age and under who sell raffle tickets to raise funds for youth activities in which they participate may receive nonmonetary incentive awards or prizes from the organization provided that organization is nonprofit. 
(7)  No landlord shall, at bingo games conducted on the landlord's premises: (i) participate in the conduct, management, or operation of any bingo games; (ii) sell, lease, or otherwise provide for consideration any bingo supplies, including, but not limited to, bingo cards, instant bingo cards, markers, or other game pieces; or (iii) require as a condition of the lease or by contract that a particular manufacturer, distributor, or supplier of bingo supplies or equipment be used by the organization. If equipment or services are included by a landlord in any lease or contract, the lease or contract shall itemize the amount attributable to the rent of the premises, equipment, and each service to be provided by the landlord. 
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any charitable organization conducting bingo games on their own behalf; provided, the organization owns the premises where such bingo games are held. 
(8)  No person shall participate in the operation of bingo games or pull-tab raffles for more than one organization in any one calendar year. A calendar year shall run from January 1 through December 31. 
(9)  No organization shall enter into any contract with or otherwise employ or compensate any member of that organization regarding the sale of bingo or raffle supplies or equipment. 
(10)  No organization shall award any bingo prize money or any merchandise valued in excess of the following amounts: (i) no bingo door prize shall exceed $25.00; (ii) no regular bingo or special bingo game shall award a prize in excess of $100.00; (iii) no instant bingo prize for a single card shall exceed $500.00; and (iv) no bingo jackpot of any nature whatsoever shall exceed $1,000.00, nor shall the total amount of bingo jackpot prizes award in any one calendar day exceed $1,000.00. 
(11)  Except as provided herein, no organization shall award any raffle prize valued at more than $100,000.00. The $100,000.00 limitation shall not apply to a raffle conducted no more than once per calendar year by an organization qualified as a tax-exempt organization pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code for a prize consisting of a lot improved by a residential dwelling where 100 percent of the monies received from such raffle, less deductions for the fair market value for the cost of acquisition of the land and materials, are donated to lawful religious, charitable, community, or educational organizations specifically chartered or organized under the laws of the commonwealth and qualified as a Section 501(c)(3) tax-exempt organization. The award of any prize money for any bingo or raffle shall not be deemed to be part of any gaming contract within the purview of Code of Virginia, § 11-14. 
(12)  Any bingo game in which all of the gross receipts from players for that game are paid as prize money back to the players shall not be subject to the limitations of subsection (9) of this section, but there shall not more than one such game per calendar day of play and the prize money from any such game shall not exceed $1,000.00. 
(13)  No person shall participate in the management, operation, or conduct of any bingo game or raffle if, within the preceding five years, he has been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude. Further, no person shall participate in the management, operation, or conduct of any bingo game or raffle if that persons, within the past five years, has participated in the management, operation, or conduct of any bingo game or raffle which was found by a local permitting authority or by a court of competent jurisdiction to have been operated in violation of state law or local ordinance. 
(14)  An organization using or selling bingo or raffle supplies, including instant bingo supplies, which have been tampered with in any way, including seals broken or packets, or the tampering with bingo or raffle supplies by the organization shall result in the revocation of a permit. 
(15)  No prize shall be awarded to the winner of a bingo game or raffle other than as advertised by the organization. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.9. 
Sec. 10-74. - Denial, suspension or revocation of permit; penalties. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue may deny, suspend or revoke the permit of any organization found not to be in strict compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of sections 10-66 through 10-78 shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Any person violation the provisions of section 10-73(a) shall be guilty of a class 6 felony. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.10. 
Sec. 10-75. - Enforcement of article; injunctive relief. 
    In the event that any person violates the provisions of this article, then the commonwealth's attorney or the city attorney may, in addition to the foregoing criminal penalties, apply to the appropriate circuit court for an injunction restraining the continued operation of bingo games or raffles or any aspect thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.11. 
Sec. 10-76. - Hearings and appeals. 
    Unless automatic revocation is required by ordinance, no permit to conduct bingo games or raffles shall be denied, suspended or revoked except upon notice stating the proposed basis for such action and the time and place for a hearing before the commissioner of the revenue thereon. Where a permit is automatically revoked, the organization may request a hearing with the commission of the revenue. After a hearing, the commissioner of the revenue may refuse to issue or may suspend or revoke any such permit if he determines that the organization has not complied with the provisions of this article. Any organization aggrieved by the decision of the commission of the revenue may appeal such decision to the circuit court. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.12. 
Sec. 10-77. - Joint operation of bingo games; restriction; special permit required. 
(a)  Two qualified organizations as defined in this article may jointly organize and conduct bingo games provided both have been issued a permit under the provisions of section 1-67 and provided both fully comply with all other provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any two qualified organizations jointly conducting bingo games shall be subject to the same restrictions and prohibitions contained in this article that would apply to a single organization conducting bingo games. Organizations jointly conducting bingo games shall not circumvent any restrictions and prohibitions which would otherwise apply if a single organization were conducting such games. These restrictions and prohibitions shall include, but not be limited to, the frequency with which bingo games may be held, the value of merchandise nor money awarded as prizes, and all other practices prohibited under section 10-73 and Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.9A. 
(c)  Any two qualified organizations which wish to jointly conduct one or more bingo games shall furnish to the commissioner of the revenue a written report setting forth the division of manpower, costs, and proceeds for each game to be jointly conducted. Upon a finding that the division of manpower and costs for each game bears a reasonable relationship to the division of proceeds, the commission of the revenue shall issue a special permit for the joint conduct of all approved bingo games. No bingo game may be jointly conducted until this special permit is obtained by the organization involved for that bingo game. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.13. 
Sec. 10-78. - Only bingo, instant bingo, raffles, and duck races permitted. 
    This article permits organizations to conduct bingo, instant bingo, raffles, or duck races. All games not explicitly authorized by this article are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.14. 
Secs. 10-79-10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POOLROOMS 

Sec. 10-91. - Application of article. 
    All poolrooms in the city shall be subject to the restrictions and conditions contained in the provisions of this article, except as noted in section 10-97. 
(Code 1969, § 3-1) 
Sec. 10-92. - When closing required. 
    Each poolroom shall be closed at 2:00 a.m. each morning and shall not reopen until 6:00 a.m. each morning. 
(Code 1969, § 3-2) 
Sec. 10-93. - Visibility of interior. 
    In no portion of the structure used as a poolroom shall screens, blinds, curtains or other like obstructions be permitted that would cut off or limit the view within the entire poolroom. 
(Code 1969, § 3-3) 
Sec. 10-94. - Betting or gambling. 
    No betting or gambling of any kind shall be allowed in any poolroom or in the structure wherein it is located. 
(Code 1969, § 3-4) 
Cross reference- Gambling, § 58-61 et seq. 
Sec. 10-95. - Presence of minors. 
(a)  The proprietor of a poolroom or person in charge of or manager of a poolroom shall not permit persons under the age of 18 years to enter, frequent or play any games of any kind in such poolroom. 
(b)  There shall be posted at a conspicuous place at the entrance of the poolroom a sign in bold letters not less than two inches in height, with the following announcement: "No person under 18 years of age shall be allowed in this poolroom." 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 3-5) 
Sec. 10-96. - Forfeiture of license because of violation of article. 
    A violation of any of the prohibitions, restrictions or conditions contained in this article by the proprietor or manager of a poolroom shall result in a forfeiture of the license under the provisions of which such poolroom is licensed to operate. 
(Code 1969, § 3-6) 
Sec. 10-97. - What article not applicable to. 
    The provisions, requirements, restrictions and prohibitions of this article shall not apply to the operation of nonstandard, what is commonly known as "coin in the slot" pool tables, or the like. 
(Code 1969, § 3-8) 
Sec. 10-98. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, a violation of any of the foregoing restrictions, prohibitions or conditions of this article by the proprietor or manager of a poolroom shall subject such proprietor or manager, as well as any other person involved, to punishment for a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 3-7) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Powers of city as to regulation of animals (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-870) adopted, § 2.2. 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22; health and sanitation, ch. 38; protection of food from contamination, § 38-56; application of traffic regulations to persons riding or driving animals, § 86-3; zoning, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Comprehensive animal laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.66 et seq.; offenses involving animals, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.128, 18.2-403.1 et seq.; inoculation of cats against rabies, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-28.5; cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-29.1:1; diseased animals, dead animals, etc., Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-323, 18.2-510; regulation of hunting and trapping by cities, Code of Virginia, §§ 29.1-526, 29.1-528; hunting near public schools and public parks, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-527; estrays, Code of Virginia, § 55-202 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Keeping noisy, etc., animals or fowl. 
(a)  No person shall, either on his own property or on any property in which he has any interest or over which he exercises any control, keep, maintain or allow to remain any animal or fowl which sets up, causes, emits or gives vent to incessant or intermittent or other noises or commotions of such a character and kind as to disturb any citizen of the city in the reasonable use and enjoyment of his property or so as to cause any person of ordinary sensibilities any actual physical discomfort. 
(b)  The keeping by any person of any animal or fowl which sets up, brings about, causes, emits or gives vent to such noises shall constitute a nuisance abatable as such by a proper suit in equity in the circuit court for the city, but this shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the punishment provided. 
(Code 1969, § 4-2; Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Editor's note- Ord. of 2-8-2010(1), repealed former § 14-1, which pertained to dangerous or vicious animals at large, and derived from Code 1969, §§ 4-1, 4-27(f). Subsequently, said ordinance renumbered former § 14-2 as § 14-1 as set out herein. 
Sec. 14-2. - Dogs, cats and other animals in city parks or school facilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog, cat or other animal to allow such dog, cat or other animal on the premises of any city park or school facilities, whether such dog, cat or other animal is running at large or under the direct supervision and control of its owner or custodian. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall subject the owner or custodian of any dog, cat or other animal so found on the premises of any city park or school facilities to punishment for a class 4 misdemeanor. Every time such dog, cat or other animal is permitted on the premises of a city park or school facilities shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 17-14.2; Ord. of 3-23-92; Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Editor's note- Ord. of 2-8-2010(1), renumbered former § 14-4 as § 14-2 as set out herein. 
Sec. 14-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of 2-8-2010(1), repealed former § 14-3, which pertained to cruelty to animals; penalty, and derived from Code 1969, § 4-3. 
Secs. 14-4-14-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POULTRY GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-36. - Confinement; permitting to trespass on property of others. 
    All persons owning or having in their possession, under their control or on their premises chickens, ducks, guinea-fowl and any other like fowl shall strictly confine, keep up and pen the same so that they cannot get off the premises owned or controlled by any such person owning or having or in charge of such chickens, ducks, guineas and like fowl. If any chickens, ducks, guineas and like fowl are allowed, permitted, or in any way trespass upon the property of others, then the owner or the person having charge of such chicken, duck, guinea or other fowl on his premises shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. Each time any chicken, duck, guinea or other like fowl trespasses upon the property of another shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 4-4) 
Sec. 14-37. - Keeping certain fowl as nuisance. 
    The keeping by any person of any chickens, turkeys, ducks or other poultry or fowl which either disturbs any citizen of the city in the reasonable use and enjoyment of his property or causes any person of ordinary sensibilities any actual physical discomfort, or creates or brings about an insanitary situation or condition detrimental to the health of any citizen of the city, shall constitute a nuisance abatable as such by a proper suit in equity in the circuit court for the city, but this shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the punishment provided. 
(Code 1969, § 4-5) 
Cross reference- Maintaining nuisance generally, § 30-5. 
Sec. 14-38. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2012(1)) 
Sec. 14-39. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by animal control officers or police officers for the City of Salem. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2012(1)) 
Secs. 14-40-14-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BIRD SANCTUARY 

Sec. 14-56. - Establishment. 
    The area within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated and established as a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1969, § 4-6) 
Sec. 14-57. - Signs. 
    The city manager shall erect appropriate signs designating the city as a bird sanctuary at the corporate limits of the city on U.S. Routes 11 and 460 and State Routes 311 and 419, and at such other places as, in his discretion, he deems necessary. 
(Code 1969, § 4-7) 
Cross reference- Signs, ch. 66. 
Sec. 14-58. - Killing songbirds or wild game birds; molesting nests. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to kill a songbird or wild game bird in the city with any gun, pistol or other firearm, air rifle, BB gun, gravel shooter, bow and arrow, slingshot or any other similar device or weapon. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to molest the nest of any songbird or wild game bird. 
(Code 1969, § 4-8) 
Secs. 14-59-14-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOGS AND CATS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Comprehensive animal laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6500 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-86. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal or animals means domestic animal or animals, including both agriculture and companion animals. 
    Animal control officer means any animal control officer appointed under this article. 
    Animal nuisance is created when any dog, cat, or other animals unreasonably annoy humans, endanger the life or health of other animals or persons or substantially interfere with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to the enjoyment of life or property. Such acts of nuisance shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Repeatedly found to run at large; 
(2)  Damages property other than that of the animal's owner; 
(3)  Attacks or disturbs other animals, persons or vehicles by chasing, barking or biting; 
(4)  Makes excessive noises, including but not limited to, barking, whining, howling, caterwauling or crying; 
(5)  Creates noxious or offensive odors; 
(6)  Defecates upon any public place or upon premises not owned or controlled by the owner unless promptly removed by the animal's owner; or 
(7)  Creates an unsanitary condition or insect breeding site due to an accumulation of excreta or filth. 
    Cat means any member of the animal species felis catus. 
    Dog means every dog, regardless of age. 
    Kennel means an enclosure wherein dogs are kept and from which they cannot escape. 
    Livestock means and includes cattle, horses, sheep, goats, swine and enclosed, domesticated rabbits or hares. 
    Owner means and includes every person having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps or harbors an animal, or who has an animal in his care, or who acts as a custodian of an animal, or who permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. In the case of a minor who owns, keeps, harbors, or acts as custodian of an animal, the parent or parents or other lawful guardian of such minor shall be deemed to be the owner of the animal. 
    Run at large means roaming, running or self-hunting off the property of the animal's owner or custodian and not under its owner's or custodian's immediate control. 
    Treasurer means and includes the treasurer of this city or any other officer designated by law to collect taxes in this city. 
(Code 1969, §§ 4-10.1, 4-12; Ord. of 10-26-92, §§ 4-10.1, 4-12; Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-87. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of 2-8-2010(1) repealed § 14-87, which pertained to mad dogs and derived from Code 1969, § 4-11. 
Sec. 14-88. - Running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to permit such dog to run at large, remain unconfined, unrestricted or not penned up, whether licensed or unlicensed, within the corporate limits of the city at any time. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall subject the owner or custodian of such dog so found running at large at any time contrary to the provisions of this section to punishment as provided in section 14-103. Every time such dog is permitted to run at large contrary to the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Every police officer or animal control officer shall impound any such dog so found running at large contrary to the provisions of this section, and if such dog is found to have done any damage to property, real or personal, such dog may be killed in accordance with the provisions and requirements of § 3.2-6546 of the 1950 Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(Code 1969, § 4-12; Ord. of 10-26-92, § 4-12; Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit dogs from running at large, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6538. 
Sec. 14-89. - Female dogs in season. 
    The owner or custodian shall confine every female dog known or suspected of being in season to a building or structure properly enclosed so as to obscure the female dog from public view while the female dog is known or suspected to be in season. If the owner or custodian is identified by any police officer, such owner or custodian shall be notified to secure the dog in a secure place. If the owner or custodian refuses or neglects to do so or if the owner or custodian is not known, then it shall be the duty of any police officer to have the dog killed. 
(Code 1969, §§ 4-13, 4-27(b); Ord. of 10-26-92, § 4-27(b)) 
Sec. 14-90. - Dogs and cats deemed personal property; rights relating thereto. 
(a)  All dogs and cats shall be deemed personal property and may be the subject of larceny and malicious or unlawful trespass. Owners may maintain any action for the killing of any such dog or cat, or injury thereto, or unlawful detention or use thereof as in the case of other personal property. The owner of any dog or cat which is injured or killed contrary to the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be entitled to recover the value thereof or the damage done thereto in an appropriate action at law from such person. 
(b)  An animal control officer or other officer finding a stolen dog or cat, or a dog or cat held or detained contrary to law, shall have authority to seize and hold such dog or cat pending action before a general district court or other court. If no such action is instituted within seven days, the animal control officer or other officer shall deliver the dog or cat to its owner. 
(c)  The presence of a dog or cat on the premises of a person other than its legal owner shall raise no presumption of theft against the owner of such property, and the animal control officer may take such dog or cat in charge and notify its legal owner to remove it. 
(d)  The legal owner of a dog or cat impounded under this section shall pay, for the keep of such dog or cat while in the possession of the animal control officer, the sum of $10.00 for the first 24 hours, or any portion thereof, and $10.00 for each 24 hours, or any portion thereof, thereafter, and, in addition thereto, a pickup fee of $20.00. 
(Code 1969, § 4-23; Ord. of 10-26-92, § 4-23; Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6585. 
Sec. 14-91. - Dogs killing, injuring or chasing livestock or poultry. 
    It shall be the duty of any animal control officer or other officer who may find a dog in the act of killing or injuring livestock or poultry to kill such dog forthwith, whether such dog bears a tag or not. Any person finding a dog committing any of the depredations mentioned in this section shall have the right to kill such dog on sight, as shall any owner of livestock or his agent finding a dog chasing livestock on land utilized by the livestock when the circumstances show that such chasing is harmful to the livestock. 
(Code 1969, § 4-24; Ord. of 10-26-92, § 4-24; Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6552. 
Sec. 14-92. - Killing unlicensed dogs and cats. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to kill any dog or cat of unknown ownership found running at large on which the license fee has not been paid in accordance with the provision and requirements of § 3.2-6546 of the 1950 Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(Code 1969, § 4-25; Ord. of 10-26-92, § 4-25; Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Sec. 14-93. - Disposal of dead animals. 
    The owner of any animal which has died from disease or other cause shall forthwith cremate or bury such animal. If, after notice, any owner fails to do so, the animal control officer or other officer shall bury or cremate the animal, and he may recover on behalf of the city from the owner his cost for this service. 
(Code 1969, § 4-26; Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
State Law reference- Disposal of dead dogs, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6554. 
Sec. 14-94. - Prohibited acts generally. 
    The following shall be class 4 misdemeanors: 
(1)  Diseased dog or cat. For the owner of any dog or cat with a contagious or infectious disease to permit such dog or cat to stray from his premises if such disease is known to the owner. 
(2)  Confinement of dogs and cats; sanitary conditions. The structure or building in which any dogs or cats are confined and the lot, compound, or enclosure in which they are penned shall be kept in such sanitary condition as not to cause offensive odors or to attract flies or other insects. 
(3)  Removing collar or tag. For any person, except the owner or custodian, to remove a legally acquired collar or license tag from a dog or cat, subject to the exceptions listed in section 14-137 herein. 
(4)  Concealing a dog or cat. For any person to conceal or harbor any dog or cat on which the license fee has not been paid or to conceal a rabid dog or cat to keep such dog or cat from being killed. 
(Code 1969, § 4-27(a), (c)-(e); Ord. of 10-26-92, § 4-27(a), (c)-(e); Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Sec. 14-95. - Vaccination required generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, hold or harbor any dog or domesticated cat four months of age or over within the city unless the dog or domesticated cat shall have been vaccinated with a modified live virus (flury strain) rabies vaccine in accordance with provisions of § 3.2-6521 of the 1950 Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(Code 1969, § 4-28; Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6521A. 
Sec. 14-96. - Vaccination of dogs and cats coming into city. 
    Any person transporting a dog or domesticated cat four months of age or over into the city from some other jurisdiction shall be required to conform with the vaccination requirement of section 14-95 forthwith after bringing the dog or cat into the city. 
(Code 1969, § 4-29; Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Sec. 14-97. - Certificate of inoculation; disposition of dogs and cats not vaccinated. 
(a)  At the time of vaccination, a certificate of inoculation setting forth the type of vaccine used shall be issued to the dog or cat owner. 
(b)  Any dog or cat found within the city not vaccinated and identified as described in subsection (a) shall be impounded by the animal control officer and/or a police officer, and such dog or cat shall be held in accordance with the provisions of § 3.2-6546 of the 1950 Code of Virginia, as amended. The dog or cat may be returned to its owner upon proof of ownership, vaccination, and payment of the cost of impoundment as provided in section 14-90 herein. 
(Code 1969, § 4-30; Ord. of 10-26-92, § 4-30; Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Sec. 14-98. - Council may provide vaccination clinics. 
    The council may provide for clinics for the vaccination of dogs and cats under the supervision of the animal control officer or his designee and the county health director, and fix fees to be charged for such services. 
(Code 1969, § 4-31; Ord. of 10-26-92, § 4-31; Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Sec. 14-99. - Quarantine. 
    When, in the judgment of the health director, an emergency shall be deemed to exist in the city or any section thereof due to a widespread rabies epidemic, for the protection of the public health, the health director may declare a quarantine in the city or such section thereof as may be affected and restrict all dogs to the owners' premises or to the immediate custody of a responsible person for the duration of such emergency as it is set forth by the health director. 
(Code 1969, § 4-32) 
Sec. 14-100. - Limit on number of dogs and cats kept; location and condition of pens, etc. 
(a)  No person shall keep or permit another to keep, in any one separate location at any one time, a total of more than three dogs and more than a total of three cats. The pen or premises in which such animals are kept shall be not less than 50 feet from the dwelling or other structure used for human habitation of any other person, and such pens and premises shall at all times be kept so clean and free from offensive odors as not to disturb any citizen of the city in the reasonable use and enjoyment of his property or to cause any person of ordinary sensibilities any actual physical discomfort. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any puppies or kittens under the age of four months, if the pens and premises holding such puppies or kittens are kept or likewise maintained in the manner set forth in this section. 
(Code 1969, § 4-9) 
Sec. 14-101. - Keeping certain dogs and cats as animal nuisance. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog, cat or other animals to cause or permit such animal to perform, create or engage in any animal nuisance, as defined in section 14-86. Any animal found acting in any way forbidden by this article shall hereby be declared a nuisance, and its owner shall be subject to the penalties provided by section 14-103. 
(Code 1969, § 4-10; Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Cross reference- Maintaining nuisance generally, § 30-5. 
Sec. 14-102. - Penalties for certain violations. 
    Any person who shall make a false statement in order to secure a dog or cat license to which he is not entitled shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Any person convicted of failure to pay the license fee prior to February 1 of each year, or as otherwise provided in this article, on any dog or cat owned by him shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor and shall be required to obtain proper license forthwith; and unless the fine and license fee are immediately paid, the general district court may order the dog or cat disposed of by the animal control officer or other designated official by giving it into the possession of any person willing to pay the cost of impounding and license; or, if not so disposed of, it shall be killed in a humane manner by the animal control officer or other designated official, but the disposing or killing of such dog or cat shall not relieve its owner of the payment of the fine and license fee already due. 
(Code 1969, § 4-33; Ord. of 10-26-92, § 4-33; Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Sec. 14-103. - Penalty for violation of article; impoundment of dogs, cats and animals; disposition of fines. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided for, any violation of this article shall be a class 4 misdemeanor, and each such violation shall constitute a separate offense; in addition, every animal control officer or other officer shall have the right, and it shall be his duty, to seize and impound any such dog, cat, or other animal found in violation of any provision of this article. Such dog, cat, or other animal shall be impounded and held in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia (1950), § 3-2-6546, as amended. All fines collected from any person for violating any provision of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be credited to the general fund of the city and deposited by the city treasurer. 
(Code 1969, § 4-34; Ord. of 10-26-92, § 4-34; Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Sec. 14-104. - Enforcement of article; appointment of animal control officer. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforceable by the game warden, animal control officer, city sheriff, or any police officer of the city unless otherwise specifically provided for. The city manager is hereby authorized to appoint an animal control officer in accordance with section 5.2 of the Charter. 
(Code 1969, § 4-35; Ord. of 10-26-92, § 4-35) 
Sec. 14-105. - Confinement of animals in vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  Any person who confines an animal in an unattended, enclosed vehicle where the outside temperature is 80 degrees or greater, and the interior of the vehicle is not equipped with a supplemental fan that is operating at the time of such confinement, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who confines an animal in an unattended, enclosed vehicle so as to cause the animal to suffer from heat stress, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. The animal control officer or other officer shall have the authority to remove any animal found in an enclosed vehicle that appears to be suffering from heat stress. The animal shall be provided immediate veterinary care. The animal owner or custodian shall be responsible for all expenses incurred during the removal of the animal or its subsequent treatment and impoundment. 
(c)  In the event that the person responsible for the violation cannot be ascertained, the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by Code of Virginia (1950), tit. 46.2, ch. 6, as amended, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such registered owner was the person who committed the violation. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2011) 
Secs. 14-106-14-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 2-8-2010(2) shall be in full force and effect October 1, 2010. 

Sec. 14-131. - Required; term; fees generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own and keep a dog or cat four months old or over in this city unless it is licensed as required by the provisions of this division. Licenses shall run by the calendar year; namely, from January 1 through December 31, and the license fee shall be payable at the office of the treasurer and shall be as follows: 
(1)  Male. For a male dog or cat ..... $10.00 
(2)  Unsexed dog or cat. For an unsex[ed] (successfully spayed or neutered) dog or cat ..... $5.00 
(3)  Female. For a female dog or cat ..... $10.00 
(4)  Kennel (for 20 dogs or less). For a kennel of 20 dogs or less ..... $15.00 
(5)  Kennel (for more than 20 dogs). For a kennel of more than 20 dogs ..... $25.00 
(6)  Dangerous dog. As declared by any general district court of the state (in addition to the other applicable fees in this section): A registration certificate and renewal fees as provided in the 1950 Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6540(G) and as amended thereafter. 
(Code 1969, § 4-14; Ord. of 10-26-92, § 4-14; Ord. of 2-8-2010(2); Ord. of 4-9-2018(1)) 
State Law reference- Amount of license tax, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6528. 
Sec. 14-132. - When fees payable. 
    The license fee on dogs and cats shall be due and payable as follows: 
(1)  On or after January 1 and not later than January 31 of each year, the owner of any dog or cat four months old or older shall pay a license fee as prescribed in the preceding section. 
(2)  If a dog or cat four months of age or older unlicensed by this city shall come in the possession of any person in this city between January 1 and October 31 of any year, a license fee for the current calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner. 
(3)  If a dog or cat four months of age unlicensed by this city shall come into the possession of any person in this city between November 1 and December 31 of any year, the license fee for the succeeding calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner, and such license shall be valid from the date of payment of the license fee. 
(Code 1969, § 4-15; Ord. of 2-8-2010(2)) 
State Law reference- When license tax payable, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6530. 
Sec. 14-133. - Payment of license fee subsequent to summons. 
    Payment of the license fee subsequent to a summons to appear before the judge of the general district court for failure to do so within the time required shall not operate to relieve such owner from the penalties provided. 
(Code 1969, § 4-16) 
Sec. 14-134. - Procedure for obtaining. 
    Any resident of this city may obtain a dog or cat license by making oral or written application to the treasurer, accompanied by the amount of the license fee. The treasurer shall have authority to license only dogs and cats kept by resident owners or custodians within this city and may require information to this effect of any applicant. Any person making application for a dog or cat license shall be required to present to the official who issues such licenses a certificate of rabies vaccination, properly executed and signed by a licensed veterinarian, certifying that the dog or cat has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions set forth in this article. The certificate must show the date of inoculation, a brief description of the dog or cat, sex and breed, and the owner thereof. The certificate must be presented before the license is issued and must comply with the provisions of section 14-95 herein. When the dog or cat license has been issued, the certificate of vaccination shall be so marked and returned to the owner. 
(Code 1969, § 4-17; Ord. of 2-8-2010(2)) 
Sec. 14-135. - Composition. 
    A dog or cat license shall consist of a license receipt and a metal tag stamped or otherwise permanently marked to show the jurisdiction issuing the license, the sex of the dog or cat, the calendar year for which issued, and bear a serial number. The license tag for a kennel shall show the number of dogs authorized to be kept under such license and have attached thereto a metal identification plate for each of such dogs, numbered to correspond with the serial number of the license tag. 
(Code 1969, § 4-18; Ord. of 2-8-2010(2)) 
State Law reference- What dog license shall consist of, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6526. 
Sec. 14-136. - Duplicate license tags. 
    If a dog or cat license tag shall become lost, destroyed or stolen, the owner or custodian shall at once apply to the treasurer or his agent who issued the original license for a duplicate license tag, presenting the original license receipt. Upon affidavit of the owner or custodian before the treasurer or his agent that the original license tag has been lost, destroyed or stolen, he shall issue a duplicate license tag, which the owner or custodian shall immediately affix to the collar of the dog or cat. The treasurer or his agent shall endorse the number of the duplicate and the date issued on the face of the original license receipt. The fee for a duplicate tag shall be $1.00. 
(Code 1969, § 4-19; Ord. of 2-8-2010(2)) 
State Law reference- Duplicate license tags, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6532. 
Sec. 14-137. - Displaying receipts; wearing of tags. 
(a)  License receipts shall be carefully preserved by the licensees and exhibited promptly on request for inspection by any animal control officer and/or police officer. License tags shall be securely fastened to a substantial collar by the owner or custodian and worn by such dog or cat at all times, except as provided in subsection (b) and (c). 
(b)  The owner of the dog or cat may remove the collar and license tag required by this section when: 
(1)  The dog is engaged in lawful hunting; 
(2)  The dog or cat is competing in a dog or cat show; 
(3)  The dog or cat has a skin condition which would be exacerbated by the wearing of a collar; 
(4)  The dog or cat is confined; or 
(5)  The dog or cat is under the immediate control of its owner. 
(c)  The animal control officer or representative may remove the collar and license tag of such dog or cat when under their immediate control. 
(Code 1969, § 4-20; Ord. of 10-26-92, § 4-20; Ord. of 2-8-2010(2)) 
State Law reference- Displaying receipts, dogs to wear tags, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6531. 
Sec. 14-138. - Effect of dog or cat not wearing collar and license. 
    Any dog or cat not wearing a collar bearing a license tag of the proper calendar year shall prima facie be deemed to be unlicensed; and, in any proceedings under this article, the burden of proof of the fact that the dog or cat has been licensed, or is otherwise not required to bear a tag at the time, shall be on the owner. 
(Code 1969, § 4-21; Ord. of 2-8-2010(2)) 
Sec. 14-139. - Kennel dogs. 
(a)  The owner of a kennel shall securely fasten the license tag to the kennel enclosure in full view and keep one of the identification plates provided therewith attached to the collar of each dog authorized to be kept enclosed in the kennel. Any identification plates not so in use shall be kept by the owner or custodian and promptly shown to any animal control officer and/or police officer upon request. 
(b)  A kennel dog shall not be permitted to stray beyond the limits of the enclosure, but such requirement shall not prohibit removing dogs therefrom temporarily while under the control of the owner or custodian for the purpose of exercising, hunting, breeding, trial or show. A kennel shall not be operated in such manner as to defraud the city of the license fee applying to dogs which cannot be legally covered thereunder or to in any manner violate other provisions of this division. 
(Code 1969, § 4-22; Ord. of 10-26-92, § 4-22) 
Secs. 14-140-14-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 2-8-2010(1) repealed Div. 3, §§ 14-151-14-155, which pertained to dangerous dogs and derived from Ord. of 10-26-92. 

Secs. 14-151-14-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LIVESTOCK 

Sec. 14-166. - Keeping hogs, pigs, or swine. 
    No person shall keep or maintain any hogs, pigs, or swine of any type within the city. Any violation of this section shall be a class 4 misdemeanor, and each day the violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense; however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to the keeping of hogs, pigs, or swine on any tract or parcel of land zoned for agricultural purposes, provided the hogs, pigs, or swine are kept at least 100 feet from any residence, and provided further that no offensive odors from the keeping of such animals disturb any citizen or resident of the city in the reasonable use and enjoyment of his property or cause any person of ordinary sensibility any actual physical discomfort. 
(Code 1969, § 4-36; Ord. of 11-13-95(1)) 
Sec. 14-167. - Keeping horses, ponies, cows, etc. 
    Except as provided in this section or in section 14-166, no person shall keep within the city any horses, ponies, cows, or any like livestock. Any violation of this section shall be a class 4 misdemeanor, and each day the violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the keeping of horses, ponies, cows or such livestock on any tract or parcel of land zoned for agricultural purposes or any tract or parcel of land containing eight acres or more; nor shall it apply to any riding stable licensed by the city council, provided that such animals are kept at least 100 feet from any residence, and provided further that no offensive odors from the keeping of such animals shall disturb any citizen or resident of the city in the reasonable use and enjoyment of his property or cause any person of ordinary sensibility any actual physical discomfort. 
(Code 1969, § 4-37) 
Sec. 14-168. - Boundary lines declared lawful fences; animals running at large beyond boundaries of own land. 
(a)  The boundary lines of each lot, parcel or tract of land within the corporate limits of the city are constituted and determined to be a lawful fence, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, caretaker or manager, temporary or otherwise, of any horse, mule, swine, sheep, goat or cattle of any sort or description to permit such animal or animals to run at large beyond the boundaries of his own lands. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 4-38) 
State Law reference- Trespasses, fences, Code of Virginia, § 55-298.1 et seq. 
Sec. 14-169. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall supersede and take priority over any conflicting provisions of chapter 106 herein. 
(Ord. of 6-25-2012(1)) 
Secs. 14-170-14-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BEEKEEPING 

Sec. 14-181. - Distance from property lines. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or place an apiary or beehive or cause or allow an apiary or beehive to remain: 
(1)  Closer than ten feet to the property line of adjoining property of anyone other than the person maintaining the apiary or beehive or his immediate family; 
(2)  Closer than 40 feet to any house or other building used for residential purposes by anyone other than the person maintaining the beehive or apiary or his immediate family or any apartment, hotel, motel, office, commercial establishment, church or school; or 
(3)  Closer than 30 feet to any "street" as defined by section 1-2 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96) 
Sec. 14-182. - Water supply for bees. 
    Every person owning, possessing, controlling or keeping an apiary or beehive shall maintain, within 50 feet of each beehive an adequate, accessible or usable supply of fresh water for the bees. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96) 
Sec. 14-183. - Density requirements. 
(a)  The keeping of honeybees shall be allowed as an accessory use on any lot at the ratio of four beehives per 10,000 square feet. 
(b)  The density restrictions established by this section shall have no application to an apiary or beehive kept, placed or maintained on any parcel of real property zoned agricultural (A-1). 
(Ord. of 11-11-96) 
Sec. 14-184. - Exceptions from article. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the keeping of apiary or beehives within an educational institution, museum, physician's office or laboratory for the purpose of study, observation or medical research or treatment, provided that such bees are not permitted to fly at large. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96) 
Sec. 14-185. - Penalties; violations declared nuisances. 
    Any person convicted or violation of any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. In addition, any violation of this article is hereby declared a public nuisance, and any person suffering injury or damage therefrom may seek the correction, removal or abatement of such nuisance through appropriate suit in equity. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96) 
Sec. 14-186. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article the words "beehive" and "apiary" shall have the following meanings: 
    Apiary shall mean any place where one or more colonies of bees are kept. 
    Beehive shall mean a single colony, hive or stand of bees, regardless of size. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96) 
ARTICLE VII. - WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 14-187. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them: 
    Animal shall include any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, not to include birds. 
    Pet shall mean any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. 
    Vicious animal shall mean any animal that has: 
(1)  Killed a person; 
(2)  Inflicted serious injury to a person, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or 
(3)  In the case of a dog, continued to exhibit the behavior which resulted in a previous finding by a court that it is a "dangerous dog," provided the owner or custodian of said dog has been given notice of that finding. 
    Wild or exotic animal shall mean any live monkey (nonhuman primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm-blooded animal, poisonous snake or tarantula which can normally be found in the wild state or any other member of crocodilian, including, but not limited to, alligators, crocodiles, caimans, and gavials. Ferrets, guinea pigs, nonpoisonous snakes, rabbits, and laboratory rats which have been bred in captivity and which have never known the wild shall be excluded from this definition. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Sec. 14-188. - Display or exhibition. 
    No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild, exotic or vicious animal or display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, circuses, or veterinary clinics which are properly licensed by the federal government or commonwealth of Virginia. In no case, however, shall such wild or exotic animals be exhibited or displayed in such a manner that persons other than their handlers can pet, fondle or otherwise come in direct physical contact with such animals. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Sec. 14-189. - Keeping as a pet. 
    No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild, exotic, or vicious animal as a pet. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Sec. 14-190. - Notice required at place of sale. 
    Any person who offers for sale a wild or exotic animal shall post conspicuously at the place of sale or display the following notice: 
No person may lawfully keep or permit to be kept in the City of Salem any live monkey (nonhuman primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or any other warm-blooded animal, poisonous snake or tarantula, crocodile or alligator, which can normally be found in the wild state or any other member of the crocodilian, including but not limited to alligators, crocodiles, caimans, and gavials. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Sec. 14-191. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Each day a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Sec. 14-192. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by animal control officers or police officers for the City of Salem. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2010(1)) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Powers of city as to buildings for municipal functions, purposes, etc. (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-846, now repealed) and light, ventilation and sanitation of buildings and premises (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-869) adopted, § 2.2. See Code of Virginia § 15.2-1117. 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22; massage parlor permit, § 22-166 et seq.; environment, ch. 30; air pollution, § 30-41 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; planning, ch. 62; signs, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Access to and use of buildings by handicapped, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-517; dangerous buildings and other structures, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-906; fences around swimming pools, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-921; display of numbers on buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2024; buildings, monuments and lands of local governments, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1638 et seq.; Virginia Industrialized Building Safety Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-70 et seq.; Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq.; local licensing of certain contractors, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-1117. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Certificate of qualification-Generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or engage in, or offer to engage in, for the general public for compensation, plumbing, building- related mechanical or electrical work, unless such person has been issued a certificate of qualification. 
(b)  The applicant for a certificate of qualification shall furnish evidence of his ability or proficiency as may be required by standards established by the state department of housing and community development and the applicant shall be examined to determine his qualifications. The issuance of certificates pursuant to these standards shall be limited to two levels based on the ability and proficiency demonstrated by the applicant in the specified areas of competence. 
(c)  National testing organizations designated by the state department of housing and community development shall administer all examinations to determine an applicant's qualification for certification and the building official shall refuse to grant a certificate to an applicant found not to be qualified. 
(d)  An application fee of $15.00 shall be charged each applicant for level one (journeyman) certification. A fee of $30.00 shall be charged each applicant for level two (master) certification. 
(e)  The violation of any of the provisions of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor and be punishable as such. 
(Code 1969, §§ 6-5.5, 19-10) 
Sec. 18-2. - Same-Revocation. 
    Certification may be revoked for misrepresentation or a fraudulent application, or for incompetence as demonstrated by an egregious or repeated violation of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1969, § 19-11) 
Sec. 18-3. - Gutters, etc., when eaves project over sidewalk; downspouts from gutters. 
    All buildings which are built so close to the street line that the eaves project over the sidewalk shall be provided with gutters so that there shall be no drip upon the sidewalk, and the gutters and eaves shall at all times be kept in good repair. Downspouts from gutters shall be constructed so as to discharge the water, when practicable, under the sidewalk in a suitable pipe. 
(Code 1969, § 6-1) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Regulations concerning the building of houses, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-15(1). 
Sec. 18-4. - Use of covered drain when water flows across street upon erection of building, etc., or grading of lot. 
    No person shall erect, add to, alter or repair any building or other structure of any nature or kind, whether such building or other structure is above or below ground, or so grade any lot, as will concentrate water from any lot, building, structure, gutter or downspout, or from any other source whatsoever, and cause such water to flow across any street, alley or other public way, except in a covered drain of sufficient capacity, the size, location and construction of which shall be in accordance with plans and specifications first approved by the city manager. No building permit shall be issued unless and until satisfactory provisions for the elimination or proper disposition of concentrated water has been reasonably provided for. 
(Code 1969, § 6-2) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
Secs. 18-5-18-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 18-36. - Adopted; where copies filed; permit fees. 
(a)  There is adopted, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, service, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical work in connection therewith, including permits and penalties, those certain codes, known as the Uniform Statewide Building Code, as provided in Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq., of which copies have been and are now on file in the office of the clerk of council, and such codes are adopted and incorporated in this article as a part of this article to the same extent and purpose as though such codes were fully set out at length in this article, and the provisions thereof shall control the construction, alteration or addition to any building and other structure within the city. 
(b)  Every person filing an application for a permit as required by the Uniform Statewide Building Code shall pay to the city a permit fee in accordance with the schedule established by the council. If any person commences any work on a building or structure before obtaining the necessary permit and paying the applicable fee, the permit fee shall be doubled. 
(Code 1969, § 6-5) 
Sec. 18-37. - When and where copies obtainable. 
    Copies of the Uniform Statewide Building Code adopted by section 18-36 may be obtained at the office of the building official in the city during regular business hours. 
(Code 1969, § 6-6) 
Sec. 18-38. - Amendments. 
    The Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code is amended and reordained in the following respects: 
(1)  Unsafe buildings. In addition to the administrative and enforcement provisions contained in the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, adopted in the Uniform Statewide Building Code, as amended from time to time, the provisions of this section shall apply to unsafe buildings. The following words when used in this section for the purposes of this section shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
a.  Board means the board of appeals established under section 116.0 of volume I of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
b.  Building means every building or structure which: 
1.  Shows 33 percent or more of damages or deterioration of the supporting members, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting, enclosing or outside walls or covering; 
2.  Has improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roof or is otherwise overloaded, or which has insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose for which it is used; 
3.  Has been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to become dangerous to the life, safety or health of the occupants thereof or other inhabitants of the city; 
4.  Is so dilapidated, decayed or unsafe as to become dangerous to the safety of the inhabitants of the city; or 
5.  Has parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall or otherwise become detached and cause personal injury or damage to other property. 
c.  Building official shall be as defined in section 102.0 of volume I of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
d.  Occupant means the occupants of a building in possession under a contract or lease with the owner thereof or the occupants of a building in possession under a sublease thereof. 
e.  Owner means every individual, firm or corporation holding legal title to a building appearing of record in the clerk's office of the circuit court of the city, where deeds are recorded; the guardian, if any, of any such owner if he is an infant and the committee, if any, of such owner if he is insane; and the trustee or mortgagee under any deed of trust or mortgage creating a lien on such building also appearing of record in such clerk's office. 
(2)  All buildings defined in subsection (1) of this section are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished, as the case may be, as required by this section. 
(3)  Whenever it shall come to the attention of the building official that a building is likely to exist in violation of the provisions of this section, he shall inspect or cause an inspection to be made thereof and shall determine whether the existence of such building is in fact in violation of the provisions of this section. Upon such finding, the building official shall notify the board of his finding and the board shall give notice in writing of such finding to the owner and occupant, if any, of the building and shall set forth in such notice a time and place that the owner and occupant may appear before the board to show cause why such dangerous building should not be repaired, vacated or demolished, as the case may be. 
(4)  The notice under this section shall set forth (i) the location of the building; (ii) a statement of the particulars which cause the building to exist in violation of the provisions of this section; (iii) a general statement of the work to be undertaken, if the building can be repaired; and (iv) the time and place of the hearing before the board. If, in the opinion of the building official, the continued occupancy of the building will cause imminent peril to life or property, the board or the building official may order the vacation of the building forthwith. 
(5)  The notice under this section shall be given in the following manner: 
a.  To persons who are the owners of such buildings, by delivering a copy thereof to them in person; or if they cannot be found at their usual place of abode in the city, by delivering such copy and giving information of its purport to any person found there who is a member of their family, other than a temporary sojourner or guest, above the age of 16 years; or if neither they nor any such person is found there, by leaving such copy posted at the front door of such place of abode. 
b.  To persons who are owners of such buildings who are infants or insane, by delivering a copy thereof to their guardian or committee in person; or if such guardian or committee cannot be found at his usual place of abode in the city, by delivering such copy and information of its purport to any person found there who is a member of his family, other than a temporary sojourner or guest, above the age of 16 years; or if neither he nor any such person is found there, by leaving such copy posted at the front door of such place of abode. 
c.  To a corporation, bank, trust company or other corporate entity who is the owner of such building, by delivering a copy thereof to its president or other officer, manager, director or agent thereof in the city; or if such person cannot be found at the office or place of business in the city of such corporation, bank, trust company or corporate entity, by delivering a copy to any employee thereof found at such office or place of business giving information of its purport; or if no such person is found at such office or place of business, by leaving such copy posted at the front door of such office or place of business. 
d.  If an owner of such building is unknown or cannot with reasonable diligence be found in the city or has no place of abode, office or place of business in the city, the notice shall be given by posting a copy thereof on such building in such place on the front thereof as can be easily and readily seen and by mailing a copy thereof by registered mail to the last known street and post office address of such owner, and the proof of such mailing shall be sufficient evidence of serving notice by mail. 
e.  To an occupant of any building, by delivering a copy thereof to him in person; or if he cannot be found at such building, by delivering a copy and giving information of its purport to any person found there who is a member of his family, other than a temporary sojourner or guest, above the age of 16 years; or if neither he nor any such person is found there, by leaving such copy posted at the front door of such building. If, in the opinion of the building official, the continued occupancy of the building will cause imminent peril to life or property, the board or the building official may order the vacation of the building forthwith. 
f.  The notice shall be served by any officer having authority to serve notices under Code of Virginia, § 8.01-293, who shall make return of the manner and time of service thereof to the board. 
g.  The building official shall, upon order of the board, post on the front door of such building in such place as can be easily and readily seen the following notice, and it shall be unlawful to remove such notice from the building until the order of the board with respect to the building is complied with or unless it is necessary to remove the notice in order to comply with such order: 
"Warning-This building is unsafe and its use or occupancy has been prohibited by the City of Salem, Virginia. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or their agents to remove this notice without written permission of the building official. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter this building without permission of the building official." 
(6)  The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing and shall decide the issue within reasonable time. At the hearing before the board, the owner and occupant may appear in person, by agent or attorney, and shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The board shall have the power and it shall be its duty to enter such order or may make such requirement or determination as shall be entered or made. The concurring affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the board shall be necessary to comprise the order of the board. The board shall act by formal resolution, which shall set forth the reason for its action, and the vote of each member participating therein, which shall be spread upon its records, and shall be open to public inspection. Every decision of the board shall be based upon a finding of fact and sworn testimony. The actions or decisions of the board shall be final, and its proceedings may not be stayed otherwise than by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
If, on hearing of the case, the board shall find that the building in question is a dangerous building or structure, it shall enter an order that such building be repaired, vacated or demolished, as the case may be. The board shall: 
a.  Order a building to be repaired when it can be reasonably done so that it will not exist in violation of the provisions of this section; 
b.  Order the occupants thereof to vacate such building when it is in such condition as to make it detrimental to public health or safety; or 
c.  Order the demolition of such building in any other case where the building cannot or will not be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the provisions of this section. 
The order shall specify the time in which the work is to be completed and the day on or before which the work of repair or removal is to be begun. The order shall further specify the repairs which will be necessary if the owner elects to repair rather than remove the building or structure, and such order shall further specify the time in which such vacation is to take place should such building be ordered vacated. A copy of the order shall be given to the owner or occupant or to any person appearing on the owner's behalf, and, should the board deem it advisable, the board may order a notice to be posted on the front door of such building or structure as provided in subsection (5) of this section. 
(7)  If an owner fails to appear or refuses or neglects to comply with the order of the board, the board may order the building to be repaired or demolished, and the building official shall cause the building to be repaired or demolished upon such order of the board and shall submit to the city treasurer a statement of all costs incurred thereby, which shall be added to the taxes for the ensuing tax year assessed against the real estate on which the building stood and shall be collected with such taxes by any manner prescribed by law for the collection of such taxes. 
(8)  If an occupant refuses or neglects to comply with the order of the board, the board shall cause a summons to be issued by the clerk of the general district court against the occupant based upon a statement made in writing by the board to the clerk under oath of the facts which authorize the removal of the occupant from the building. The summons shall be served upon the occupant, together with a copy of the statement, by the authorized officer in the manner provided for the service of the notice upon the occupant under the provisions of subsection (5) of this section. It shall be returned to the general district court and the case shall be heard and determined by such court. Such summons shall be served at least five days before the return day thereof. The case shall be heard upon a plea of not guilty, and upon this issue the court shall determine whether the occupant retains possession of the building in violation of the order of the board, and upon finding that such order is being violated, shall issue a writ directed to the authorized officer commanding him to remove the occupant and his goods or chattels from the building. All costs and expenses incurred in the issuance and service of such summons, the trial of the issue and removing the occupant and his goods and chattels shall be recoverable against the occupant in such proceeding. 
(9)  Every owner or occupant who shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the order of the board, or otherwise violate the provisions of this section, shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor and be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-7 of the City Code. 
(Code 1969, § 6-5.1) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34. 
Sec. 18-39. - Bond requirements. 
    All persons filing for a building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or sign permit, unless that person is a state class A or B registered contractor, shall, before the permit is granted, file with the building official a continuing bond in the penal sum of not less than $10,000.00 executed by the applicant and a surety company to be approved by the city attorney. This bond shall be so conditioned that all work performed by or under the supervision of the contractor shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article and shall indemnify the city or the owner of the property against damages by reason of any defect arising out of such construction. It shall further be conditioned to refund to the city or the property owner any money expended to correct any work or repair any damage done or caused by the contractor in the execution of his work and further conditioned to save harmless any other person for whom the contractor or his employees may perform construction or furnish materials, and that the contractor will pay all fees, all fines, and penalties properly imposed upon such contractor for violation of any provisions of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 6-5.2) 
Sec. 18-40. - Allowing one's name, license or bond to be used to obtain permit fraudulently. 
    No person bonded and licensed by the city shall allow his name to be used by any other person, directly or indirectly, to obtain a permit or for the construction of any work under his name, license or bond, nor shall he make any misrepresentations or omissions in his returns. 
(Code 1969, § 6-5.3) 
Sec. 18-41. - Certificate of compliance. 
    Upon the change of occupancy in existing buildings, the building official shall make or cause to be made inspections under the provisions of Volume II of the Uniform Statewide Building Code (National Property Maintenance Code). 
(Code 1969, § 6-5.4; Ord. of 3-11-96) 
Secs. 18-42-18-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICITY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Electricity in mobile home parks, § 54-47; poles and wires, § 74-136 et seq.; city electric system, § 90-26 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-166. - Short circuiting fuse plugs. 
    No person shall short circuit fuse plugs, by the use of any metal or otherwise, anywhere on the city electrical system, whether within or without the city. 
(Code 1969, § 8-1) 
Secs. 18-167-18-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 18-186. - Appointment, etc. 
    The city manager shall appoint an electrical inspector, whose salary shall be fixed by the council and his term of office by the city manager. He shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 8-2) 
Sec. 18-187. - Duties generally. 
    The electrical inspector shall see that the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city relative to electric wiring and the installation and maintenance of electrical equipment and appliances are enforced, and he shall perform such other duties as may from time to time be assigned to him. 
(Code 1969, § 8-3) 
Sec. 18-188. - Right of entry. 
    The electrical inspector may, in the discharge of his duties under this chapter, enter at all reasonable hours any building, manhole or subway or climb any pole, for the purpose of examining and testing the electrical appliances therein or thereon contained and, for that purpose, he shall be given prompt access to all buildings, public and private, and to all manholes, subways or poles on application to the individual or company owning or in charge of such building, manhole, subway or pole. 
(Code 1969, § 8-4) 
Sec. 18-189. - Removal of defective wire or appliance and unsafe conditions. 
    Whenever any electric wire or appliance shall be defective through improper or insufficient installation or for any other reason or otherwise become unsafe as determined by the electrical inspector, the electrical inspector shall at once cause or direct the removal of such defective wire, appliance or unsafe conditions at the expense of the owner of the premises. 
(Code 1969, § 8-5; Ord. of 2-26-2018(1)) 
Sec. 18-190. - Failure, etc., to correct defects after notice. 
    Any person engaging in the business of electrical construction and of the installation of wiring and apparatus for electric light, heat or power in the city failing to correct any defect in his work, after having been given ten days' notice by the electrical inspector, shall not receive any further permit until such defect has been corrected. It shall be unlawful for the recipient of any such notice to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such notice within the period thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 8-6) 
Sec. 18-191. - Forfeiture of license for continual, etc., violation of provisions of Code, etc., as to electrical affairs. 
    In any case in which a person engaging in the business of electrical construction and of the installation of wiring and apparatus for electric light, heat or power in the city shall continually or persistently violate the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the city in regard to electrical affairs or the orders of the electrical inspector touching the same, the license such person holds to engage in business as set out in this section shall be forfeited. 
(Code 1969, § 8-7) 
Cross reference- Licensing, § 22-36 et seq. 
Sec. 18-192. - Permit for wiring of building or alteration of wiring generally; application therefor. 
(a)  No building shall be wired for electric lights, motors or heating devices and no alteration shall be made in the wiring of any building for light, heat or power or to increase the load carried by such wires without a written permit therefor from the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
(b)  Any person desiring a permit as required in subsection (a) shall file an application therefor with the city manager or his duly authorized representative. Such application shall be submitted in such form and contain such information as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 8-8) 
Sec. 18-193. - Record of work done, permits, etc.; annual report. 
    The city manager or his duly authorized representative shall keep a full and complete daily record of all work done, permits and licenses issued, examinations made, and other official work performed, as required by this article. The city manager shall make a report thereof to the council on or before June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1969, § 8-9) 
Sec. 18-194. - Inspection of wiring; certificates of satisfactory inspection. 
    Upon the completion of the wiring of any building for light, heat or power, it shall be the duty of the company, firm or individual doing such wiring to notify the electrical inspector, who shall have such wiring and appliances inspected at once and, if approved, he shall have a certificate of satisfactory inspection issued, which shall contain the date of such inspection and an outline of the result of the examination. No such certificate of satisfactory inspection shall be issued unless such electric wiring and appliances are in strict conformity to the rules and regulations prescribed or required by this article, nor shall current be turned on such installation until such certificate is issued. 
(Code 1969, § 8-10) 
Sec. 18-195. - Inspection fees. 
    Prior to the issuance of the certificate of satisfactory inspection required under section 18-194, the person applying therefor shall pay the city treasurer an inspection fee in conformity to the table or schedule established by the council. 
(Code 1969, § 8-11) 
Sec. 18-196. - Discontinuance of service for failure to comply with article. 
    In any case of failure of any person to comply with this article, the electrical inspector shall have authority, after due notice, to discontinue electric service in any locality concerned and to enforce discontinuance of such electric service until such requirements are complied with. 
(Code 1969, § 8-12) 
City electric system, § 90-26 et seq. 
Sec. 18-197. - Referral to city manager of appeals from electrical inspector's decisions, etc. 
    Any difference of opinion caused by the interpretation of the provisions of this article between the electrical inspector and any electrician, any appeal from a decision of the electrical inspector, or any complaint against the electrical inspector shall be referred to the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 8-13) 
Secs. 18-198-18-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 18-226. - Adoption. 
(a)  Pursuant to state law, there is hereby adopted by reference the 1990 edition of the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association, for electrical wiring and apparatus, as approved by the American Standards Association, as amended, as fully as though completely set out in this division. The installation and use of electrical wiring and apparatus within the city, all electrical construction, and all material and appliances used in connection with electrical work and the operation of all electrical apparatus within the city shall conform to the rules and requirements of such edition of the National Electrical Code adopted in this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the 1990 edition of the National Electrical Code hereby adopted. 
(Code 1969, § 8-14) 
Sec. 18-227. - When and where copies may be obtained. 
    Copies of the National Electrical Code, 1990 edition, adopted as provided in section 18-226, may be obtained at the office of the building official during regular business hours. 
(Code 1969, § 8-15) 
Secs. 18-228-18-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 90. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-261. - Application of article. 
    This article shall apply to all plumbing within the city and likewise shall apply to all plumbing connected with the city water system and the city sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1969, § 19-1) 
Sec. 18-262. - Performance of plumbing work, etc., by registered plumber. 
    No person other than a plumber, registered as provided in section 18-1, shall engage in the actual performance of plumbing work or, subject to the provisions of chapter 90, make any connection with any sewer, drain, soil, waste or water pipe or any other pipe connected therewith. 
(Code 1969, § 19-12) 
Sec. 18-263. - Connection of downspout, etc., to sanitary sewer system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to connect, permit to be connected, construct or maintain, or suffer to be constructed or maintained, on any premises belonging to such person or under his control, any downspout, roof drain, surface drain, stormwater drain or any other conductor of surface or storm water which is discharged into the city sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  Where any downspout, drain or conductor of surface or storm water is in any manner connected to the city sanitary sewer system, it shall be the duty of both the owner and the lessee of the property on which such downspout, drain or conductor of surface or storm water exists to remove, sever or break the connection thereof with the sanitary sewer into which it is discharged, and to so provide that such conductor shall not discharge into the city sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1969, § 19-2) 
Secs. 18-264-18-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLUMBING INSPECTOR[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 18-286. - Appointment, etc. 
    The city manager shall appoint a plumbing inspector, whose salary shall be fixed by the council and his term of office by the city manager. He shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 19-3) 
Sec. 18-287. - Duties generally. 
    The plumbing inspector shall see that the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city relative to plumbing are enforced, and he shall perform other duties as may from time to time be assigned to him. 
(Code 1969, § 19-4) 
Sec. 18-288. - Inspection and right of entry. 
    The plumbing inspector shall have the right, at all reasonable hours, to inspect all buildings or premises within the city for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article and to enter buildings or premises for such purpose. 
(Code 1969, § 19-5) 
Sec. 18-289. - Referral to city manager of appeals from plumbing inspector's decisions, etc. 
    Any difference of opinion caused by the interpretation of the provisions of this article between the plumbing inspector and any master plumber, appeals from the plumbing inspector's decision, or complaints against the plumbing inspector shall be referred to the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 19-6) 
Secs. 18-290-18-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT FOR PLUMBING WORK 

Sec. 18-311. - Required. 
    A plumber, registered as provided in this article, desiring to do plumbing work in relation to the sanitary arrangements of any building shall first get a written permit therefor from the plumbing inspector; provided, however, that no permit is required for such ordinary repairs as defined by the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1969, § 19-7) 
Sec. 18-312. - Fees. 
    Any permittee under section 18-311 shall pay, to the appropriate city officer, such permit or inspection fee as may be established by the council. 
(Code 1969, § 19-8) 
Sec. 18-313. - Permit for person not in employment of permittee; procedure when plumbing job is not finished by plumber who started it. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any plumber to take out a permit, as required in section 18-311, in contemplation of plumbing work which is to be done by any person not in his employment. 
(b)  Before any plumber undertakes to complete a job of plumbing work started by another, he must first have the work theretofore completely inspected before proceeding further. 
(Code 1969, § 19-9) 
Secs. 18-314-18-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SWIMMING POOLS WITH PUBLIC FINANCING, MEMBERSHIP FEES OR PAID ADMISSION[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Powers of city as to swimming pools (Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-858, 15.2-886) adopted, § 2.2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-351. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Maximum load or design load means the maximum number of persons permitted in the swimming pool at any one time and shall be determined by dividing the total square footage of swimming pool water surface area by 27. 
    Operator or manager means the individual responsible for operation and management of the swimming pool. 
    Swimming pool means any artificial swimming, wading or spray pool intended for recreational purposes, including all appurtenant equipment, structures and facilities, provided by any person or political subdivision for the use of guests who gain access through public financing or by membership fees or paid admission. 
(Code 1969, § 27-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-352. - Application of article. 
(a)  The structural and equipment provisions and requirements of this article shall not apply to any swimming pool constructed prior to the effective date of this section, except as follows: 
(1)  When any condition exists in such swimming pool that would endanger the health, safety or life of any person, the health director may order such swimming pool closed until such condition is corrected. Provided, that such owner, operator or manager of such swimming pool furnishes evidence satisfactory to the health director of his intention to comply with the provisions and requirements deemed necessary by the health director. 
(2)  When any material alteration or structural change is made to any pool, or when any placement or replacement of any substantial equipment is made to any such swimming pool. 
(b)  The provisions and requirements of this article with respect to operational procedures and standards and lifeguards shall be complied with by all operators or managers of swimming pools, regardless of the date of construction thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 27-2) 
Editor's note- The ordinance codified as this article was adopted on January 22, 1962, to be in full force and effect 30 days after passage. The above section was amended on May 28, 1962, by an emergency ordinance. 
Sec. 18-353. - Permit prerequisite to construction; plans and specifications. 
    A permit shall be obtained from the building official before the construction, remodeling or major alteration of any swimming pool. Plans and specifications for use in connection with such construction, remodeling or major alteration shall have been approved by the building official and the health director prior to the issuance of such permit. Plans and specifications for use in connection with such construction, remodeling or major alteration shall be submitted in triplicate to the building official and one set of plans and specifications, when approved, will be so stamped and returned to the person filing the application for such permit. Original tracings will not be stamped for approval. 
(Code 1969, § 27-3) 
Sec. 18-354. - Operation without license or permit. 
    No person shall operate a swimming pool without a license or permit. 
(Code 1969, § 27-4) 
Sec. 18-355. - Procedure when article is not complied with or dangerous conditions exist. 
    When the health director finds that the provisions of this article are not met or that any condition exists that endangers the life, health or safety of the users of any bathing place, he may order the facility closed until the condition is corrected. Continued failure to comply with this article shall be cause for revocation of any operating license or permit issued as required in this article. 
(Code 1969, § 27-5) 
Sec. 18-356. - Penalty for violating article. 
    Any person violating, or aiding or abetting any violation of, any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 27-6) 
Secs. 18-357-18-375. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATION 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 18-376. - Compliance with division. 
    The operation of swimming pools shall be in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1969, § 27-7) 
Sec. 18-377. - Operating records. 
    The person responsible for the operation of a swimming pool shall keep or maintain such records of the operation of such swimming pool as may be required by the health director. These records shall be kept on file for a period of at least one year from their submission. 
(Code 1969, § 27-8) 
Sec. 18-378. - Lifeguards and lifesaving equipment. 
    The management of any swimming pool available for use of guests or members, whether for pay or not, shall designate a reliable and competent person as a lifeguard. The management shall further provide for the use of this lifeguard such lifesaving equipment as may be required, depending upon the size and depth of the pool. The number of lifeguards and the required proficiencies, conforming to the standards established by the American Red Cross for lifesaving personnel, shall be determined by the design and depth of pools and the number of bathers. 
(Code 1969, § 27-9) 
Secs. 18-379-18-400. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Dressing Rooms 

Sec. 18-401. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this subdivision shall apply to dressing rooms at swimming pools. 
(Code 1969, § 27-10) 
Sec. 18-402. - Soap. 
    Soap shall be provided at each shower and lavatory of swimming pool dressing rooms. 
(Code 1969, § 27-11) 
Sec. 18-403. - Common use of brushes, combs, etc. 
    The common use of brushes, combs, towels and drinking utensils in swimming pool dressing rooms is prohibited. 
(Code 1969, § 27-12) 
Sec. 18-404. - Suits and towels. 
    Suits and towels in swimming pool dressing rooms shall be laundered and handled in a sanitary and safe manner. 
(Code 1969, § 27-13) 
Sec. 18-405. - Floor. 
    The floor of the dressing room shall be maintained in a clean and dry condition when the swimming pool is not in use. 
(Code 1969, § 27-14) 
Sec. 18-406. - General housekeeping. 
    All of the dressing room facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe manner. Toilet paper shall be provided at each water closet and female urinal. 
(Code 1969, § 27-15) 
Secs. 18-407-18-430. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Water 

Sec. 18-431. - Operation of chlorination equipment. 
    The chlorination equipment at a swimming pool shall be operated so as to maintain a free chlorine residual content of not less than 0.5 parts per million at all points throughout the swimming pool water when there are bathers present. 
(Code 1969, § 27-16) 
Sec. 18-432. - Alkalinity. 
    With reference to the alkalinity of the water in a swimming pool, the hydrogen-ion concentration shall be maintained at 7.2 or above. 
(Code 1969, § 27-17) 
Sec. 18-433. - Filtration. 
    The filters at a swimming pool shall be operated 24 hours per day during the days the swimming pool is in use. At all times when the swimming pool is open for use, the water shall be sufficiently clear to permit a disc six inches in diameter, divided into alternate black and white quadrants, when placed on the bottom of the pool at the deepest point, to be clearly visible from the swimming pool deck at all distances up to ten yards in a horizontal direction from projection of the disc on the swimming pool surface. 
(Code 1969, § 27-18) 
Sec. 18-434. - Use of chemicals. 
    Chemicals other than chlorine, sodium or calcium hypochlorite, lime, soda ash and aluminum sulfate shall not be used to treat swimming pool water without written permission of the health director. 
(Code 1969, § 27-19) 
Sec. 18-435. - Posting of placard in filter room. 
    In the filter room at each swimming pool, there shall be prominently displayed a placard showing the following data: 
(1)  Size of the swimming pool in feet and volume in gallons; 
(2)  Capacity of the filters in square feet and gallons per minute; 
(3)  Capacity of the pumps in gallons per minute at the appropriate head in feet; 
(4)  Head loss at which the filters should be backwashed; and 
(5)  Complete instructions for operating the recirculation and disinfection equipment. 
(Code 1969, § 27-20) 
Secs. 18-436-18-450. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Pool Area 

Sec. 18-451. - Spectators, etc., on the deck. 
    At a swimming pool, no spectators, visitors or other persons other than bathers shall be allowed on the deck of the swimming pool. 
(Code 1969, § 27-21) 
Sec. 18-452. - Persons eating or drinking. 
    At a swimming pool, any person in the process of eating or drinking shall be restricted to the area designated for the preparation and serving of food. 
(Code 1969, § 27-22) 
Secs. 18-453-18-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION GENERALLY 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 18-461-18-470. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Pools and Pool Areas 

Sec. 18-471. - Water supply; certain piping arrangements prohibited. 
    All water used in swimming pools shall be from sources that are approved by the health director. No piping arrangements shall exist which, under any conditions, will permit sewage or wastewater to enter the swimming pool water system or water from the swimming pool to enter the city's water supply. 
(Code 1969, § 27-23) 
Sec. 18-472. - Location. 
    No swimming pool shall be so located as, in any way, to adversely affect its sanitary operation, bather's safety or water quality. 
(Code 1969, § 27-24) 
Sec. 18-473. - Materials. 
    Materials used in connection with swimming pools shall provide a rigid type tight tank with light color and smooth and easily cleaned surfaces. 
(Code 1969, § 27-25) 
Sec. 18-474. - Shape, contour and slope. 
    Each swimming pool shall be designed and constructed of such shape, contour and slope that efficient and safe control of the bathers can be accomplished. In water depths under five feet, the slope of the bottom of a swimming pool shall not exceed one foot in 12 feet. 
(Code 1969, § 27-26) 
Sec. 18-475. - Decks. 
    There shall be a deck at least four feet wide extending around the entire perimeter of each swimming pool. Such deck shall be constructed of concrete or other approved materials. The material shall have a nonslip but smooth finish. Such deck shall have a pitch of not less than one-eighth of an inch nor more than five-eighths of an inch to the foot and be so designed as to conduct drainage away from the pool area in a manner that will not create or maintain pools of water or a nuisance. 
(Code 1969, § 27-27) 
Sec. 18-476. - Steps and ladders. 
    Two or more ladders shall be provided for each swimming pool having a perimeter greater than 100 feet and one ladder for a pool 100 feet or less. Steps projecting into the swimming pool area shall not be permitted. Treads of all steps, ladders or other means of egress shall be of nonslip construction. Each recessed step area shall be provided with one or more handrails. 
(Code 1969, § 27-28) 
Sec. 18-477. - Overflow facilities. 
(a)  Provision shall be made in each swimming pool for the removal of floating materials and scum from the surface of the water. 
(b)  If a recessed type of gutter located near the top of the walls is used, the gutter shall have a minimum depth of three inches and shall be of a design which will permit satisfactory cleaning of the overflow channel. The lip of the scum gutter shall be level and be designed to serve as a handhold for bathers. The gutter drain outlets shall be spaced around the pool not more than 15 feet on centers. The gutter bottom shall slope toward these outlets with a minimum slope of one-eighth inch to the foot. The drains shall not be less than 21/2 inches in diameter and the total orifice area of the grating shall be at least twice the cross-sectional area of the outlet pipe. The above-described gutter may be replaced by an arrangement of overflow devices in the walls which will provide the proper removal of scum and floating material. There shall be one such device for each 400 square feet of pool area with a minimum of four per pool, each of which shall be individually controlled. 
(c)  If the recirculation system is designed for water to enter the bottom portion of the pool and overflow the top, then adequate measures for the proper removal of the scum and floating material from the deck shall be provided. This may be by a continuous drain or multiple drains. If multiple drains are used, each drain grating shall have a total orifice area of at least four times the cross-sectional area of drainpipe, which shall have a minimum diameter of 21/2 inches. In the use of drain channels continuous around the perimeter of the pool, the channel grating shall be designed so as not to create a hazard to fingers and toes, and shall be resistant to corrosion. 
(Code 1969, § 27-29) 
Sec. 18-478. - Inlets and outlets; disposal of wastewater to storm sewer, etc. 
(a)  The inlets for the recirculation of water in a swimming pool shall be submerged and be so located as to produce uniform circulation of water throughout the swimming pool without the existence of dead spots. Wall inlets shall be located on not more than 20-foot centers entirely around the perimeter of the swimming pool. Bottom inlets shall be spaced, depending on the pool dimensions, so as to produce uniform water circulation. If used, the number of bottom inlets shall be the same as required for wall inlets. Each inlet is to be designed as an adjustable orifice or provided with a valve. 
(b)  An outlet drain shall be provided for completely emptying the swimming pool and direct connection thereof to a sanitary sewer shall not be permitted. The outlet drain shall be covered with a grate of such design that it cannot be readily removed by or produce any hazard to the bathers. 
(c)  Disposal of wastewater to a storm sewer or natural watercourse shall be subject to approval of the city manager and the health director. 
(Code 1969, § 27-30) 
Sec. 18-479. - Marking of depth. 
    The depth of the water in a swimming pool shall be marked at every one-foot increment of depth, in water depths five feet and under, on both sides of the pool. In water deeper than five feet, the markings shall be no further apart than three feet. Numerals and letters shall be at least five inches in size and of good contrast with the walls and deck. 
(Code 1969, § 27-31) 
Sec. 18-480. - Lighting. 
    Where swimming pools are to be used after dark, the swimming pool area shall be equipped with lighting fixtures of such number and design as to light all parts of the pool, the water therein, and the entire area. Fixtures shall be installed in such a manner as to create no hazard to the bathers. The design and installation of the fixtures shall be such that lifeguards can clearly see every part of the swimming pool including decks, diving boards, and other appurtenances without being blinded by glare. 
(Code 1969, § 27-32) 
Sec. 18-481. - Drinking water. 
    At each swimming pool, a safely dispensed approved supply of drinking water shall be readily accessible to the bathers. 
(Code 1969, § 27-33) 
Sec. 18-482. - Preparation, etc., of food and drink. 
    Food and drink preparation, serving and consumption and consumption facilities shall be permitted at a swimming pool only within designated areas approved for these purposes by the health director. 
(Code 1969, § 27-34) 
Sec. 18-483. - Unobstructed headroom above diving board. 
    At any swimming pool, at least 12 feet of free and unobstructed headroom shall be provided above the diving boards. 
(Code 1969, § 27-35) 
Sec. 18-484. - Dimensions, etc., of diving areas. 
(a)  At any swimming pool, the minimum depth of water and minimum dimensions in diving areas shall be determined as follows: 
Elevation of 
diving point 
above water 
 surface Depth of 
water End wall to maximum depth Maximum depth to 
5 ft. 0 to 30 inches inclusive 8 ft. 13 ft. 17 ft. 30 inches plus to 1 meter incl. 8 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 1 meter plus to 3 meters incl. 10 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 3 meters plus to 5 meters 14 ft. 6 in. 17 ft. 23 ft.  
(b)  At any swimming pool, the minimum length of any diving area terminating at a vertical wall shall be 30 feet. 
(c)  Where multiple diving boards are used at any swimming pool, the space between centerlines shall be not less than ten feet, and the centerline of no board shall be closer than ten feet to a side wall, nor shall the diving end of the board be closer than ten feet to the wall in which it is attached. Where multiple diving boards are used and are elevated from three to five meters above water level, the above measurements shall be increased to a minimum depth of 15 feet, and for those elevated five to ten meters above water level, the minimum depth shall be 18 feet. 
(Code 1969, § 27-36) 
Secs. 18-485-18-500. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Dressing Room Facilities 

Sec. 18-501. - Exception to application of subdivision. 
    The provisions of this subdivision shall not be construed to apply to a swimming pool serving patrons of transient or lodging accommodations. 
(Code 1969, § 27-37) 
Sec. 18-502. - Dressing rooms to be provided. 
    A dressing room for each sex shall be provided at each swimming pool. 
(Code 1969, § 27-38) 
Sec. 18-503. - Disposition of liquid waste. 
    All liquid waste from any dressing room at a swimming pool shall be discharged to an approved public sewerage system or to sewage disposal facilities approved by the health director. 
(Code 1969, § 27-39) 
Sec. 18-504. - Lockers, etc. 
    Metal lockers, wire baskets, hooks or other sanitary means of storage of clothing and personal accessories shall be provided at each dressing room at a swimming pool, but wooden lockers or cloth bags shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1969, § 27-40) 
Sec. 18-505. - Floors. 
    The floors of a dressing room at a swimming pool shall have a minimum pitch of three inches in ten feet to the drains with no low spots which will allow water to stand. Such floors shall be of smooth but nonslip finish and the rooms shall be so ventilated that the floors do not remain damp or wet when the swimming pool is not in use. 
(Code 1969, § 27-41) 
Sec. 18-506. - Showers. 
    Showers shall be provided in dressing rooms at swimming pools in the proportion of one for each 40 persons of each sex at the time of maximum load. Each shower shall supply an adequate quantity of heated water through a device that will prevent scalding. Drainage from each shower shall be such as to prevent water from one shower draining across the floor area of another. Each shower shall be equipped with suitable facilities for making soap available. 
(Code 1969, § 27-42) 
Sec. 18-507. - Toilet facilities. 
    Toilet facilities shall be provided in dressing rooms at swimming pools in proportion of one water closet for each 40 females or one water closet and one urinal for each 60 females at the time of maximum load. One water closet and one urinal shall be provided for each 60 males at the time of maximum load. The urinals and water closets shall be so located that the bathers will pass by them and then by the showers and lavatory on their way to the swimming pool. 
(Code 1969, § 27-43) 
Sec. 18-508. - Lavatories. 
    Lavatories shall be provided in dressing rooms at swimming pools in the proportion of one for each 60 persons of each sex at the time of maximum load. Each lavatory shall be provided with suitable facilities for making soap available. 
(Code 1969, § 27-44) 
Secs. 18-509-18-525. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Recirculation System and Appurtenances 

Sec. 18-526. - Recirculation system generally. 
    All swimming pools shall be equipped with a recirculation system consisting of pumps, hair and lint catcher, filters, disinfection equipment, and necessary pipe connections to the inlets and outlets. Adequate provision shall be made for backwashing filters. The recirculation system shall be designed for an eight-hour or less turnover of the swimming pool water. 
(Code 1969, § 27-45) 
Sec. 18-527. - Filter rooms. 
(a)  Any room containing the filtration equipment, pumps and other recirculation system appurtenances shall be finished in a light color and be provided with adequate illumination and ventilation. The floor of the filter room shall be designed to provide adequate drainage. The provision of any facility for discharging filter back- washing water onto the filter room floor is strictly prohibited. 
(b)  All of the recirculation equipment in the filter room shall be so installed that it is convenient to operate or repair such equipment. All entrances below ground surface shall be by stair- way. Adequate headroom shall be provided above all filters. 
(Code 1969, § 27-46) 
Sec. 18-528. - Pumping equipment. 
    The pumping equipment forming part of a recirculation system at a swimming pool shall have sufficient capacity to discharge the volume of water for the required turnover of the pool against the maximum head in the recirculation system. The pump used for backwashing sand filters shall have sufficient capacity to backwash the unit at the rate of at least 12 gallons per minute per square foot of filter area against maximum head. 
(Code 1969, § 27-47) 
Sec. 18-529. - Hair and lint catcher. 
    The hair and lint catcher forming part of a recirculation system at a swimming pool shall be installed ahead of the filter pump and be so designed and located that it can be easily and simply dismantled for cleaning and inspection. 
(Code 1969, § 27-48) 
Sec. 18-530. - Filters. 
(a)  The recirculation system of any swimming pool shall be equipped with a filtration system that will filter the entire contents of the swimming pool within eight hours or less at the rates of three gallons or less per square foot per minute. 
(b)  In sand filters, the layer of filter sand shall be at least 20 inches in depth, properly supported by uniform layers of clean, graded gravel to a minimum depth of 12 inches, or supported by porous plates. The filter sand shall have an effective size between 0.45 and 0.55 millimeter, with a uniformity coefficient of not greater than 1.7. 
(c)  In anthracite coal filters, the anthracite shall have a depth of at least 24 inches and shall have an effective size between 0.6 and 0.8 millimeter with a uniformity coefficient of not greater than 1.8. 
(d)  Pressure filters shall be equipped with readily accessible air relief valves and with an access hole large enough to permit inspection, maintenance and repair work. Each pressure filter system shall be equipped with a pressure gauge on the inlet and outlet to indicate the loss of head in pounds per square inch. A sight glass that can be easily removed for cleaning shall be provided on the waste discharge line. 
(e)  Gravity-type filters shall be equipped with loss of head gauges. 
(f)  The filtration rate for diatomaceous earth filters and similar equipment may not exceed two gallons per square foot of filter area with eight hours' turnover of pool volume. 
(g)  Arrangements or equipment shall be provided for application of filter aid and proper precoating and cleaning of filter elements. It will be necessary to evaluate such equipment individually, and approval or rejection shall be at the discretion of the health director. 
(Code 1969, § 27-49) 
Sec. 18-531. - Rate of flow indicators. 
    The recirculation system at a swimming pool shall be equipped with a rate of flow indicator reading in gallons per minute, so located as to indicate the rate of flow of the effluent from the filter and also the rate of backwash in gallons per minute in sand or anthracite coal filters. 
(Code 1969, § 27-50) 
Sec. 18-532. - Suction cleaners. 
    A suction cleaner shall be provided at each swimming pool. Where the suction cleaner is operated by the recirculating pump, a device shall be provided for throttling the flow from the pool outlet and the suction cleaner line shall be connected through the hair and lint catcher. 
(Code 1969, § 27-51) 
Sec. 18-533. - Equipment for feeding chemicals to water. 
    Means shall be provided at each swimming pool for regulating the feeding of chemicals to the water in the recirculation system. The installation of mechanically operated, positive, chemical feeders or open-type chemical machines is required. The installation of closed-type solution pots is prohibited. 
(Code 1969, § 27-52) 
Sec. 18-534. - Disinfection and disinfection equipment. 
(a)  All swimming pools shall be provided with approved chlorine feeding equipment. The chlorinating equipment shall be capable of applying a dose up to six parts per million of chlorine at the rate of recirculation. Chlorine gas feeding equipment and chlorine gas cylinders shall be installed in an enclosed space or room separate from the filter room equipped with a door capable of being locked. When this chlorinator room is tight, it shall be equipped with a forced draft fan exhausting to the outside from the floor level and a fresh air inlet shall be provided near the ceiling. Unless the topography makes it difficult or impossible, the chlorinator room shall be located above ground level and below deck level of the swimming pool. The chlorine gas tanks shall be protected from direct sunlight and fastened in place during storage and use. An approved type gas mask shall be provided where chlorine gas is being utilized. This shall be located accessible to, but outside of, the chlorinator room. 
(b)  Nothing in subsection (a) shall be construed as prohibiting any other method of disinfection or equipment demonstrated as of at least equal efficiency and approved by the health director. 
(Code 1969, § 27-53) 
Sec. 18-535. - Chemical testing equipment. 
    Each swimming pool shall be provided with approved equipment for the determination of hydrogen-ion concentration (pH) ranging from 6.8 to 8.0. Satisfactory equipment shall also be provided for determination of residual chlorine content ranging from 0 to 1.0 parts per million. 
(Code 1969, § 27-54) 
Secs. 18-536-18-550. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF WADING POOLS 

Sec. 18-551. - Water supply, lighting, overflow facilities, inlets and outlets. 
    Water supply, lighting, overflow facilities, inlets and outlets for wading pools shall meet the requirements set forth in division 3 of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 27-55) 
Sec. 18-552. - Location. 
    Wading pools shall be so located that drainage from surrounding areas will not wash contamination into the pool during rainfall. 
(Code 1969, § 27-56) 
Sec. 18-553. - Slope of bottom. 
    The bottom of each wading pool shall slope not less than three inches in ten feet toward the drain. 
(Code 1969, § 27-57) 
Sec. 18-554. - Deck. 
    Each wading pool shall be entirely surrounded by a deck at least four feet in width, constructed of permanently impervious material which shall have and retain a finish as smooth as possible that is nonslip to bare feet. The deck shall slope not less than three inches in ten feet away from pool edge, and the water on the deck discharged to waste. 
(Code 1969, § 27-58) 
Sec. 18-555. - Separation from swimming pools. 
    Wading pools shall be separated from swimming pools and appropriate protection features, such as a fence, shall be installed. 
(Code 1969, § 27-59) 
Sec. 18-556. - Dressing rooms. 
    Separate dressing room facilities will not be required when a wading pool is operated in conjunction with a swimming pool. If the wading pool is not operated with a swimming pool, then the requirements of division 3 of this article shall apply. 
(Code 1969, § 27-60) 
Sec. 18-557. - Recirculation of water; disposal of wastewater. 
    A complete recirculation system shall be installed at wading pools which cannot be served adequately by an adjacent swimming pool recirculation system. The recirculation system shall provide a pool volume turnover rate of once in three hours or less. An alternate method of water circulation system is the continuous addition of water properly treated at a rate of flow sufficient to replace all of the water in the wading pool once in three hours or less. The overflow water, with this method, shall be continuously discharged to waste. The provisions for the disposal of wastewater contained in division 3 of this article shall apply to wading pools. 
(Code 1969, § 27-61) 
Secs. 18-558-18-580. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF SPRAY POOLS 

Sec. 18-581. - Application of division. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to spray pools. 
(Code 1969, § 27-62) 
Sec. 18-582. - Water supply; submergence of spray heads. 
    The water sprayed into a spray pool shall be from an approved supply. Spray heads shall be so installed that there will be no possibility for submergence. 
(Code 1969, § 27-63) 
Sec. 18-583. - Construction materials. 
    Spray pools shall be constructed of permanently impervious material that shall have and retain a finish as smooth as possible that is nonslip to bare feet. 
(Code 1969, § 27-64) 
Sec. 18-584. - Slope of bottom. 
    Spray pool bottoms shall slope not less than three inches in ten feet toward the drains. 
(Code 1969, § 27-65) 
Sec. 18-585. - Drains; disposal of wastewater. 
    The spray pool shall be equipped at its low point with an unvalved drain to waste. The drain shall be of such size and design that water sprayed into the pool will not pond in the pool bottom. The provisions for the disposal of wastewater contained in division 3 of this article shall apply to spray pools. 
(Code 1969, § 27-66) 
Sec. 18-586. - Deck. 
    The spray pool shall be entirely surrounded by a deck at least four feet in width, constructed of permanently impervious material which shall have and retain a finish as smooth as possible and nonslip to bare feet. The deck shall slope not less than three inches in ten feet away from the pool edge and water on the deck discharged to waste. 
(Code 1969, § 27-67) 
Secs. 18-587-18-610. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FENCING OF SWIMMING POOLS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to adopt ordinance relative to fencing of swimming pools, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-29. 

Sec. 18-611. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fence means a close type vertical barrier not less than four feet in height above ground surface. A woven steel wire, chainlink, picket or solid board type fence or a fence of similar construction which will prevent the smallest of children from getting through shall be construed as within this definition. 
    Swimming pool means and includes any outdoor manmade structure constructed from material other than natural earth or soil designed or used to hold water for the purpose of providing a swimming or bathing place for any person or any such structure for the purpose of impounding water therein to a depth of more than two feet. 
(Code 1969, § 27-68) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-612. - Enclosure of swimming pool required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, use, possess or control any swimming pool on any property within the city without having a fence completely around such swimming pool; provided, however, that a dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. 
(Code 1969, § 27-69) 
Sec. 18-613. - Self-closing and self-latching devices for gates or doors in fences. 
    All gates or doors opening through fences used in the enclosure of swimming pools shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling or accessory building which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. All self-latching devices shall be not less than four feet above ground level. 
(Code 1969, § 27-70) 
Sec. 18-614. - Clearance of ground; distance from swimming pool. 
    Fences used in the enclosure of swimming pools shall be so constructed as to come within two inches of the ground at the bottom and shall be at least five feet at any point from the edge of the swimming pool. 
(Code 1969, § 27-71) 
Sec. 18-615. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Each violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $300.00 or confinement in jail for not more than 30 days, either or both. Each day that such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 27-72) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Sale of ice cream and similar products, state preemption, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-562.4; certification to operate or maintain boiler or pressure vessel, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-910; sanitation in tattoo parlors, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-912; door-to-door vendors, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-913; funding the construction or repair of rental property, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-958; regulation of child care services and facilities in certain cities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-914; municipal franchises, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2100 et seq.; dangerous, offensive or unhealthful business in municipality, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1113; regulation of auctions, peddlers, weights and measures, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1114; going-out-of-business sales, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-223, 18.2-224; licensing of bail bondsmen, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-152.1; regulation of precious metals dealers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4111; records of firearms dealers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4200 et seq.; local license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Bondsmen. 
(a)  Every person who shall, for compensation, enter into any bond for others, whether as a principal or surety, and every agent of such person shall pay a license tax as provided in article II of this chapter. No such license shall be issued unless or until the applicant shall have first obtained from the circuit court of the city, and exhibited to the commissioner of the revenue, a certificate that he is a person of good moral character, that his past conduct before the courts of the city has not been unsatisfactory, and that he is suitable to be licensed. 
(b)  No professional bondsman shall enter into any such bond if the aggregate of the penalty of such bond and all other bonds on which he has not been released from liability is in excess of the true market value of his real estate. Each professional bondsman, if so directed by the judge of the circuit court of the city in which he is licensed, shall place a deed of trust on the real estate that he is using for the limit of his expected bond indebtedness to secure the State of Virginia and shall name the state's attorney for the city as trustee under the deed of trust. In addition thereto, he shall furnish the clerk of the appropriate court an acceptable appraisal and title certificate of the real estate subject to any such deed of trust. Each professional bondsman licensed under this section shall file with the clerk of the circuit court of the city not later than the fifth day of each month a list of all outstanding bonds on which he was obligated as the last day of the preceding month, together with the amount of the penalty of each such bond. 
(c)  Any person entering into any bond for others, whether as principal or surety, for compensation, and not having first been licensed under the provisions of this section, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor; such conviction, however, is not to relieve such person from the payment of the license tax provided for in this section. 
(d)  Every clerk of court and every other public official authorized by law or ordinance to take or accept bonds shall, prior to taking or accepting a bond, require the principal and the surety thereon to state in writing whether or not any compensation has been, or will be, paid to such surety on account of the making of such bond; provided, however, that a failure of such officer or official to obtain such written statement shall not, in any case, be deemed to invalidate or vitiate the obligation of such bond. 
(e)  Any professional bondsman, or agent for any professional bondsman, qualified under this section, shall be subject to and governed by any reasonable rules of conduct or procedures set up by the judge of the court in which he is acting as a bondsman, which may include a requirement that such bondsman or agent place a reasonable amount of cash or negotiable bonds in escrow with the clerk of such court, to be held during the time such bondsman or agent is acting as a bondsman in such court, provided that such clerk is acting under a bond of sufficient amount and coverage to insure protection against loss, theft or misappropriation. Upon his violation of such rules, he may, after a hearing upon a charge of such violation, be suspended from entering into further bonds in such court by the judge thereof. If such bondsman or agent fails to have in escrow with the clerk of such court a sum sufficient to cover any forfeiture of bond against him and fails or refuses to pay such forfeiture after notice and demand by the judge of the court, he may be suspended by such judge from entering into further bonds in such court until the forfeiture is paid or it is adjudicated that he is not liable thereon. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to guaranty, indemnity, fidelity and security companies doing business in the state or their agents and attorneys-in-fact, under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 38.2-2400 et seq., except that agents and attorneys-in-fact of guaranty, indemnity, fidelity and security companies entering into bonds for bail, appearances, costs or appeal in criminal cases shall be required to obtain a certificate from the judge of the circuit court in which he desires to carry on the business of professional bondsman, certifying that the applicant is of good moral character, that his past conduct before the courts of such county or city has not been unsatisfactory, and that he is suitable to be a licensed bondsman. Such certificate shall authorize such persons to enter into such bonds in any other county or city. Such agents and attorneys-in-fact shall be subject to any reasonable rules of conduct or procedure and discipline for the violation of same as may be ordered by the judge of the court in which they act for such companies. No person may act as such an agent or attorney-in-fact when such person, his spouse, or a member of his immediate family holds any office as magistrate, clerk or deputy clerk of any court. 
(Code 1969, § 9-3; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 19.2-152.1, 58.1-3724. 
Secs. 22-2-22-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Forfeiture of license for violation of ordinance provisions pertaining to electricity, § 18-191; liquefied petroleum gas, § 34-201 et seq.; payment of license tax for automobile graveyard, § 86-475; taxicab certificate required before issuance of license, § 98-82. 
State Law reference- License taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-36. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acted responsibility means that: 
(1)  The taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business; and 
(2)  The taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered. 
    Affiliated group means: 
(1)  One or more chains of corporations subject to inclusion connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is a corporation subject to inclusion if: 
a.  Stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the corporations subject to inclusion, except the common parent corporation is owned directly by one or more of the other corporations subject to inclusion; and 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of nonvoting stock of at least one of the other subject to inclusion corporations. As used in this subdivision the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock, which is limited and preferred as to dividends: the phrase "corporation subject to inclusion" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or county its corporation; and the term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income. 
(2)  Two or more corporations if five or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.  At least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least 80 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation. 
b.  More than 50 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than 50 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. When one or more of the corporations subject to inclusion, including the common parent corporation, is a nonstock corporation the term "stock" as used in this subdivision shall refer to the nonstock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
    Ancillary means: subordinate to, subservient to, auxiliary to, or in aid of, that which is principal and primary. This would mean those activities that serve no independent business function apart from their connection to principal activity. 
    Assessment means a determination as to the property rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by an assessing official when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the assessing official or an employee of the assessing official, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be. 
    Assessor or assessing official means the commissioner of the revenue. 
    Base year means the calendar year preceding the current license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
    Business means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person maybe engaged in more than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: 
(1)  Advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or 
(2)  Filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
    Collector or collecting official means the treasurer. 
    Date means the license tax year as provided for in section 22-46. 
    Definite place of business means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for 30 consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis; and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
    Events beyond the taxpayer's control include but are not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the commissioner of the revenue, who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayers business when he provided the erroneous information. 
    Gross receipts means the whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the license privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of this chapter. Exclusions and deductions from "gross receipts:" 
(1)  General rule: Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the license privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business or profession. 
(2)  [Exclusions:] The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts: 
a.  Amounts received and paid to the United States, the commonwealth, any county, city or town for the Virginia retail sales or use tax, or for any local sales excise taxes on motor fuels. 
b.  Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed. 
c.  Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the business to its customer. 
d.  Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor. 
e.  Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset. 
f.  Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offerer, and which the recipient assigns to licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee's gross receipts together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive. 
g.  Withdrawals from inventory for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory, whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes. 
h.  Inventory income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a licensable business not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to interest, dividends, and other income derived form the investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business. 
(3)  Situs of gross receipts: General rule: Whenever the tax imposed by this chapter is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a licensable privilege at a definite place of business within the city. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipt shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be listed with that specific classification. 
    Jeopardized by delay includes a finding that the application is frivolous or that a taxpayer desires to: 
(1)  Depart quickly from the locality. 
(2)  Remove his property therefrom. 
(3)  Conceal himself or his property therein. 
(4)  Do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
    Manufacturing means taking original materials or components and by using a process substantially changing the original materials into a well-signalized transformation in form, usability, quality and adaptability rendering the original materials more valuable for use than it was before. The manufacturing process includes, but not limited to any one or more of the following: 
(1)  The assembly process is complex and uses numerous components or materials. 
(2)  After assembly or process the components cannot be recognized without previous knowledge. 
(3)  The components, parts or materials are not readily usable for any purpose other than incorporation into the finished product. 
    License year means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
    Purchases means and includes all goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of every wholesale merchant. The term as so used shall not be construed to exclude any goods, wares and merchandise otherwise coming within the meaning of the word, and all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale in the state as merchandise shall be considered as purchases within the meaning of this article. But this article shall not be construed as applying to manufacturers taxed on capital by this state, who offer for sale at the place of manufacture goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by them. 
    Year means the date of January 1 to December 31 as used in this section for business license purposes. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-6; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-37. - Rules of construction. 
    The rules, as given in the Code of Virginia and any acts amendatory thereto, for the construction of statutes shall, as far as applicable, govern in the construction of this article and such amendments to this article as may be adopted. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-3; Ord. No. 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-38. - Statement of policy. 
    It is the purpose and policy of the city in enacting this article imposing license taxes for the conducting of business in the city, and for the granting of privileges as are in this article defined and set forth, to equalize as far as practicable the burden of such license taxation among those hereby liable thereto, by adopting for general application, but subject to the regulations, personal privileges and exceptions specifically set forth in this article, a system of license taxes measured by the volume of business done by the business, trade, profession or occupation upon which the tax is levied. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-1; Ord. 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-39. - Rules for guidance. 
    As to all questions in regard to the duty and conduct of officers of the city in collecting and enforcing the taxes imposed in this article, and in regard to matters of construction, and for definitions of terms used in this article and the rules and regulations applicable to putting the same in operation, for the assessment, levy and collection of taxes for the current year, reference is hereby made to the laws of the state, and more particularly to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq., or to so much thereof as is applicable to this article and is not inconsistent with it or the general ordinances of the city; and for the conduct and guidance of the officers of the city and other parties affected by this article, and for fixing their powers, rights, duties and obligations, the provisions of such laws, so far as applicable, are hereby adopted, without, however, being specifically quoted or set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-7; Ord. 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-40. - Branch office. 
    Every person conducting any and all phases of business and maintaining an office or location in the city shall pay a license tax based on the volume of business derived by that office or location as prescribed in this article, and if a person has no regularly established office in the state, such person shall pay on the volume of business derived in the city. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-6.14; Ord. 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-41. - Powers of city treasurer. 
    The city treasurer shall have, and is hereby given, the same power to enforce the collection of licenses that are given unto the commissioners of the revenue and treasurers by the applicable provisions of the Code of Virginia for the enforcement of state licenses and this article being specifically quoted and set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-8; Ord. 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-42. - Zoning and license restrictions. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue shall not issue a license for conducting any business, trade, profession or occupation at a location where the conducting of such business, trade, profession or occupation at such location is prohibited by chapter 106 or any other ordinance provision of the city. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue shall not issue a license for conducting any business, trade, profession or occupation to be conducted at a residence without the approval of the city planning commission for a home occupation permit as defined in chapter 106. 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue shall not issue a license for conducting any business, trade, profession or occupation unless any assumed or fictitious name of their business has first been recorded with the clerk of the circuit court. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-9; Ord. 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-43. - Who is subject to tax. 
    The license taxes enumerated in this article are for the conducting of business in the city, including any and all phases and activities of the business, trade, profession or occupation so conducted in the city or the maintenance of any office or branch office in the city, either or both, and for the granting of certain privileges. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-10; Ord. 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-43.1. - License requirement. 
    Every person shall apply for a license for each business or profession before engaging in a business in this jurisdiction if: 
(1)  The person has a definite place of business in the city; 
(2)  There is no definite place of business anywhere and the person resides in this jurisdiction; or 
(3)  There is no definite place of business in this jurisdiction but the person operates amusement machines or is classified as an itinerant merchant, peddler, carnival, circus, contractor subject to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715 or public service corporation. A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business and for each business. A person engaged in two or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: 
a.  Each business or profession is subject to licensure at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of this city; 
b.  All of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate or if subject to different tax rate, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and 
c.  The taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the assessor may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts. 
(Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-44. - Separate license for each branch of business. 
    When any person is engaged in more than one business activity which is made by the provisions of this article subject to taxation, such person shall pay the tax provided by law on each activity prosecuted by that business. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-11; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-44.1. - Situs for license tax. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law and except as to public service corporations the situs for the local license taxation for any business, profession, trade, occupation or calling subject to licensure, shall be the locality in which the person so engaged has a definite place of business. If any such person has a definite place of business in any other locality, then such other locality may impose a license tax on him, provided such other locality is otherwise authorized to impose a local license tax with respect thereto. 
(b)  Where a local license tax imposed by any locality is measured by volume, the volume on which the tax may be computed shall be the volume attributable to all definite places of business of the business, profession, trade, occupation or calling in such locality. All volume attributable to any definite places of business of the business, profession, trade, occupation or calling in any other locality shall be deductible from the base by the locality in which the first mentioned definite place is located. 
(c)  The word "volume" as used in this section, means gross receipts, sales, purchases or other base for measuring a license tax which is related to the amount of business done. 
(d)  This section shall not be construed as prohibiting any locality from requiring a separate license for each definite place of business located in such locality. 
(Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-45. - Separate license for each place of business. 
    When any person is engaged in a business subject to taxation under the provisions of this article, a separate license shall be required for each different location where such business is conducted. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-12; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-46. - License year. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, all license taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable at the office of the city treasurer on January 1 of each and every year, and shall expire on December 31 following the date on which such license is issued. Any person conducting any business, trade, occupation or profession after January 1 of any year without having paid the license tax levied by this article, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall be guilty of committing a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-13; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-46.1. - License due dates. 
(a)  Every person subject to a license tax in this article shall apply for a license prior to beginning business if he was not subject to licensure in this jurisdiction on or before January 1 of the license year or no later than March 1 of the license year, if he had been issued a license for the proceeding year. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue. The fact that a business or profession conducted business without obtaining a license, or after being refused a license, shall not relieve that business or profession of the tax imposed by this section. 
(b)  The tax shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not based on gross receipts of the business. If the tax is measured by gross receipts the tax shall be paid with filing of application on or before March 1 including all supplemental taxes and adjustments. 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue may grant an extension of time in which to file an application for a license, for reasonable cause. The extension shall be a condition of a timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax; the tax is then subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension. 
(Ord. of 12-9-96(2); Ord. of 9-27-2010, eff. 10-7-2010) 
Sec. 22-47. - Expiration of license. 
    The city treasurer shall state in the certificate of license for any business, trade, profession or occupation mentioned within this article that the person to whom such license is issued is thereby licensed to carry on the business, trade, profession or occupation therein named until December 31 following the date of which such license is issued; or for the duration of the specific license granted. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-14; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-48. - Keeping of records. 
    Every person who is assessable with a local license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the assessing official to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the assessor to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of these years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the assessor in order to allow the assessor to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within this jurisdiction. The assessor shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside this jurisdiction, copies of the appropriate book and records shall be sent to the assessor's office upon demand. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-15; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-48.1. - Consistent reporting and coordinated enforcements. 
    The commissioner of the revenue may consult with federal, state and local government officials to verify that an relevant certifications, determinations or classifications made by such other government official or the taxpayer for other tax or regulatory purposes are consistent with the classification claimed by the taxpayer for local license tax purposes or to coordinate enforcement of various tax and regulatory provisions. No presumption shall be established by the action or inaction of another government official unless the applicable law, regulation or policy administered by the other government official is substantially similar to the definition, law, ordinance or other provision applicable for business professional occupational license purposes. 
(1)  The commissioner of the revenue may consult with federal and state officials concerning whether a person who claims not to be engaged in a business for local license tax purposes properly filed a schedule C with his federal and state income tax returns. 
(2)  The commissioner of the revenue may verify whether federal forms W-2, 1099 or similar forms have been filed with respect to persons or income for which classification as an employee or independent contractor. 
(3)  The assessing official may verify whether a person has obtained or is required to obtain a state or local regulatory license such as a contractor's license, professional license, zoning approval, building permit, etc. The existence or absence of such other regulatory action generally will not establish a presumption with respect to business professional occupational license tax issued because different definitions, purposes and policies are involved. 
(Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-49. - Penalties for false oath and refusal to furnish information. 
(a)  Where a statement of purchases, gross receipts, gross value or sales is made by any person under the provisions of this article, the commissioner of the revenue or other official performing the duties of the commissioner of the revenue may require of each such person a statement, under oath, to the best of his knowledge, as to the amount of his purchases, gross receipts, gross value or sales; and if the commissioner of the revenue or his deputy deems it advisable or necessary, he may demand of such person such other proof of the amount of his purchases, gross receipts, gross value or sales as may enable him to satisfactorily determine the same. 
(b)  Anyone who, for the purpose of obtaining a license, makes a false or misleading statement or gives false testimony for the purpose of obtaining a license, or assists or aids another to obtain a license, or refuses to provide the information deemed necessary by the commissioner of the revenue or his deputies, shall be subject to the penalty as provided for in section 22-52. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-16; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-50. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Every person desiring to obtain a license to prosecute any business, trade, profession or occupation or to do anything for which a license is required under this article shall first make application therefor to the commissioner of the revenue. The application shall state the nature of the business, trade, profession or occupation; the owner or owners of the business, trade, profession or occupation; the trading name of the business, trade, profession or occupation; the place where the business is proposed to be conducted; and in case the business, trade, profession or occupation to be licensed, whereby the tax is to be measured by gross receipts, gross commissions, sales, or gross purchases as provided in this article, shall make such statement thereof under oath to the commissioner of the revenue, who shall assess such application with the proper license tax. The commissioner of the revenue shall then issue a business license statement to the city treasurer. The city treasurer, upon payment of the license tax, shall issue a license to the applicant to conduct the business, trade, profession or occupation. 
(b)  No business license shall be issued until the applicant has produced satisfactory evidence that all delinquent business license, business personal property, meals, transient occupancy, and admissions taxes owed to the city have been paid which have been properly assessed against the applicant by the city. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-17; Ord. of 9-23-91; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-51. - Proration of license. 
    There shall be no abatement from, or proration of, any license tax imposed under this article, except that any person who pays a flat rate license tax, and who shall begin business after the beginning of the license tax year, then in such case, the commissioner of the revenue shall ascertain the amount of such license tax, which license tax shall bear the same proportion of the annual tax thereon as the period embraced between the date at which such license is issued and December 31 next thereafter bears to the whole year, and except further that in computing such tax no deduction shall be made therefrom for any fractional part of a month. The foregoing provision shall not apply to any gross receipts or gross value licenses issued under this article, or to any license computed upon the amount of sales or contracts made or done, or for any such license computed upon the amount of sales or purchases. No license tax specifically prohibited from being prorated shall be prorated. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-18; Ord. 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-52. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of having committed a class 1 misdemeanor, unless otherwise provided for in this article. Each day any such person violates or fails to conform to such provision or requirement shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection and remittance of such tax as provided in this article. 
(b)  A penalty of ten percent of the tax shall be imposed upon the failure to pay the tax on or before March 1. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the commissioner of the revenue if both the application and payment are late. 
(c)  A penalty of ten percent of the tax shall be imposed upon the failure to file a tax return on or before March 1. No penalty shall be imposed if such failure was not the fault of the taxpayer, or was the fault of the commissioner of the revenue or the treasurer. Additionally, penalty may be waived upon determination of reasonable cause. 
(d)  The commissioner may, for the purpose of assessing all taxes assessable by his office, summon the taxpayer or any other person to appear before him at his office, to answer, under oath, questions touching the tax liability of any and all specifically identified taxpayers. The commissioner shall not, however, summon a taxpayer or other person for the tax liability of the taxpayer which is subject of litigation. 
(e)  Any person who refuses to (i) furnish to the commissioner of the revenue access to books of account or other papers and records, (ii) furnish information to the commissioner of the revenue relating to the assessment of taxes, (iii) answer under oath questions touching any person's tax liability, or (iv) exhibit to the commissioner of the revenue any subject of taxation liable to assessment by the commissioner of the revenue, shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Each day's refusal to furnish such access or information shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-19; Ord. of 1-14-91; Ord. of 12-9-96(2); Ord. of 9-27-2010, eff. 10-7-2010) 
Sec. 22-53. - Additional license taxes and beginner's license. 
(a)  Whenever any person begins a business, trade, profession or occupation on or after January 1 of the license year, the license tax imposed by this article shall be measured by the applicant's estimate of the purchases, sales and gross receipts that will be received, made, established or produced from the commencement of the business, trade, profession or occupation to the end of the license year; however, such person shall, within a period of 30 days from the commencement of the succeeding license tax year, or when applying for his license for such succeeding year, furnish the commissioner of the revenue with the true amount of the gross receipts, sales or purchases for that part of the preceding year during which such person operated and thereupon pay to the treasurer any additional amount of license tax due. Until such payment is made, there shall not be issued to such person any license permitting such person to carry on any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city. 
(b)  Whenever the commissioner of the revenue shall ascertain that any person should be assessed with other or any additional license tax pursuant to the provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to assess such person with such additional license tax as may be reported to be due. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-20; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-54. - Display or exhibition of license. 
(a)  Every person required to obtain any business license shall display such tag, sign or decal as evidence of a current privilege license at a location that is in general view of the public or as designated by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(b)  Every person required to pay a license tax shall keep the license receipt issued by the city treasurer in a convenient place at his definite place of business and, whenever required to do so, shall exhibit such license receipt to the commissioner of the revenue or his deputies or to any member of the police department. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-21; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-55. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted December 9, 1996, reserved § 22-55. Formerly, such section pertained to transfer of license and derived from Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-22. 
Sec. 22-56. - License inspector, powers and duties generally. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue shall designate some employee in his office to act as license inspector of the city, and such person shall at all times be under the supervision and control of the commissioner of the revenue. The license inspector shall ascertain the name of each person engaged in conducting any business, occupation or profession in the city without having obtained a license therefor and the correctness of each license, classification, location, ownership, and statement of gross receipts or gross purchases. The license inspector shall have authority as prescribed by Code of Virginia, § 19.2-232 et seq., for issuance and service of a summons on any person found in the presence of such license inspector to be engaged in any business, occupation or profession without having obtained such license as required by this article or found to be violating any other provision of this article, commanding such person to appear before the city general district court at such time and on such date as is stated in the summons, not later than five days from the issuance thereof; or the license inspector may have a summons or warrant of arrest issued by a magistrate of the city for any such person, charging him with a violation of the proper provisions of this article, and may serve a copy of such summons upon such person in a manner provided by law. He shall return the original of such summons to the clerk of the city general district court or to a judge thereof with the manner and time of service or execution stated thereon. Any person who, having been served by such license inspector with any such aforesaid summons to appear before the city general district court to answer a charge of a violation of the provisions of this article who fails to make such appearance shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue shall have the power to prescribe such forms as he may deem necessary for the efficient administration of this article with respect to license taxes and may require taxpayers to complete and file such forms in such manner as he may determine. 
(c)  The city license inspector is authorized and empowered to summons any person before him in the office of the commissioner of the revenue and require the production of any or all of his records, books and papers likely to provide information relevant to the matter under investigation; and the license inspector is authorized and empowered to make such other and further investigations, examinations and audits of the records, books and papers of such person as he shall deem proper in order to accurately determine the proper return to be made by such person. 
(d)  The city license inspector shall have the power and right, at all reasonable times, to examine the license, books and records of any taxpayer liable for taxes assessable, the liability of any person using the facilities of such taxpayer, as well as the liability of the taxpayer whose books and records are so examined. 
(e)  If it shall appear that the purchases, sales, amount of business or other matters pertinent to the license assessment have been incorrectly reported or returned or underestimated, the city license inspector shall make a report to the commissioner of the revenue who, if he shall be satisfied that such person has made an incorrect report or return or underestimate, shall assess such person with the proper city license tax and with such penalty as may be provided. 
(f)  Every person who shall fail to appear before the city license inspector, or appearing fails or refuses to produce such records, books and papers when duly summoned, or shall refuse to permit the city license inspector to make such other and further investigation and audit of such books and papers as aforesaid shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each offense. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-23; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 22-57. - Discontinued business license refund. 
    When any established business, trade or profession licensed under this article whose volume is measured by gross receipts, purchases, sales or commissions shall permanently discontinue that business by surrendering the license and making a timely written application for a refund submitted to the commissioner of the revenue, the commissioner of the revenue shall ascertain the present amount of the unused portion of the license tax paid to the city for that calendar year and submit a request to the city for a refund to be paid the licensee, provided: 
(1)  The licensee has submitted the application for a refund no later than January 31 of the year next following the tax year for which any such license was issued. 
(2)  No refund shall be made for tax amounts less than the minimum license tax. 
(3)  The amount of the refund shall be computed as follows: 
a.  Months license not used: 12 months divided by percentage of months license not used. 
b.  Actual gross receipts minus minimum gross receipts equals base gross receipts; base gross receipts times percentage of months license not used equals unused gross receipts; unused gross receipts times rate per $100.00 equals amount of refund. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-24; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-58. - Erroneous assessments. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall certify to the treasurer any instances in which an assessment or portion thereof is erroneous. Upon receipt of such certification, the treasurer shall make a refund to the taxpayer, if the tax together with any penalties and interest thereon has been paid; or abate the assessment or portion of the assessment, if the tax together with any penalties and interest thereon remains unpaid. Any such refund, or so much thereof as is necessary, shall first be applied to such indebtedness. 
    A licensee which has permanently ceased to engage in the license business shall be liable for tax only with respect to the months or portion of a month before permanently ceasing to conduct the licensed business. The tax shall be computed by multiplying the previous year's gross receipts by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months, or fraction thereof, of the current tax year prior to permanently ceasing business and the denominator of which is the number of months, or fractions thereof, of the preceding tax year during which it engaged in the license business. In no event shall a refund be required for any part of a flat or minimum flat tax. A refund of tax paid for the current tax year, or an abatement of tax owed for the current tax year shall be made in the same manor as for an erroneous assessment. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-25; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-59. - Personal privilege permits. 
    The following enumerated licenses are to be considered as a personal privilege license and cannot be issued unless approval is received from the city council or city manager: 
Amusement centers. 
Amusement parks. 
Archery or shooting ranges. 
Auto impound lots. 
Billiard or pool parlors. 
Bowling alleys. 
Carnivals. 
Circuses. 
Dance halls. 
Dog or animal shows. 
Fortunetellers. 
Go-cart racing tracks. 
Golf driving ranges. 
Junk dealers. 
Miniature indoor and outdoor golf courses. 
Miniature or model car racing tracks. 
Minstrels. 
Parades. 
Pawnbrokers. 
Public exhibitions. 
Public performances. 
Skating rinks or skateboard centers. 
Trampoline centers. 
Vaudeville shows. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-26; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-60. - Amusement service. 
(a)  Amusement service means any person that, for compensation, provides any type of amusement or entertainment, unless otherwise specifically provided for under another section of this article. 
(b)  Every person conducting, operating or engaging in an amusement service shall pay an annual license tax of $30.00 for the first $8,334.00 plus $0.36 on each $100.00 of gross receipts in excess of $8,334.00. 
(c)  Those engaged in rendering an amusement service include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Amusement centers. 
Amusement parks. 
Animal rides. 
Baseball batting cages. 
Billiard parlors. 
Booking agents. 
Bowling alleys. 
Coin-in-slot pool tables. 
Commercial sports. 
Concert managers. 
Electronic and mechanical amusement machines. 
Go-cart rides. 
Golf courses. 
Golf driving ranges. 
Health spas. 
Hobby horses, merry-go-rounds. 
Miniature car racing. 
Miniature golf. 
Motion picture theaters. 
Musical bands. 
Pool parlors. 
Public demonstrations. 
Public exhibitions. 
Public performances. 
Recreation services. 
Riding stables. 
Shooting galleries and archery ranges. 
Skateboard centers. 
Skating rinks. 
Swimming pools. 
Tennis courts. 
Trampoline centers. 
and other amusement service occupations. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-27; Ord. of 9-28-81; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Cross reference- Dancehall license, § 10-38. 
Sec. 22-61. - Carnivals, circuses, minstrels and menageries. 
(a)  Every person who exhibits performances in a sideshow, dog and pony show, trained animal show, carnival, circus, menagerie, or any other show, exhibition or performance similar thereto shall procure a license of $500.00 for each day that an exhibition is given. This license shall be a regulatory license by authority of Code of Virginia, title 58.1, and shall be a personal privilege license granted only upon order of council. 
(b)  Any performance, exhibition, circus, carnival, minstrel, menagerie, show or like undertaking that uses city streets for parades or other advertisements, even if exhibiting outside of but within one mile of the city, shall pay the appropriate license tax as if the performance, exhibition, circus, carnival, minstrel, menagerie, or show were exhibited within the city; and, provided further, that if a street parade is advertised in connection with such performance, exhibition, circus, carnival, minstrel, menagerie, show or like undertaking and is not given, the same license tax shall be paid by such performance, exhibition, circus, carnival, menagerie, minstrel, show, or like undertaking as if such street parade were actually given. This license shall be a personal privilege and shall be granted only upon a written permit from the city manager. 
(c)  Before a license can be issued to any carnival, show, minstrel, circus, menagerie, animal show, performance or public exhibition, as provided for in this section, the person proposing to exhibit such carnival, show, minstrel, circus, menagerie, animal show, performance or public exhibition shall make application in writing to the city manager stating the nature of the carnival, show, minstrel, circus, menagerie, animal show, performance or public exhibition, the location in the city where such performance shall be exhibited, and shall secure from the city manager a written permit therefor. If the city manager considers it undesirable to permit such a carnival, show, minstrel, circus, menagerie, animal show, performance or public exhibition to exhibit anywhere within the city, he shall have full power to refuse to issue such permit. This provision shall also apply to any parade or other advertisement that uses city streets. The commissioner of the revenue shall not validate a license until such permit is secured from the city manager. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-28; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-62. - Fortunetellers. 
    On every fortuneteller, clairvoyant, phrenologist, spirit medium, spiritualist, astrologist, hypnotist or palmist, the license tax shall be $1,000.00 per year. This license shall be a personal privilege and shall be granted only upon order of council and the tax shall not be prorated nor the license transferred. (Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3726) Any person who engages in business under this article without the license required shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-29; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-63. - Business service. 
(a)  Business service means any person engaged in conduct of a business trade or occupation that renders a service for compensation of any nature, primarily to any business, trade, occupation or government agency, unless otherwise specifically provided for under another section of this article. 
(b)  Every person conducting, operating or engaging in a business service shall pay an annual license tax of $30.00 for the first $8,334.00 plus $0.36 on each $100.00 in excess of $8,334.00 of gross receipts. 
(c)  Those engaged in rendering a business service include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Accountant or bookkeeping service. 
Advertising, all types. 
Alarm device service or monitoring service. 
Auditor. 
Bookbinding. 
Bottle exchange. 
Brokers, all types. 
Collection agency. 
Commercial equipment leasing. 
Commission merchants. 
Computer service. 
Consulting services, all types. 
Data processing service. 
Delivery service. 
Detective agency. 
Directory service. 
Drafting services. 
Duplication processes. 
Garbage pickup service. 
Hauling, or transporting, all types. 
Impounding lot. 
Industrial packing, crating, shipping, or moving goods. 
Janitorial service. 
Mailing, messenger or correspondent service. 
Metallurgist. 
Paging service. 
Parcel delivery service. 
Promotion agency. 
Public relations service. 
Realty multiple listing. 
Reproduction services. 
Research and development service. 
Secretarial services. 
Security or guard service. 
Sign painting or sign making. 
Systems development services. 
Tabulation and inventory service. 
Telephone answering service. 
Temporary personal service. 
Testing laboratories. 
Transcription and typing service. 
Trucking companies (interstate). 
And other business services. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-30; Ord. of 9-28-81; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-64. - Contractors and contracting. 
(a)  Contractor means and includes every person, firm or corporation engaged in the conduct of a business, trade or occupation enumerated in this section. The term "contractor" is further defined to include every person, firm or corporation: 
(1)  Accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts for doing any work on or in any building or structure, requiring the use of paint, stone, brick, mortar, wood, cement, structural iron or steel sheet from galvanized iron, metallic piping, tin, lead or other metal or any other building materials; 
(2)  Accepting or offering to accept contracts to do any paving, curbing or other work on sidewalks, streets, alleys or highways or public, private or governmental property, using asphalt, brick, stone, cement, concrete, steel, wood or any composition; 
(3)  Accepting or offering to accept an order for or contract to excavate earth, rock or other material for foundation or any other purpose or for cutting, trimming or maintaining rights-of-way; 
(4)  Accepting or offering to accept an order or contracts to construct any sewer of stone, brick, terra cotta or other material; 
(5)  Accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts for doing any work on or in any building or premises involving the erecting, installing, altering, repairing, servicing or maintaining of electric wiring, devices or appliances permanently connected to such wiring; or the erecting repairing or maintaining of lines for the transmission or distribution of electric power or fiber optic cable; 
(6)  Engaging in the business of plumbing and steamfitting; 
(7)  Accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts for building, remodeling, repairing, wrecking, razing or demolishing any structure; for moving any building; for drilling, boring or digging a well; for the installation, maintenance of signs, billboards, air conditioning apparatus or equipment; and any such person shall be deemed to be a contractor or subcontractor, whether such work is done or offered to be done by day labor, general contract or subcontract; provide, however, that every person who shall build, erect or construct a house or building for the purpose of selling or renting the same and who shall not have employed therefor in writing a contract or person who has paid the license tax by this section and who has acted as superintendent of the whole construction, shall, himself, be deemed a contractor and shall be subject to all the provisions of this article. Any person who sell, erect or construct a house or building and later sell or offer to sell or rent such house or building, without having himself resided in such house or building for at least 90 consecutive days, shall be prima facie deemed to have erected or constructed that house or building for the purpose of selling or renting such house or building. 
(b)  Contractors having a principal office located outside the city who exceed $25,000.00 in contract amounts in the city in any year will be required to purchase a city contractor's license as per Code of Virginia § 58.1-3715. 
(c)  The building official shall not issue a building permit to a contractor who does not maintain an office in the city and the cost of construction exceeds $25,000.00 or a contractor whose place of business is located in the city unless the contractor has just purchased the required city contractor's license as prescribed by this article. 
(d)  Every contractor conducting, operating or engaging in any of the enumerated businesses, trades or occupations shall pay an annual license tax based upon the gross receipts from all orders or contracts accepted during the preceding year, whereas a credit or allowance is given for the contract amount of any contractor's license purchased from any other locality. The license tax shall be $30.00 on the first $18,750.00 of gross receipts plus $0.16 per $100.00 in excess of $18,750.00. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-31; Ord. of 9-28-81; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-65. - Commission merchants and merchandise brokers. 
    Every person who receives, distributes, buys or sells any provisions and merchandise on account of the shipper and who participates in the profits ensuing from or accruing out of the sale of any personal property which may be left with or consigned to him for sale and who invoices such sales or collects the money therefor without receiving title to the merchandise as prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3733, shall be a commission merchant and broker and shall pay the license as prescribed for a business service. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-32; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-66. - Peddlers and itinerant merchants. 
(a)  Any person who shall carry from place to place any goods, wares or merchandise and offer to sell or barter such goods, wares or merchandise, or actually sell or barter such goods, wares or merchandise, shall be deemed to be a peddler and pay an annual license tax of $200.00 per person. This subsection shall not apply to those who sell or offer for sale in person or by their employees ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature or farm products grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale; nor shall this subsection apply to any regularly licensed wholesale merchant who shall sell and deliver merchandise to dealers or retail merchants for resale, a distributor of motor vehicle fuels or petroleum products, or a manufacturer taxed on his capital by this state who peddles only goods and wares manufactured by him. 
(b)  Itinerant merchants. 
(1)  Any person who shall engage in, do or transact any temporary or transient business in this city in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and who for the purpose of carrying on such business shall hire, lease, use or occupy any building or structure, motor vehicle, tent, car, boat or public room or any part thereof, including rooms in hotels, lodginghouses, or houses of private entertainment, or in any street, alley or other public place in this city, for a period of less than one year, for the exhibition of or sale of such goods, wares or merchandise shall be deemed an itinerant merchant. 
(2)  There is imposed upon every itinerant merchant selling new furniture, televisions, radios, space heaters or other appliances, audio, video or other electronic equipment, computer equipment or hardware, rugs, clothing or footwear, watches or jewelry, tools or hardware, automotive parts or equipment, paintings or art objects, stuffed animals or toys, a tax of $500.00 per year immediately upon engaging in such activity. 
(3)  There is imposed upon every itinerant merchant selling merchandise or wares other than that enumerated in subsection (b)(2) a tax of $50.00 per year immediately upon engaging in such activity. 
(4)  This subsection (b) shall not apply to a regularly licensed auctioneer with a regular place of business in this state. 
(5)  No person shall be exempt from the payment of the license tax imposed by this subsection (b) by reason of associating temporarily with any local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer or by reason of or as a part of any business in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer. 
(6)  A license under this subsection (b) cannot be prorated or transferred. This is a regulatory license by authority of Code of Virginia, title 58.1. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-33; Ord. of 6-24-85; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-67. - Restaurants. 
    Any person who shall cook, prepare or otherwise furnish, for compensation, food or refreshments of any kind, for casual visitors at his house or place of business for consumption therein, and who does not furnish lodging, and who is not the keeper of a hotel or lodginghouse, shall be classified as a retail merchant for license tax purposes and shall be licensed as such. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-34; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Cross reference- Food establishments, § 38-56 et seq. 
Sec. 22-68. - Retail merchants. 
(a)  Retail merchant means any person, bank or savings and loan association or churches and charitable nonprofit organizations with unrelated trade or business income which is taxable under Internal Revenue Code, that purchases goods, wares and merchandise and sells the same for any purpose other than resale, regardless of sale price. 
(b)  (1) This does not include sales at wholesale to industrial, commercial, institutional or government agencies. 
(2)  Nor any domestic products or nursery products, ornamental or otherwise or for the planting of nursery products, as an incident to the sale thereof, outside of the regular market house and sheds of the city; provided such products are grown or produced by the person offering such products for sale. 
(3)  Nor any retailer for the privilege of selling bicentennial medals on a nonprofit basis for the benefit of the Virginia Independence Bicentennial Commission or the city bicentennial commission. 
(c)  Any person who is both a wholesale merchant and a retail merchant is hereby required to obtain both classes of licenses; provided however that any retail merchant who desires to do a wholesale business also may elect to do such wholesale business under his retail merchants license by paying license tax under this section as a retail merchant on both his retail business and his wholesale business. 
(d)  On every person conducting the business of a retail merchant there shall be a license tax which shall be measured by the amount of sale made by him during the proceeding year. The license tax on each retail merchant shall be as follows: if the amount of sale throughout the then next proceeding calendar year did not exceed $15,000.00. The license tax shall be $30.00 and $0.20 of every $100.00 in excess of $15,000.00. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-35; Ord. of 9-28-81; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-68.1. - Direct sellers/home based business. 
(a)  Direct seller/home based business means any person who: 
(1)  Engages in the trade or business of selling or soliciting the sale of consumer products primarily in private residences and maintains no public location for the conduct of such business; 
(2)  Receives renumeration for such activities, with substantially all of such renumeration being directly related to sales or other sales-oriented services rather than to the number of hours worked; 
(3)  Performs such activities pursuant to a written contract between such person and the person will not be treated as an employee with respect to such activities for federal tax purpose; and 
(4)  Having first obtained approval from the planning commission to conduct a business from his place of abode; and 
(5)  Engaged in the trade or business of soliciting business primarily in private residence or place of abode and maintains no public location for the conduct of such business. 
(b)  Direct sellers/home based business. 
(1)  Rate limitation notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city shall not levy and license tax on a direct seller, or home based business as defined herein unless the total sales of such seller exceeds $8,000.00 per year. 
(2)  Every person conducting or engaging in the business of a direct seller/home based business as described above shall pay an annual license tax as prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-68.2. - Motor vehicle dealers. 
(a)  On every person conducting the business of a new or used motor vehicle dealer, shall pay the license tax as prescribed by section 22-68 of this article. 
(1)  The dealer may separately state the amount of the license tax applicable to each sale of a motor vehicle and add such tax to the sales price of the motor vehicle and after the consumer pays the tax to the dealer, the license tax collected shall be deemed to be held in trust by the dealer until remitted to the city treasurer. The failure of such merchant to recover the tax from the purchaser shall not relieve such merchant from the obligation to pay the tax to the city. 
(2)  Whenever a motor vehicle dealer accepts a trade-in as part of a sale of a motor vehicle, the dealer's gross receipts for license tax purpose shall not include the amount of the trade-in. 
(Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-69. - Wholesale merchant. 
(a)  Wholesale merchant means any person that purchases goods, wares and merchandise and who sells to others for resale or who sells to institutional, commercial, industrial users and governmental agencies at wholesale, unless otherwise specifically provided for under another section of this article. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation, who or which sells or offers to sell goods, wares or merchandise to licensed dealers, other than at a definite place of business operated by the seller, and at the time of such sale or exposure for sale delivers, or offers to deliver, the goods, wares or merchandise to the buyer shall be deemed a peddler at wholesale. For purposes of this section any delivery made on the day of sale shall be construed as a delivery at the time of sale. The license tax for a peddler at wholesale shall be the same as a wholesale merchant. 
(c)  Wholesale merchandise broker means every person buying or selling on his own account or for another food products or other commodities and who sells only to wholesalers and manufacturers at wholesale prices from an office in the city and whose gross profits are measured principally by a fixed commission shall pay the license tax as prescribed for a wholesale merchant. 
(d)  This section shall not include a manufacturer for the privilege of manufacturing and selling goods, wares and merchandise at wholesale at the place of manufacture. 
(e)  Every person conducting the business of a wholesale merchant shall pay a license tax as follows: if the amount of purchases throughout the next proceeding calendar year did not exceed $10,000.00 the license tax shall be $50.00 plus $0.13 on every $100.00 in excess of $10,000.00. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-36; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
State Law reference- Wholesale merchants, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3716. 
Sec. 22-70. - Solicitation permit. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of book sales, magazine sales or other commodities who requires or solicits any deposit at the time of such sale and not selling from a regularly established place of business in the city shall pay for the privilege of soliciting the general public of the city a permit fee of $15.00 per month or fraction of a month. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of any permit under this section by the commissioner of the revenue, the chief of police shall investigate the person and company and approve the application for a permit. 
(c)  Permits under this section cannot be transferred nor prorated. This is a regulatory permit by authority of Code of Virginia, title 58.1. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-37; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted December 9, 1996, reserved § 22-71. Formerly, such section pertained to wholesale merchandise broker and derived from Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-38. 
Sec. 22-72. - Tobacco, wholesale and retail. 
    On every person wholesaling or retailing tobacco, cigarettes, cigars or snuff there shall be a license tax of $10.00, in addition to the license tax for a wholesale or retail merchant. This license tax is a regulatory license by authority of Code of Virginia, title 58.1. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-39) 
Sec. 22-73. - Personal service occupation. 
(a)  Personal service means any service rendered for compensation of any nature, either upon or for persons, animals or personal effects, unless the service is specifically provided for under another section of this article. 
(b)  Every person conducting, operating or engaging in any of the following enumerated businesses, trades or occupations shall pay an annual license tax of $30.00 for the first $8,334.00, plus $0.36 on all gross receipts in excess of $8,334.00. 
(c)  Those engaged in rendering a personal service include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Adult care service. 
Ambulance service. 
Animal grooming or kennels service. 
Auctioneers. 
Automobile driving schools. 
Barbershops or beauty parlors. 
Beauty schools. 
Boarding house. 
Bondsmen. 
Booking agents or concert managers. 
Child care attendants or schools. 
Convalescent homes. 
Dance studios and schools. 
Developing photographs. 
Detective agency and security service. 
Employment agencies. 
Engraving. 
Extermination service. 
Funeral services and crematories. 
Hotels and motels. 
Hospitals for profit. 
House cleaning services. 
Instructors, tutors, schools all types. 
Interior decorating. 
Laundries and dry cleaning. 
Lawn care service. 
Leasing of tangible personal property. 
Linen and uniform service. 
Massage therapist. 
Mini storage warehouses. 
Nursing homes. 
Photographs. 
Private teaching service all types. 
Storage of tangible personal property. 
Tailors. 
Towing service. 
Travel agent or bureaus. 
And other personal service occupations. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-40; Ord. of 9-28-81; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-74. - Short-term rental business. 
(a)  Every person conducting or operating a business which qualifies as a short-term rental business, as defined in section 82-178, shall pay an annual license tax as follows: If the amount of the gross receipts throughout the then next preceding calendar year did not exceed $15,000.00, then the license tax shall be $30.00 on the first $15,000.00 and $0.20 per $100.00 in excess of $15,000.00. 
(b)  The same penalty and interest as provided in this article shall apply to new licenses if not obtained within 30 days after the commencement of business. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-40A; Ord. of 11-13-89; Ord. of 12-10-90; Ord. of 1-14-91; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-75. - Professional service. 
(a)  Professional service means: A person is engaged in providing a professional service if engaged in rendering any service specifically enumerated below or engaged in any occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by prolonged course of specialized instruction and study is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The word profession and professional imply attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to use for others as a vocation. 
(b)  Every person conducting or engaging in any of the professions or occupations enumerated in this section and maintaining an office within the city shall pay an annual license tax based upon gross receipts derived from such profession or occupation received during the preceding year. The license tax shall be as follows: When the gross receipts did not exceed $5,173.00, the license tax shall be $30.00; when such receipts exceed $5,173.00, the license tax shall be $30.00 on the first $5,173.00 plus $0.58 on every $100.00 in excess of $15,000.00. 
(c)  Those engaged in rendering a professional service include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Acupuncture. 
Architect. 
Attorney at law. 
Certified public accountant. 
Chiropractor. 
Dentist. 
Dermatologist. 
Doctor of dental surgery. 
Doctor of medicine. 
Doctor of veterinary medicine. 
Engineers, any and all types. 
Oculist. 
Optician. 
Optometrist. 
Osteopath. 
Pharmacist. 
Physiotherapist. 
Podiatrist. 
Psychologist. 
Surgeon. 
Surveyor. 
And any other professional service occupations. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-41; Ord. of 9-28-81; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-76. - Real estate service. 
(a)  Real estate service means any person rendering a service for compensation as lessor, buyer, seller, agent or broker. 
(b)  Every person conducting or engaging in any of the real estate services or occupations enumerated in this section and maintaining an office within the city shall pay an annual license tax of $30.00 for the first $5,173.00 of gross receipts, plus $0.58 per $100.00 in excess of $5,173.00 of gross receipts, namely: 
(c)  Those engaged in rendering a real estate service include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Appraisers of real estate. 
Escrow agents. 
Fiduciaries. 
Lessors of real estate. 
Real estate agents, brokers and managers. 
Rental agents for real estate. 
And other real estate services. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-42; Ord. of 9-28-81; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-77. - Financial service. 
(a)  Financial service means any person rendering a service for compensation in the form of a credit agency, an investment company, or a broker or dealer in securities and commodities exchange. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Banks and trust companies subject to Virginia Bank Franchise Tax. 
(2)  Savings and loan companies (including those whose name includes "savings bank") and state chartered credit unions are limited to a license tax of $50.00. 
(3)  Federal Credit Unions are exempt under the Federal Credit Union Act. 
(c)  Every person conducting, operating or engaging in any of the following businesses, trades or occupations shall pay an annual license tax of $30.00 for the first $15,000.00 of gross receipts plus $0.58 on every $100.00 in excess of $15,000.00 of gross receipts. 
(d)  Those engaged in rendering a financial service include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Buying installment receivables chattel mortgage. 
Financing. 
Consumer financing. 
Credit card service. 
Factors. 
Financing accounts receivable. 
Industrial loan company. 
Installment financing. 
Inventory financing. 
Loan or mortgage brokers. 
Loan or mortgage company. 
Safety deposit box company. 
Security and commodity service. 
Stockbrokers. 
Working capital financing. 
And other financing service occupations. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-43; Ord. of 9-28-81; Ord. of 3-25-85; Ord. of 12-9-96(2); Ord. of 11-9-2015(2)) 
Editor's note- Ord. of 11-9-2015(2) shall be in full force and effect on Jan. 1, 2016. 
Sec. 22-78. - Repair service. 
(a)  Repair service means any person engaged in the conduct of a business, trade or occupation that repairs, renovates, cleans or services some article or item of personal property for compensation of any nature, unless the service is specifically provided for under another section of this article. 
(b)  Every person conducting, operating or engaging in any of the following businesses, trades or occupations shall pay an annual license tax of $30.00 for the first $8,334.00 in gross receipts, plus $0.36 per $100.00 in excess of $8,334.00 of gross receipts. 
(c)  Those engaged in rendering a repair service include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Air conditioning equipment repair. 
Bicycle repair. 
Boat and boat motor repair. 
Boiler repair. 
Business and office machine repair and service. 
Electrical appliance repair. 
Engine repair, any and all types. 
Farm machinery repair. 
Furnace and heating equipment repair. 
Furniture repair. 
Gun repair. 
Industrial and commercial machinery repair. 
Lawn equipment, any and all types. 
Lawnmower repair and sharpening. 
Leather goods repair, any and all types. 
Motor vehicle repair, any and all types. 
Musical instrument repair or tuning. 
Nickel and chrome plating. 
Paint and body shop for vehicles. 
Radio, television and communication equipment. 
Saw repair and sharpening. 
Scales repair. 
Shade repair. 
Shoe repair. 
Tire repair or recapping. 
Tool repair. 
Toy repair. 
Watch, clock and jewelry repair. 
Welding shop. 
And other repair services. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-45; Ord. of 9-28-81; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-79. - Junk dealers, canvassers and dealers in certain secondhand merchandise. 
(a)  Junk dealers and canvassers. 
(1)  Every person trading, purchasing, bartering or exchanging any kind of secondhand or used articles, junk, rags, bottles, metals such as steel, iron, lead, tin, aluminum, copper, etc., and/or any rubber, wood, glass, plastic, etc., except furniture, clothes, shoes and household appliances, etc., intended to be resold for use as such shall be deemed a junk dealer or junk canvasser. 
(2)  On every junk dealer trading in any kind of the articles enumerated in subsection (a)(1) shall be a license tax of $200.00. On every junk canvasser or agent canvassing the city for the purpose of buying any kind of the articles enumerated in subsection (a)(1) there shall be a license tax of $50.00. 
(3)  A license for junk dealers located in the city shall be a personal privilege and shall be granted only upon order of the council and shall not be prorated or transferred. On every junk canvasser, the license shall only be granted upon the approval of the chief of police. 
(b)  Dealers in certain secondhand merchandise. 
(1)  Requirement of register for dealers in certain secondhand merchandise. Every person who is a dealer in or is in the business of purchasing secondhand or used silver, silverplated, gold, goldplated or pewter flatware, holloware, tableware or other similar household items, watches and jewelry, guns and coins shall keep at his place of business a register in which he shall record with respect to each purchase of any of the foregoing items the following information: 
a.  A complete and accurate description of the goods, articles or things purchased, including the number of items; 
b.  The time and date of receiving the goods, articles or things purchased; 
c.  The amount of money paid for the goods, articles or things purchased; and 
d.  The name and complete and accurate address of the person selling the goods, articles or things purchased, which information shall be taken from a valid driver's license or special identification card issued by the state division of motor vehicles, or other reliable identification card or document, together with a particular description of such person. 
(2)  Access of law enforcement officers to register. The register required to be maintained by subsection (b)(1) shall be open to inspection by any federal, state or local law enforcement officer during business hours. 
(3)  Examination of merchandise by law enforcement officers. Every person who is a dealer in or is in the business of purchasing any of the items enumerated in subsection (b)(1) and every person in the employ of such person shall admit to his premises during business hours any federal, state or local law enforcement officer to examine any item purchased and to search for and take into possession any article known by him to be missing or known or believed by him to have been stolen. 
(4)  Purchases from minors prohibited. No person who is a dealer in or is in the business of purchasing any of the items enumerated in subsection (b)(1) shall purchase, buy or receive, directly or indirectly, any such items from any person under the age of 18 years of age. 
(5)  Penalties. Violation of any provision of subsections (b)(1) through (4) of this section shall be a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(6)  License tax required. 
a.  On every dealer of secondhand merchandise as enumerated in subsection (b)(1), located in the city, there shall be a license tax of $200.00, and the license shall be a personal privilege license and shall be granted only upon order of the council and shall not be prorated or transferred. 
b.  On every canvasser of secondhand merchandise as enumerated in subsection (b)(1), there shall be a license tax of $50.00, and such license shall only be granted upon approval of the chief of police. 
(c)  Regulatory license. The license for junk dealers, canvassers and dealers in certain secondhand merchandise is a regulatory license by authority of Code of Virginia, title 58.1. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-48; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Cross reference- Automobile graveyards, § 86-471 et seq. 
Sec. 22-80. - Pawnbrokers. 
(a)  Any person who shall in any manner lend or advance money or other things for profit on the pledge and possession of personal property or other valuable things, other than securities or written or printed evidences of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable things on condition of selling such personal property or other valuable things back to the seller at a stipulated price shall be held to be a pawnbroker. On every pawnbroker there shall be a license tax of $150.00. 
(b)  A license under this section shall be a personal privilege and shall be granted only upon order of council and shall not be prorated or transferred. Such license is a regulatory license by authority of Code of Virginia, title 58.1. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-49; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
State Law reference- Pawnbrokers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4000 et seq. 
Sec. 22-81. - Photographers outside state. 
(a)  Any person having no regular established place of business in this state upon which is a properly levied license tax, who provides photographer's service consisting of the taking of pictures or the making of pictorial reproductions in this state shall pay for this privilege the sum of $30.00 per year. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall apply to: 
(1)  Amateur photographers who expose, develop and finish their own work and who do not receive compensation for such work or receive compensation for performing any of the processes of photography; 
(2)  Coin-operated photography machines; or 
(3)  Photographers providing service in the course of their employment by newspapers, magazines or television stations. 
(c)  A license under this section is a regulatory license by authority of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3727. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-50; Ord. of 9-28-81; Ord. of 12-9-96(2); Ord. of 11-27-00) 
Sec. 22-82. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  The terms used in this section shall have the meanings set forth in Code of Virginia, § 4.1-100 et seq., unless a different meaning shall be clearly intended. 
(b)  All persons licensed under any provision of this section shall comply in every respect with all the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (Code of Virginia, § 4.1-100 et seq.) and the other provisions of Code of Virginia, title 4.1, and no license shall be issued by the city commissioner of the revenue, under the provisions of this section, unless and until such applicant therefor shall hold and present to the commissioner of the revenue the proper state license as required by the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (Code of Virginia, § 4.1-100 et seq.) and the other provisions of Code of Virginia, title 4.1. 
(c)  If any person is holding a city license without, at the same time, holding the proper state license provided for in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and in the other provisions of Code of Virginia, title 4.1, such city license shall, during the period such person does not hold the proper state license, confer upon such person no rights, powers or privileges under the provisions of this section. 
(d)  The license tax for every distillery, wholesale winery, brewery, bottler, wholesale beer distributor, wholesale wine distributor, wholesale druggist, and on-premises or off-premises beer and/or wine licensee, druggist licensee, and banquet licensee when alcohol of more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight is distilled, brewed, distributed or sold, shall be as follows: 
(1)  On every distiller, there shall be a license tax of $1,000.00; but no license shall be required under the provisions of this subsection (d)(1) where there is manufactured not more than 5,000 gallons of alcohol or spirits, either or both, during the license year. 
(2)  On every winery, there shall be a license tax of $1,000.00. 
(3)  On every brewery, there shall be a license tax of $1,000.00. 
(4)  On every bottler, there shall be a license tax of $500.00. 
(5)  On every wholesale beer distributor, there shall be a license tax of $250.00. 
(6)  On every wholesale wine distributor, there shall be a license tax of $50.00. 
(7)  On every retail on-premises beer license, there shall be a license tax of $50.00. 
(8)  On every retail off-premises beer license, there shall be a license tax of $50.00. 
(9)  On every on-premises wine and beer license, there shall be a license tax of $50.00. 
(10)  On every retail off-premises wine and beer license, there shall be a license tax of $50.00. 
(e)  The license tax for manufacturers, wholesalers, bottlers and retailers of any beverage containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and not more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight shall be as follows: 
(1)  On every manufacturer, there shall be a license tax of $150.00. 
(2)  One every wholesaler of beer, there shall be a license tax of $200.00; on every wholesaler of wine there shall be a license tax of $50.00; provided, however, that every distribution house used in whole or in part by any person for distributing beverages among his retail stores must secure, in addition to the license provided for in this subsection, a wholesale merchant's license as provided for in section 22-69. 
(3)  On every bottler, there shall be a license tax of $500.00. 
(f)  Any license tax imposed by this section shall be additional to other licenses and taxes, and beverages shall be considered goods, wares and merchandise for the purpose of licenses or taxes. 
(g)  The license taxes required by this section shall not be prorated. No license issued under the provisions of this section shall be transferable from one person to another, but may be amended to show a change in the place of business. 
(h)  Any police officer shall at all times during business hours be allowed free access to every place where beverages are manufactured, bottled, distilled, brewed, stored, distributed, offered for sale, and/or sold for the purpose of examining and inspecting such premises. 
(i)  Mixed beverage license. On every establishment serving mixed beverages, there shall be the following license tax: 
Capacity or type of 
establishment License tax (per year) Up to 100 seats $200.00 101 to 150 seats $350.00 Over 150 seats $500.00 Private nonprofit club $350.00  
(j)  No license tax required under this section shall be prorated. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-51; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted December 9, 1996, amended § 22-82 to read as set out. Formerly, such section pertained to bingo. 
Sec. 22-83. - Yard sales, garage sales, etc. 
(a)  Certain sales regulated. A yard sale, garage sale, carport sale, basement sale or any sale operated out of a single-family, two-family, multifamily or business location by the person who owns or holds an annual lease for the property where the sale is to be conducted, being of two hours or more in duration, and where the items were not purchased to be resold at such sale, shall be regulated by this section. "Goods," as used in this section, means any goods, wares, merchandise or any other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated by this section. 
(b)  Permit required; display. No garage sale, yard sale, carport sale, basement sale or any such sale described in subsection (a) shall be held until the person conducting such sale shall have first obtained a sale permit in the amount of $5.00 from the office of the commissioner of the revenue. Application for more than two permits for any one person at the same address within one calendar year shall be reason for the denial of the permit by the commissioner of the revenue or his deputies. Such permit shall be conspicuously displayed upon the premises during the time of the sale so it may be inspected by any authorized representative of the city. 
(c)  Operating requirements. The following general operating requirements shall apply to all sales regulated by this section: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct more than two such sales in one calendar year at the location owned or leased by him. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct such sale for longer than three consecutive days. 
(3)  No signs advertising the sale or giving direction to its location shall be used, erected or allowed, except that one sign shall be allowed on the property of the sale location during the time of the sale. 
(4)  Any person may change the dates of such sales. The commissioner of the revenue may change the date of the sale upon request if notified the day before the first day of such sale and the change of dates shall not be legal until the license is changed by the commissioner of the revenue or his deputies. 
(d)  Penalty. All violations of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-52; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-83.1. - Charitable nonprofit organization sales. 
(a)  A yard sale, rummage sale, garage sale, bazaar, basement sale, or any sale operated by an organization, defined as a charitable nonprofit organization in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.1(1), being of two hours or more in duration, and where the items were not purchased to be resold at such sale, shall be regulated by this section. "Goods," as used in this section, means goods, wares, merchandise or any other property capable of being the subject of a sale regulated by this section. 
(b)  No such sale described in subsection (a) shall be held until the organization conducting such sale shall have first obtained a permit in the amount of $5.00 from the commissioner of the revenue. Application for more than four permits for any one organization in a calendar year shall be reason for the denial of the permit by the commissioner of the revenue. Such permit shall be conspicuously displayed upon the premises during the time of the sale so it may be inspected by any authorized representative of the city. 
    Each permit issued hereunder shall be of one, two or three days' duration as requested by the organization. 
(c)  No signs advertising the sale or giving directions to its location shall be used, erected, or allowed, except that one sign shall be allowed on the property of the location during the time of the sale. 
(d)  All violations of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 9-27-93(1); Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-84. - Show and sale; flea markets. 
    Any person may sponsor a show and sale or flea market in the city upon and pursuant to the following: 
(1)  A tax of $30.00 is hereby imposed on each charitable non-profit organization's antique, art or craft show and sale provided that such sale shall not continue for a period longer than 30 consecutive days. 
(2)  A tax of $30.00 is hereby imposed on such other show and sale. The payment of such tax shall permit such show and sale for a period not exceeding 30 consecutive days from the date such show and sale has begun. A license issued hereunder shall be in lieu of an itinerant vendor's or peddler's license which would be otherwise required of any seller who participates in such show and sale under the sponsorship of such person. 
(3)  The tax imposed herein shall not apply to any auction or sale if the only sales thereunder are directly by a non-profit organization. 
(4)  (a)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the owner, lessee, promoter, sponsor or proprietor of a flea market shall pay a permit fee of $30.00 for each flea market show and sale not exceeding 30 consecutive days for each such show and sale. For the purposes herein, a flea market shall be defined as follows: 
An assembly of vendors, selling new or used goods in the open air or within temporary structures, who display and sell their wares on the lands of another for a consideration. 
(b)  Such owner, lessee, promoter, sponsor or proprietor shall, in addition to the permit fee provided herein, be subject to a business license tax in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Such permit fee shall not be required of a charitable, non-profit organization that sells or displays goods at a flea market provided that the proceeds of such sale are retained by the charitable, non-profit organization and not shared with other persons, businesses or organizations. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-53; Ord. of 12-9-96(2); Ord. of 3-10-97(1); Ord. of 11-9-2015(1)) 
Sec. 22-85. - Going out of business sales; permit required, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or conduct a sale for the purpose of discontinuing a retail business, or to modify the word "sale" in any advertisement with the words "going out of business" or any other words which tend to insinuate that the retail business is to be discontinued and the merchandise liquidated, unless such person obtains a permit to conduct such sale from the commissioner of the revenue. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue shall issue permits to retail merchants for special sales as required by subsection (a) upon the application of such merchant, and shall inspect the advertisement and conducting of such sale to ensure that it is being advertised and conducted in conformity with the required permit. All applications for special sale permits shall be accompanied by an inventory, including the kind and quantity of all goods which are to be offered for sale during the sale, and only the goods specified in the inventory list may be advertised at a reduced price or sold at a reduced price during the sale period. Goods not included on the inventory of special sale goods shall not be commingled with or added to the special sale goods. The commissioner of the revenue shall have the right to revoke a special sale permit upon proof that goods not appearing on the original inventory of special sale goods have been commingled with or added to the special sale goods. 
(c)  Each special sale permit shall be valid for a period of no longer than 60 days, and any extension of that time shall constitute a new special sale and shall require an additional permit and inventory. An additional permit beyond the initial 60-day permit may be granted solely for the purpose of liquidating only those goods contained in the initial inventory list and which remain unsold. Any person who advertises such sale shall conspicuously include in the advertisement the permit number assigned for the sale and the effective dates of the sale as authorized in the permit. 
(d)  The fee for the issuance of each special sale permit shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80; Ord. of 8-13-90; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-86. - Reserved 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted December 9, 1996, reserved § 2-86. Formerly, such section pertained to penalty for violation of article and derived from Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-54. 
Sec. 22-87. - Appeals and rulings. 
(a)  Any person assessed with a license tax as a result of an audit may apply within 90 days from the date of such assessment to the assessor for a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The assessor may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, a further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the application. The assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct. The assessor shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth its position. Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to seek correction and the specific procedure to be followed in the jurisdiction (e.g., the name and address to which an application should be directed). 
(b)  Provided a timely and complete application is made, collection activity shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the assessor, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. 
(c)  Any person assessed with a local license tax as a result of an audit may apply within 90 days of the determination by the assessing official on an application pursuant to this section to the tax commissioner of the state department of taxation for a correction of such assessment. The tax commissioner shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within 90 days of receipt of the taxpayer's application, unless the taxpayer and the assessing official are notified that a longer period will be required. The application shall be treated as an application pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1821 and the tax commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1822. Following such an order, either the taxpayer or the assessing official may apply to the appropriate circuit court pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984. However, the burden shall be on the party making the application to show that the ruling of the tax commission is erroneous. Neither the tax commissioner nor the department of taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the tax commissioner has ruled on it. 
(d)  On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the tax commissioner under this section, the assessing official shall further suspend collection activity until a final determination is issued by the tax commissioner, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. 
(e)  Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of a local license tax to a specific situation from the assessor. Any person requesting such a ruling must provided all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if (i) there is a change in the law, a court decision, or the guidelines issued by the department of taxation upon which the ruling was based or (ii) the assessor notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
(Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Secs. 22-88-22-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC UTILITIES 

Sec. 22-111. - Water, heat, light and power companies. 
    On every person selling water, gas or electricity for light, heat or power in the city, there shall be a license tax equal to one-half of one percent of the gross receipts derived from such business in the city. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-44.1; Ord. of 12-9-96(2); Ord. of 10-9-00(1)) 
Sec. 22-112. - Telegraph companies. 
(a)  On every person engaged in the business of transmitting telegraph messages between the city and other points in the state, there shall be a license tax of $25.00. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to lay a license tax upon the business of transmitting messages for the United States government. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-44.2; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Sec. 22-113. - Telephone companies. 
    On every person engaged in the business of transmitting telephone messages between points within the city there shall be a license tax equal to one-half of one percent of the local exchange gross receipts derived from such business in the city. 
(Ord. of 11-24-80, § 14-44.3; Ord. of 12-9-96(2)) 
Secs. 22-114-22-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MASSAGE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-13-2017(2), adopted Nov. 13, 2017, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 22-136-22-141, 22-166-22-173, and enacted §§ 22-136, 22-137 and similar provisions in ch. 58. The former Art. III pertained to massage and massage parlor permit and derived from Code 1969, §§ 14A-1-14A-14; Ord. of 7-10-95(1); Ord. of 12-9-96(2) 

Sec. 22-136. - Massage parlor. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon every person doing business in this city or holding himself out as doing business in this city as a massage parlor as such term is defined in section 58-200 of this Code, a license tax of $5,000.00 per year which shall be due and payable as provided in this chapter. Such license shall not be proratable or transferable. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue shall not issue the license required by this section until presented with a valid nonsuspended massage parlor permit issued pursuant to section 58-206 et seq. of this Code and a massage technician permit issued pursuant to sections 58-202 of this Code for each massage technician employed by a massage parlor. 
(c)  If any person shall commence to do business in this city as a massage parlor or hold himself out as doing business in this city through any advertising medium as a massage parlor without first obtaining the license required by this section, such person shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day's operation without a license shall constitute a separate offense. Any conviction under this section shall not relieve any person convicted of doing business without a license from payment of the license tax prescribed by this section. 
(d)  If any person shall be in violation of this section for one month or longer, such person shall moreover be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the license tax which was due and payable at the beginning of the tax year, in addition to the license tax imposed by this section, and such penalty shall be assessed and paid along with the license tax and shall become a part of the license tax and shall be enforced in the manner provided by law for the enforcement of the collection of other taxes. 
(e)  In addition to the class 1 misdemeanor and the penalty, any violation of this section may be enjoined through appropriate legal proceedings. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 22-137. - Powers and duties of the commissioner as to massage parlors. 
    It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to ascertain the name of every person operating a massage parlor in the city, liable for collection of the tax levied in section 22-136, who fails, refuses or neglects to make timely payments of the required tax. The commissioner, or designee, may have a summons issued for such person and may serve a copy of such summons upon such person in the manner provided by law and shall make one return of the original to the general district court of the city. Police powers are hereby conferred upon the commissioner, or designee, while engaged in performing their duties under section 22-136 and this section, and they shall exercise all the powers and authority of policy officers in performing such duties. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(2)) 
Secs. 22-138-22-173. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Election of councilmen, § 3.1; control of registration, nominations and elections, § 3.2; conduct of regular municipal elections for election of councilmen, § 3.3; election of other city officers and filling of vacancies, § 3.4; advisory referendum, § 3.5. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Election of local governing bodies, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-37.4; election of certain city officers, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-40.1, 24.1-86 et seq.; election of municipal officers, Code of Virginia, § 24.1-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRECINCTS; VOTING PLACES 

Sec. 26-36. - Division of city into election precincts. 
    The election precincts of the city shall be constituted as set out in this article. 
(Code 1969, § 7-1) 
State Law reference- Councils of cities to establish districts or precincts, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-307. 
Sec. 26-37. - Procedure when voting place is not available. 
    Should for any reason one or more of the voting places indicated in this article be unavailable, then a suitable voting place or places shall be fixed by the judges of election of the respective precincts affected. 
(Code 1969, § 7-2) 
Sec. 26-38. - Precinct A or Conehurst Precinct. 
(a)  Boundaries. Precinct A or Conehurst Precinct shall embrace all of the territory within the corporate limits of the city situate as follows: 
Beginning at Lynchburg Turnpike at its intersection with Masons Creek; thence with Masons Creek as it meanders in a northerly direction to Interstate 81 and the north corporate limits of the city; thence with the north corporate limits of the city in an easterly direction to the east corporate limits of the city; thence with the easterly corporate limits of the city in a southerly direction to the Lynchburg Turnpike; thence with the Lynchburg Turnpike in a westerly direction to the place of beginning. 
(b)  Voting place. The voting place in Precinct A or Conehurst Precinct shall be and the same is hereby established, as long as it is available, at Salem Civic Center, 1001 Roanoke Boulevard. 
(Code 1969, § 7-3; Ord. of 2-14-00(1); Ord. of 1-23-06(1); Ord. of 1-25-2016(2)) 
Sec. 26-39. - Precinct B or North Salem No. 1 Precinct. 
(a)  Boundaries. Precinct B or North Salem No. 1 Precinct shall embrace all of the territory within the corporate limits of the city situate as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of Main Street (U.S. Route 460) and College Avenue (U.S. Route 11); thence with College Avenue north to Clay Street; thence with Clay Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with Craig Avenue (Virginia Route 311); thence with Craig Avenue (Virginia Route 311) in a northerly direction to Interstate 81; thence with Interstate 81, and the north corporate limits of the city, in an easterly direction to Masons Creek; thence with Masons Creek as it meanders in a southerly direction to Lynchburg Turnpike; thence with Lynchburg Turnpike in a westerly direction to its intersection with Texas Street (Alternate Route 460); thence with Texas Street (Alternate Route 460) in a westerly direction to its intersection with Boulevard-Roanoke; thence with Boulevard-Roanoke in a northwesterly direction to its intersection with College Avenue (U.S. Route 11); thence with College Avenue (U.S. Route 11) in a northerly direction to Main Street (U.S. Route 460), the place of beginning. 
(b)  Voting place. The voting place in Precinct B or North Salem No. 1 Precinct shall be, and the same is hereby established, as long as it is available, at the Salem Civic Center, situated at 1001 Boulevard-Roanoke. 
(Code 1969, § 7-4; Ord. of 2-9-98) 
Sec. 26-40. - Precinct C or North Salem No. 2 Precinct. 
(a)  Boundaries. Precinct C or North Salem No. 2 Precinct shall embrace all of the territory within the corporate limits of the city situate as follows: 
Beginning on Main Street at its intersection with Dry Branch; thence with Dry Branch in a northerly direction to Interstate 81; thence with Interstate 81 in an easterly direction to Wildwood Road; thence with Wildwood Road in a northerly direction, crossing Interstate 81, to the north corporate limits of the city; thence with the north corporate limits of the city, being a meandering line, to Craig Avenue; thence with Craig Avenue in a southerly direction to its intersection with Clay Street; thence with Clay Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with College Avenue; thence with College Avenue in a southerly direction to its intersection with Main Street (U.S. Route 460); thence with Main Street in a westerly direction to Dry Branch, the place of beginning. 
(b)  Voting place. The voting place in Precinct C or North Salem No. 2 Precinct shall be and the same is hereby established, as long as it is available, at the First United Methodist Church, 125 West Main Street. 
(Code 1969, § 7-5; Ord. of 11-13-95(2)) 
Sec. 26-41. - Precinct D or West Salem Precinct. 
(a)  Boundaries. Precinct D or West Salem Precinct shall embrace all of the territory within the corporate limits of the city situate as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of Main Street (U.S. Route 460) and Route 112; thence with Route 112 in a northerly direction to Interstate 81; thence with the north corporate limits of the city in an easterly direction to Dry Branch; thence with Dry Branch in a southerly direction to Main Street (U.S. Route 460); thence with Main Street (U.S. Route 460) in a westerly direction to its intersection with Route 112, the place of beginning. 
(b)  Voting place. The voting place in Precinct D or West Salem Precinct shall be and the same is hereby established, as long as it is available, at Our Lady of Perpetual Help Catholic Church, Social Hall, 314 Turner Road. 
(Code 1969, § 7-6; Ord. of 9-8-08(1)) 
Sec. 26-42. - Precinct E or South Side Hills Precinct. 
(a)  Boundaries. Precinct E or South Side Hills Precinct shall embrace all of the territory within the corporate limits of the city situate as follows: 
Beginning at the west corporate limits of the city at Main Street (U.S. Route 460); thence with the corporate limits of the city in a southerly and easterly direction to Diuguids Lane; thence with Diuguids Lane and the west corporate limits in a southerly direction to Roanoke River; thence with the southern corporate limits of the city in a southeasterly direction to its intersection with Franklin Street extended; thence with Franklin Street extended in a northerly direction to the southwestern corner of Circle Terrace Subdivision; thence with the western line thereof in a northerly direction to the northwest corner of such subdivision; thence in a northeasterly direction along the northern line of Circle Terrace Subdivision to the southerly line of Section No. 1 of Kimball Acres Subdivision; thence with the southerly line thereof and continuing with the southwesterly line of Section No. 2, Kimball Acres Subdivision, to the westerly side of Mulberry Street; thence in a northerly and westerly direction with the division line between Stonybrook Farms, Inc., and H.H. Turpin; thence in a northerly and westerly direction with the division line between S.F. Conley and Stonybrook Farms, Inc.; thence in a northerly and westerly direction between S.F. Conley and C.K. Brown to Bailey Avenue; thence in a westerly direction between the south line of Bailey Hills Section No. 2 and Stonybrook Farms, Inc., to Twelve O'clock Knob Road; thence in a southwesterly direction along Twelve O'clock Knob Road to the southerly line of the property of Judy H. Sink; thence in a northwesterly direction with the southerly line of the Sink property to the southeast corner of the Alta View Subdivision; thence in a northerly direction with the easterly line of such subdivision to Penley Boulevard; thence in an easterly direction with Penley Boulevard to Mountain Avenue; thence in a northerly and easterly direction with Mountain Avenue, crossing Riverside Drive, to Roanoke River; thence in an easterly direction with Roanoke River to Dry Branch; thence in a northerly direction with Dry Branch to Main Street (U.S. Route 460); thence with the Main Street (U.S. Route 460) in a westerly direction to the place of beginning. 
(b)  Voting place. The voting place in Precinct E or Southside Hills Precinct shall be and the same is hereby established, as long as it is available, at First Evangelical Methodist Church, 1920 Lucas Street. 
(Code 1969, § 7-7; Ord. of 3-24-08(1)) 
Sec. 26-43. - Precinct F or Hidden Valley Precinct. 
(a)  Boundaries. Precinct F or Hidden Valley Precinct shall embrace all the territory within the corporate limits of the city situate as follows: 
Beginning at a point in the south corporate limits where the same intersects with Franklin Street extended; thence with the south corporate limits in an easterly direction to Apperson Drive (U.S. Route 11); thence with Apperson Drive (U.S. Route 11) in a westerly direction to King Street; thence in a southwesterly direction with King Street to Kimball Avenue; thence in a northwesterly direction with Kimball Avenue to Franklin Street; thence in a southwesterly direction with Franklin Street and Franklin Street extended to the place of beginning. 
(b)  Voting place. The voting place in Precinct F or Hidden Valley Precinct shall be and the same is hereby established, as long as it is available, at Salem Civic Center, 1001 Roanoke Boulevard. 
(Code 1969, § 7-8; Ord. of 8-28-06; Ord. of 3-23-2015) 
Sec. 26-44. - Precinct G or South Salem No. 2 Precinct. 
(a)  Boundaries. Precinct G or South Salem No. 2 Precinct shall embrace all the territory within the corporate limits of the city situate as follows: 
Beginning at the southwestern corner of Circle Terrace Subdivision; thence with the western line thereof in a northerly direction to the northwest corner of such subdivision; thence in a northeasterly direction along the northern line of Circle Terrace Subdivision to the southerly line of Section No. 1, Kimball Acres Subdivision; thence with the southerly line thereof and continuing with the southwesterly line of Section No. 2, Kimball Acres Subdivision, to the westerly side of Mulberry Street; thence in a northerly and westerly direction with the division line between Stonybrook Farms, Inc., and H.H. Turpin; thence in a northerly and westerly direction with the division line between S.F. Conley and Stonybrook Farms, Inc.; thence in a northerly and westerly direction between S.F. Conley and C.K. Brown to Bailey Avenue; thence in a westerly direction between the south line of Bailey Hills Section No. 2 and Stonybrook Farms, Inc., to Twelve O'clock Knob Road; thence in a southwesterly direction along Twelve O'clock Knob Road to the southerly line of the property of Judy H. Sink; thence in a northwesterly direction with the southerly line of the Sink property to the southeast corner of the Alta View Subdivision; thence in a northerly direction with the easterly line of such subdivision to Penley Boulevard; thence in an easterly direction with Penley Boulevard to Mountain Avenue; thence in a northerly and easterly direction with Mountain Avenue, crossing Riverside Drive, to Roanoke River; thence in an easterly direction with Roanoke River to Apperson Drive (U.S. Route 11); thence in a westerly direction with Apperson Drive to King Street; thence in a southwesterly direction with King Street to Kimball Avenue; thence in a northwesterly direction with Kimball Avenue to Franklin Street; thence in a southwesterly direction with Franklin Street to the place of beginning. 
(b)  Voting place. The voting place in Precinct G or South Salem No. 2 Precinct shall be and the same is hereby established in the building known as the Cardinal Criminal Justice Academy, 917 Central Avenue, and within the confines of South Salem No. 2 Precinct. 
(Code 1969, § 7-9; Ord. of 7-10-95(2)) 
Sec. 26-45. - Precinct H or South Salem No. 1 Precinct. 
(a)  Boundaries. Precinct H or South Salem No. 1 Precinct shall embrace all of the territory within the corporate limits of the city situate as follows: 
Beginning on Main Street at Dry Branch; thence in a southerly direction with Dry Branch to Roanoke River; thence in an easterly direction with Roanoke River to Apperson Drive; thence still in an easterly direction with Apperson Drive to Electric Road; thence in a northerly direction with Electric Road to Lynchburg Turnpike; thence in a westerly direction with Lynchburg Turnpike to Texas Street; thence in a westerly direction with Texas Street (alternate U.S. Route 460) and Boulevard-Roanoke to College Avenue; thence in a northerly direction with College Avenue to Main Street; thence in a westerly direction with Main Street to the place of beginning. 
(b)  Voting place. The voting place in Precinct H or South Salem No. 1 Precinct shall be and the same is hereby established, as long as it is available, at the Salem Civic Center, 1001 Boulevard-Roanoke. 
(Code 1969, § 7-10; Ord. of 2-14-00(2)) 
Sec. 26-46. - Precinct I or East Salem Precinct. 
(a)  Boundaries. Precinct I or East Salem Precinct shall embrace all the territory within the city situate as follows: 
Beginning at Apperson Drive at Electric Road; thence in an easterly direction with Apperson Drive to the south corporate limits; thence in an easterly direction with the south corporate limits to the east corporate limits; thence in a northerly direction with the east corporate limits to Lynchburg Turnpike; thence in a westerly direction with Lynchburg Turnpike to Electric Road; thence in a southerly direction with Electric Road to the place of beginning. 
(b)  Voting place. The voting place in Precinct I or East Salem Precinct shall be and the same is hereby established, as long as it is available, at Salem Civic Center, 1001 Boulevard. 
(Code 1969, § 7-11; Ord. of 9-8-08(2)) 
Sec. 26-47. - Precinct J or Beverly Heights Precinct. 
(a)  Boundaries. Precinct J or Beverly Heights Precinct shall embrace all of the territory within the corporate limits of the city situate as follows: 
Beginning at the west corporate limits of the city at Main Street (U.S. Route 460); thence with the corporate limits of the city in a northerly direction to Interstate 81; thence with the north corporate limits of the city in an easterly direction to Wildwood Road; thence with Wildwood Road in a southerly direction crossing Interstate 81 and to Main Street (U.S. Route 460); thence with Main Street (U.S. Route 460) in a westerly direction to the place of beginning. 
(b)  Voting place. The voting place in Precinct J or Beverly Heights Precinct shall be and the same is hereby established, as long as it is available, at the Fort Lewis Christian Church, Fellowship Hall, 2931 West Main Street. 
(Code 1969, § 7-12; Ord. of 11-13-95(3)) 
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power of city, relative to abatement and removal of nuisances (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-867), adopted, § 2.2. See Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; planning, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 70; vegetation, ch. 94. 
State Law reference- Erosion and sediment control, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq.; stormwater management, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-603.3; local air pollution ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1321; municipal abatement of nuisances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115; action for abatement of nuisance or the costs thereof, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-900; extraterritorial powers in prevention of water pollution, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2109; contracts relating to prevention of water pollution, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2124. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Noise prohibitions generally. 
(a)  (1) It shall be a Class 2 misdemeanor and a public nuisance for any person to willfully make, permit, continue, or cause to be made, permitted or continued any noise disturbance. For the purposes of this article, a "noise disturbance" means any sound which by its character, intensity and/or duration (i) endangers or injures the health or safety of persons within the city; or (ii) annoys or disturbs reasonable persons of normal sensitivities within the city. 
(2)  Any of the following acts, or the causing or permitting thereof, among others, is declared to be a noise disturbance constituting a Class 2 misdemeanor and a public nuisance, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(i)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, whistling or singing between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or on a public right-of-way or public property. 
(ii)  Schools, public buildings, churches, and hospitals. The creation of any noise disturbance within any school, court, public building, church, or on the grounds thereof. 
(b)  The use, operation, or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which such sound is located or originates, without first obtaining a permit as provided by section 30-2, shall be unlawful. 
(c)  Section 30-1 shall have no application to any sound generated by any of the following: 
(1)  Any horn, siren, bell, whistle, or similar device used in accordance with the law to signal a warning to the citizens of the city; the approach of any train at a railcrossing; or the approach of any police vehicle, fire truck, rescue vehicle, or any similar emergency vehicle responding to an emergency situation or used to summon the members of any fire or rescue squad. 
(2)  Any mechanical or electronic horns, sirens, bells or similar devices that may be sounded as part of a burglary or fire alarm system installed for the protection of persons or property, provided that such device is deactivated by the property owner, lessee, or authorized agent within 60 minutes of its initial sounding. 
(3)  Sound which is necessary for the protection or preservation of property or the health, safety, life, or limb of any person. 
(4)  Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any public right-of-way or public property for which a permit has been issued by the city. 
(5)  Parades, fireworks, school-related activities and other special events or activities for which a permit has been issued by the city, within such hours as may be imposed as a condition for the issuance of the permit. 
(6)  Activities on or in municipal and school athletic facilities and on or in publicly owned property and facilities, provided that such activity has been authorized by the owner of such property or facilities or its agent. 
(7)  Religious services, religious events or religious activities, including, but not limited to music, bells, chimes, and organs which are a part of such service, event or activity. 
(Code 1969, § 17-25; Ord. of 9-22-97) 
Cross reference- Noise made by animal or fowl, § 14-2; railroad whistle or horn, § 86-451; bell to be rung upon approach of locomotive to street crossing, § 86-452. 
Sec. 30-2. - Loudspeakers, etc.-Permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or control, or cause to be used, operated or controlled, any loudspeaker or other mechanical device, apparatus, machine or instrument of any nature or kind whatsoever whereby the human voice or music is intensified or amplified, unless he shall first have obtained a permit for such use, operation or control from the chief of police. Any person desiring such a permit shall file an application therefor with the chief of police. 
(b)  Upon the filing of an application for permit under subsection (a), and the completion of any investigation he may deem requisite, the chief of police shall, if it appears to him that section 30-1 will not be violated, issue the permit in question, subject to such terms and conditions as he may impose. 
(Code 1969, § 17-26) 
Sec. 30-3. - Same-Manner of use, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or control, or to cause to be used, operated or controlled, any loudspeaker or other mechanical device, apparatus, machine or instrument of any nature or kind whatsoever whereby the human voice or music is intensified or amplified in such manner as to produce, make, create or give rise to any sound or noise, in any public or private place, of such a character and kind as to disturb any citizen of the city in the reasonable use and enjoyment of his property or property rights or to cause any person of ordinary sensibilities any actual physical discomfort. 
(Code 1969, § 17-27) 
Sec. 30-4. - Removal of trash, garbage, etc. 
    All persons shall keep their premises, whether owned, leased, occupied, or in their charge, clear of trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other substances which might endanger the health or safety of the other residents of the city and, if after written notice from the city manager or the building official, the trash, garbage, refuse, litter, and other substances which might endanger the health or safety of the other residents of the city are not cleared away within a period of 15 days from the giving of such notice, then the person in question shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. After the expiration of such 15 days, the city manager or the building official may cause such trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other substances which might endanger the health or safety of the other residents of the city removed where necessary, and the cost thereof shall thereupon be chargeable to and be collected from the owner of the premises in question, or the person leasing, occupying or having such premises in his charge, as other taxes or levies are or may be collected. 
(Code 1969, § 24-29; Ord. of 3-10-97(2)) 
Charter reference- Power to abate or remove nuisances (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-867) adopted, § 2.2. 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-11. 
Sec. 30-5. - Allowing noxious, etc., matter or nuisance to be placed, etc., in or upon house, lot, etc. 
    No person shall permit any noxious, unwholesome or offensive matter or nuisance of any kind, either to health or comfort, to be placed or to remain in any house, cellar, lot or other property belonging to him, or in his possession, control or occupancy; provided, however, this section shall not be construed to prevent the storing of fertilizers within the city in warehouses or other buildings removed from the street and where the odor of such fertilizers cannot reach the street. 
(Code 1969, § 13-3) 
Cross reference- Keeping certain fowl as nuisance, § 14-37; keeping certain dogs and cats as nuisance, § 14-101. 
Sec. 30-6. - Placing nuisance on property of another. 
    No person shall place a nuisance on the property of another person. 
(Code 1969, § 13-4) 
Sec. 30-7. - Allowing stagnant water to remain in house or cellar or upon lot or property. 
    No person shall permit any stagnant water to remain in any house, cellar or upon any lot or other property belonging to him or in his possession, control or occupancy. 
(Code 1969, § 13-5) 
Charter reference- Power to compel the raising or draining of grounds subject to be covered by stagnant water (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-867) adopted, § 2.2. 
Sec. 30-8. - Correction of situations injurious to health and abatement of nuisances. 
(a)  When, in the opinion of the health director, anything shall be found which is, or is likely to be, injurious to the health of the neighborhood or any person or family, the health director shall notify the city manager thereof. The city manager shall, thereupon, require the owner or occupant of the premises in question or the person causing the nuisance to correct the injurious situation or abate the nuisance within 24 hours in such a manner as the city manager may deem expedient. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the recipient of an order from the city manager requiring the correction of any injurious situation or abatement of a nuisance, as provided for in subsection (a), to fail, neglect or refuse to correct the injurious situation or abate the nuisance within 24 hours in the manner deemed expedient by the city manager. In case of such failure, neglect or refusal, the city manager may have the injurious situation corrected or nuisance abated and recover the costs thereof from the person responsible for the failure, neglect or refusal. 
(Code 1969, § 13-7) 
Secs. 30-9-30-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIR POLLUTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Local air pollution ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1321. 

Sec. 30-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Actual heat input means the sum of the actual heat input of all combustion installations which are operating during any specified period at a facility. 
    Air pollution means the presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or more substances which are or may be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare or safety, to animal or plant life, or to property, or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment by the people of life or property. 
    Air pollution episode means a situation which is declared by responsible authorities when weather and/or pollution conditions indicate a potential threat to human health. 
    Air quality means the specific measurement in the ambient air of a particular air contaminant at any given time. 
    Ambient air means that portion of the atmosphere external to buildings, to which the general public has access. 
    Ambient air quality standard-primary means air quality which, allowing an adequate margin of safety, is requisite to protect the public health. 
    Ambient air quality standard-secondary means air quality which is requisite to protect the public welfare from any known or anticipated adverse effects associated with the presence of air contaminants in the ambient air. 
    Best available control technology means any emission control device or technique which is capable of limiting emissions to the levels proposed or promulgated pursuant to 40 CFR 60. Where no standard of performance has been proposed or promulgated for a source or portion thereof under 40 CFR 60, best available control technology shall be determined on a case-by-case basis considering the following: 
(1)  The process, fuels and raw material available and to be employed in the facility involved; 
(2)  The engineering aspects of the application of various types of control techniques which have been adequately demonstrated; 
(3)  Process and fuel changes; 
(4)  The respective costs of the application of all such control techniques, process changes, alternative fuels, etc.; 
(5)  Any applicable emission standards; and 
(6)  Locational and siting considerations. 
    Capital expenditure means an expenditure for a physical or operational change to a facility which exceeds the product of the applicable annual asset guideline repair allowance percentage specified in the latest of Internal Revenue Service Publication 534 and the affected facility's basis, as defined by section 1012 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
    Combustion installation means a source consisting of any furnace, oven kiln incinerator, fuel-burning equipment, or any other stationary equipment in which solid, liquid or gaseous materials are burned. 
    Commence means to undertake or to enter into a contractual obligation to undertake and complete, within a reasonable time, a continuous program of onsite construction or modification including site clearance, grading, dredging, or land filling specifically designed for a source in preparation for construction or modification of the source. For the purpose of this definition, interruptions resulting from acts of God, strikes, litigation, or other matters beyond the control of the owner shall be disregarded in determining whether a construction or modification program is continuous. 
    Construction means fabrication, erection or installation of a source, and includes the term "reconstruction." 
    Contaminant means smoke, dust, soot, grime, carbon, or any other particulate matter, radioactive matter, noxious gas, acids, fumes, gases, odor, vapor, or any combination thereof. 
    Control equipment means any equipment which has the function of controlling the emissions from a process, fuel-burning, or refuse-burning equipment and thus reduces the creation or the emission of air contaminants into the atmosphere, or both. 
    County air pollution control officer means the medical director. 
    Dust means solid particles projected into the air by natural forces, such as wind, volcanic eruption or earthquake and by mechanical or manmade processes such as crushing, grinding, milling, drilling, demolition, shoveling, conveying, screening, bagging and sweeping. 
    Emergency means a situation that immediately and unreasonably affects public health, safety or welfare, the health of animal or plant life, or property, whether used for recreational, commercial, industrial, agricultural or other reasonable use. 
    Emission standard means any provision of this article prescribing an emission limitation or level or opacity, prescribing equipment or fuel specifications, or other requirements that result in control of air contaminants. 
    Existing source means any stationary source other than a new source or modified source. 
    Fixed capital cost means the capital needed to provide all the depreciable components. 
    Fuel-burning equipment means a source consisting of any furnace, and all appurtenances thereto, used in the process of burning fuel for the primary purpose of producing heat or power by indirect heat transfer. 
    Fugitive dust means solid airborne particulate matter or dust emitted from any source other than a flue, stack, duct or chimney. 
    Fumes means minute particulate matter generated by the condensation of vapors from solid matter after volatilization from the molten state, or generated by sublimation, distillation, calcination or chemical reaction when their processes create airborne particles. 
    Gases means formless fluids which, under standard conditions, occupy the space of enclosure and which can be changed to the liquid or solid state only by the combined effect of increased pressure and decreased temperature. 
    Heat input means the total gross heating value of all fuels burned. 
    Heating value means the heat released by combustion of one pound of fuel or other material measured in British thermal units (Btu) on an as-received basis. 
    Incinerator means any source consisting of a furnace and all appurtenances thereto designed for the destruction of refuse by burning. "Open burning" is not considered incineration. For purposes of this definition, the destruction of any combustible liquid or gaseous material by burning in a flare or flare stack shall be considered incineration. 
    Malfunction means any sudden failure of air pollution control equipment or process equipment or of a process to operate in a normal or usual manner. 
    Medical director means the director of the county department of health or his duly authorized agent. 
    Mobile sources means any vehicle, including, but not limited to, any motor vehicle, truck, or other land craft, aircraft, locomotive, bus or ship, rail vehicle, or watercraft, which emits or may emit any air contaminant. 
    Modification means any physical change in, or changes in the method of operation of, a facility which increases the amount of any air contaminant emitted into the atmosphere by that facility or which results in the emission of any air contaminant into the atmosphere not previously emitted, except that the following shall not, by themselves, be considered modifications under this definition: 
(1)  Maintenance, repair and replacement which the state air pollution control officer determines to be routine for a source type. 
(2)  An increase in production rate of a facility, if that increase can be accomplished without a major capital expenditure on the stationary source containing that facility. 
(3)  An increase in the hours of operation. 
(4)  Use of an alternative fuel or raw material if, prior to the date any provision of this article becomes applicable to that source type, the facility was designed to accommodate that alternative use. A facility shall be considered to be designed to accommodate an alternative fuel or raw material if provisions for that use were included in the final construction specifications. 
(5)  The addition or use of any system or device whose primary function is the reduction of air contaminants, except when an emission control system which the state air pollution control officer considers to be less efficient. 
(6)  The change in ownership of a facility. 
    Modified source means any stationary source, the modification of which is commenced on or after the effective date of applicable provisions of this article. 
    Motor vehicles means any powered conveyance normally licensed by the state department of motor vehicles. 
    New source means any stationary source, the construction or reconstruction of which is commenced on or after the effective date of applicable provisions of this article; any source relocated on or after the effective date of applicable provisions of this article. 
    Nuisance means environmental conditions, intermittent or continuous, produced or correctable by human agency, prejudicial to reasonable enjoyment of health, comfort or safety by an individual or causing injury or damage to persons, property or the conduct of business. 
    Odor means the sensation resulting from stimulation of the human sense of smell. 
    Opacity means the degree to which emissions reduce the transmission of light and obscure the view of an object in the background, expressed as a percentage. 
    Open burning means the burning of any matter in such a manner that the products of combustion resulting from the burning are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through an adequate flue, stack, duct or chimney. 
    Open fire means a fire in which any material is burned in the open or in a receptacle other than a furnace, incinerator, or other equipment connected to a stack. 
    Owner means any person, including bodies politic and corporate, associations, partnerships, personal representatives, trustees and committees, as well as individuals, who owns, leases, operates, controls or supervises a source. 
    Particulate means any finely divided solid or liquid material, other than uncombined water, as measured by the applicable test or sampling method. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, a governmental body, a municipal corporation, or any other legal entity. 
    Process unit means any action, operation or treatment, and the equivalent used in connection therewith, and all methods or forms of manufacturing or processing that may emit smoke, particulate matter or gases. 
    Process weight means total weight of all materials introduced into any source process unit which may cause any emissions of contaminants. Process weight includes solid fuels charged, but does not include liquid and gaseous fuels charged or combustion air for all fuels. 
    Process weight rate means rate established as follows: 
(1)  For continuous or long-run steady-state source operations, for total process weight for the entire period of continuous operation or for a typical portion thereof, divided by the number of hours of such period or portion thereof; 
(2)  For cyclical or batch unit operations, or unit processes, the total weight for a period that covers a complete operation or an integral number of cycles, divided by the hours of actual process operation during such a period. 
    Production rate means the weight of final product obtained per hour of operation. If the rate of product going to storage can vary, the production rate shall be determined by calculation from the feed rates of raw material. 
    Rated capacity means the capacity as stipulated in the purchase contract for the condition of 100 percent load, or such other capacities as mutually agreed to by the state air pollution control officer and owner. 
    Reconstruction means the replacement of components or a facility to such an extent that: 
(1)  The fixed capital cost of the new components exceeds 50 percent of the fixed capital cost that would be required to construct a comparable entirely new facility; and 
(2)  It is technologically and economically feasible to meet the applicable emission standards prescribed under this article. 
    Reference method means any method of sampling and analyzing for an air pollutant as described in appendix A of 40 CFR 60. 
    Salvage operations means any source consisting of any business, trade or industry engaged in whole or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material, such as, but not limited to, reprocessing of used motor oils, metals, chemicals, shipping containers or drums, and specifically including automobile graveyards and junkyards as defined in Code of Virginia, § 33.1-348. 
    Shutdown means the cessation of operation of a source for any purpose. 
    Smoke means small gas-borne particulate matter consisting predominantly but not exclusively of carbon, ash and other material in concentrations sufficient to form a visible plume. 
    Source means any and all points of origin of emission of air contaminants, whether privately or publicly owned or operated or a person contributing to emission of air contaminants. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, this term includes all types of business, commercial and industrial plants, works, shops and stores, and heating and power plants or stations, buildings, and other structures of all types. 
    Stack or chimney means any flue, conduit or duct arranged to conduct emissions into the atmosphere. 
    Standard conditions means dry gas temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit and gas pressure of 14.7 pounds per square inch absolute. 
    Startup means the setting in operation of a source for any source. 
    Stationary source means any building, structure, facility or installation which emits or may emit any air contaminant. 
    Total capacity means the sum of the rated capacities of all fuel-burning equipment which must be operated simultaneously under conditions of maximum load at a facility, expressed as heat input. 
    Unless specifically defined in this section, the technical terms used in this article have the meanings commonly ascribed to them by recognized authorities. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-42. - Smoke or other visible emissions, stationary sources. 
(a)  Prohibition of visible emissions. No owner shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the discharge into the outdoor atmosphere, from any source, of visible emissions of greater than 20 percent opacity. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  When starting a new fire or flowing tubes or cleaning a firebox, a person may discharge into the atmosphere from any source emissions not greater than 60 percent opacity for brief periods not to exceed six minutes in any 60-minute period. 
(2)  The limits of subsection (a) shall not apply when the opacity of the visible emissions is due to the presence of uncombined water. 
(3)  The limits of subsection (a) shall not apply during periods of startup, shutdown and malfunction. 
(c)  Traffic hazard. No person shall discharge from any source whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants, uncombined water, or other materials which may cause a traffic hazard. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-3) 
Sec. 30-43. - Particulate emissions from existing fuel-burning equipment. 
(a)  Emissions prohibited for fuel-burning equipment. 
(1)  No owner or other person shall allow to be emitted into the atmosphere from any fuel-burning equipment, or to pass a convenient measuring point near the stack outlet, particulate matter in the flue gases to exceed the appropriate following standard: 
a.  For facilities with total capacity less than 25,000,000 Btu's per hour, the maximum allowable emission ratio shall be 0.4 pound of particulate per million Btu input. 
b.  For facilities with total capacity between 25,000,000 and 10,000,000,000 Btu's per hour, the maximum allowable emission ratio, E, in pounds of particulate per million Btu input, shall be determined by the total capacity in millions of Btu's per hour. 
c.  For facilities with total capacity in excess of 10,000,000,000 Btu's per hour, the maximum allowable emission shall be 0.1 pound of particulates per million Btu input. 
d.  Figure 1 illustrates the above emission standard. 
(2)  The maximum allowable particulate emissions for a facility shall be the product of the total capacity and the emission ratio. The emission contribution of each unit shall be determined using procedures acceptable to the state air pollution control officer. 
(b)  Emission testing. For the purpose of emission testing, the particulate emission for each of the indirect heating furnace units of the facility shall be its contribution to the total allowable emission from the facility when operating at total capacity. When it is not possible to satisfactorily perform emission tests at the rated capacity of an individual indirect heating furnace unit or jointly on all units in operation, the measurements taken at actual operating load shall be related to the allowable emission at rated capacity for the unit(s) being tested, adjusted for any changes in emission control equipment efficiency due to variations in load from rated capacity. 
(c)  Exemptions. 
(1)  All fuel-burning equipment using solid fuel with a maximum heat input of less than 350,000 Btu's per hour shall be exempt from this section. 
(2)  All fuel-burning equipment using gas or oil with a maximum heat input of less than 1,000,000 Btu's per hour shall be exempt from this section. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-4) 
_____
Figure 1. 
Allowable Particulate: Emissions From Fuel-Burning Equipment 
  
H = Total heat input in millions of Btu's per hour. 
E = Maximum emissions in pounds of particulate matter per million Btu heat input. 
E = 0.8425 H = 0.2314  (H = 25 to 10,000) 
  
E   (Pounds/10 6 Btu's)     H   (10 6 Btu's/Hour) 
  
Sec. 30-44. - Particulate matter (other than from fuel-burning equipment and incinerators). 
(a)  Emission of particulate matter prohibited. 
(1)  Unless covered by a specific emission standard in section 4.40(b) of the Commonwealth of Virginia Regulations for the Control and Abatement of Air Pollution (August 9, 1975) as amended, the maximum allowable emission of particulate matter from any source shall be determined from Figure 2. 
(2)  Interpolation of the data in Figure 2 for process weight rates up to 60,000 pounds per hour shall be accomplished by use of the equation E = 4.10 P0.67 , and interpolation and extrapolation of the data for process weight rates in excess of 60,000 pounds per hour shall be accomplished by use of the equation # = 55.0 P0.11-40 , where E equals emission rate in pounds per hour and P equals process weight rate in tons per hour. 
(3)  Where the nature of any process or operation or the design of any equipment is such as to permit more than one interpretation of this section, the interpretation that results in the maximum value for allowable emission shall apply. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, the total process weight rate for each individual process unit at a plant or premises shall be used for determining the maximum allowable emission rate of particulate matter that passes through a stack or stacks. 
(5)  This section does not apply to fuel-burning equipment and incinerators. 
(b)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit any materials to be handled, transported or stored, or a building, its appurtenances, or a road to be used, constructed, altered, repaired or demolished, without taking reasonable precautions to prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne or to create a nuisance. Such reasonable precautions may include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Use of water or chemicals for control of dust in the demolition of existing buildings or structures, construction operations, the grading of roads or the clearing of land. 
(2)  Application of asphalt, oil, water or suitable chemicals on dirt roads, materials stockpiles, and other surfaces which can create airborne dusts. 
(3)  Installation and use of hoods, fans and fabric filters to enclose and vent the handling of dusty materials. Adequate containment methods shall be employed during sandblasting or similar operations. The use of sandblasting for cleaning building exteriors in residential or commercial areas is prohibited. 
(4)  Open equipment for conveying or transporting materials likely to become airborne shall be covered or treated in an equally effective manner at all times when in motion. 
(5)  The paving of roadways and their maintenance in a clean condition. 
(6)  The prompt removal of earth or other material from paved streets over which such earth or other material has been transported by trucking or earth-moving equipment or erosion by water. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-5) 
Figure 2 
Process weight rate  Maximum 
allowable 
emission rate lbs./hr. tons/hr. lbs./hr. 100 0.05 0.551 200 0.10 0.877 400 0.20 1.40 600 0.30 1.83 800 0.40 2.22 1,000 0.50 2.58 1,500 0.75 3.38 2,000 1.00 4.10 2,500 1.25 4.76 3,000 1.50 5.38 3,500 1.75 5.96 4,000 2.00 6.52 5,000 2.50 7.58 6,000 3.00 8.56 7,000 3.50 9.49 8,000 4.00 10.4 9,000 4.50 11.2 10,000 5.00 12.0 12,000 6.00 13.6 16,000 8.00 16.5 18,000 9.00 17.9 20,000 10.00 19.2 30,000 15.00 25.2 40,000 20.00 30.5 50,000 25.00 35.4 60,000 30.00 40.0 70,000 35.00 41.3 80,000 40.00 42.5 90,000 45.00 43.6 100,000 50.00 44.6 120,000 60.00 46.3 140,000 70.00 47.8 160,000 80.00 49.1 200,000 100.00 51.3 1,000,000 500.00 69.0 2,000,000 1,000.00 77.6 6,000,000 3,000.00 92.7  
Sec. 30-45. - Gaseous contaminants. 
(a)  Prohibition of gaseous contaminant emissions. No owner shall allow the operation of combustion installation and process equipment so as to disperse into the outdoor atmosphere gaseous contaminant emissions in such quantities or concentrations as to injure human, plant or animal life, or cause a condition of air pollution or create a nuisance. 
(b)  Control of sulfur dioxide emissions from combustion installations. 
(1)  No owner shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of sulfur dioxide from any combustion installation in excess of that expressed by the following equation: 
S = 2.64K 
where: 
S = allowable emission of sulfur dioxide expressed in pounds per hour. K = actual heat input at total capacity expressed in Btu × 10 6 per hour.  
(2)  Where there are one or more combustion installation units at a facility, and where the facility can be shown, to the satisfaction of the state air pollution control officer, to be in compliance when the facility is operating at total capacity, the facility will be deemed to still be in compliance if the facility is operated at reduced load or one or more units are shut down for maintenance or repair. This subsection (b)(2) is applicable only if the remaining unit(s) continues to burn the same type of fuel with the same sulfur content, or an equivalent, that was shown above to allow compliance when the facility was operating at maximum load and the actual emissions when operating at reduced load do not exceed the maximum allowable emissions. 
(c)  Control of carbon monoxide emissions. No person shall emit a carbon monoxide waste gas stream from any catalyst regeneration of a petroleum cracking system, petroleum coker or other petroleum process, or from the operation of a grey iron cupola, blast furnace, or basic oxygen steel furnace into the atmosphere unless: 
(1)  The waste gas stream is burned at 1,300 degrees Fahrenheit for 0.3 second or greater in a direct-flame afterburner or boiler equipped with a combustion control indicator; or 
(2)  Other devices or procedures are employed that reduce carbon monoxide emissions to levels comparable with a boiler or afterburner installation. 
(d)  Control of nitrogen oxides emissions. 
(1)  Nitric acid manufacture. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of nitrogen oxides (expressed as nitrogen dioxide) from nitric acid manufacturing plants into the outdoor atmosphere in excess of 5.5 pounds per ton 100 percent acid produced. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-6) 
Sec. 30-46. - Odor. 
(a)  Scope. This section shall apply to all operations that produce odorous emissions. 
(b)  Prohibition of objectionable odor. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit any source to discharge air contaminants which cause an odor objectionable to individuals of ordinary sensibility. 
(c)  Determination of violation. 
(1)  The determination of objectionable odor is to be made after a thorough review of all data or evidence relating to the situation which may be obtained by an investigation directed by the medical director and by holding a public hearing to hear complaints as prescribed in this article. The investigation may include use of an odor panel survey and/or other methods approved by the medical director. 
(2)  Upon determination that an odor is violative of subsection (b), the owner shall employ such adequate measures for the control of odorous emissions as may be approved by the medical director. 
(d)  Exception. This section is not intended to be applied to accidental emissions of odors. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-7) 
Sec. 30-47. - Incinerators. 
(a)  Prohibition of smoke, particulates and odor emissions from incinerators. No owner shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of an incinerator so as to discharge into the outdoor atmosphere smoke, particulates, or odor sufficient to cause a condition of air pollution. 
(b)  Emission standards for smoke and odor. 
(1)  Smoke from incinerators. Smoke emitted into the atmosphere from any incinerator shall not be greater than 20 percent opacity. 
(2)  Odor from incinerators. Incinerators, including all associated equipment and grounds, shall be designed, operated and maintained so as to prevent the emission of objectionable odors. 
(c)  Emission standards for particulate matter. Incinerators shall not discharge particulate matter in excess of 0.14 grain per standard cubic foot of dry flue gas corrected to 12 percent carbon dioxide (without the contribution of auxiliary fuel). 
(d)  Flue-fed incinerators. Flue-fed incinerators (those which use the same flue for feeding the refuse and discharging the gases of combustion) are prohibited for incineration usage. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-8) 
Sec. 30-48. - Motor vehicle emissions. 
(a)  Prohibition of acts affecting emissions from motor vehicles. 
(1)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the removal, disconnection or disabling of a crankcase emission control system or device, exhaust emission control system or device, fuel evaporative emission control system or device, or other air pollution control system or device which has been installed on a motor vehicle in accordance with federal and state laws and regulations while such motor vehicle is operating in the city. 
(2)  No person shall defeat the design purpose of any such motor vehicle pollution control system or device by installing therein or thereto any part or component which is not a standard factory replacement part or component of the device. 
(3)  A motor vehicle or its engine shall not be operated with the motor vehicle pollution control system or device removed or otherwise rendered inoperable. 
(4)  The provisions of this subsection (a) shall not prohibit or prevent shop adjustment and/or replacements of equipment for maintenance or repair or the conversion of engines to low pollution fuels, such as, but not limited to, natural gas or propane, so long as such action does not degrade in any manner or to any degree the antipollution capabilities of the vehicle power system. 
(b)  Visible emissions from motor vehicle. 
(1)  The propulsion engine of a commercial vehicle parked in a business or residential area shall not be left running more than three minutes after the vehicle is parked, except when the propulsion engine provides auxiliary service other than for heating or air conditioning. 
(2)  No person shall cause or permit the emission of visible air contaminants from gasoline-powered motor vehicles for longer than five consecutive seconds after the engine has been brought up to operating temperature. 
(3)  No person shall cause or permit the emission of visible air contaminants from diesel-powered motor vehicles of a density equal to or greater than 20 percent opacity for longer than five consecutive seconds after the engine has been brought up to operating temperature. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-9) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 
Sec. 30-49. - Open burning prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibition of open burning. 
(1)  No owner shall kindle or ignite, cause to be kindled or ignited, or maintain any open fire in any public or private place outside any building except as provided in subsection (b) of this section; however, such exceptions shall not allow the burning of rubber tires, asphaltic materials, crankcase oil, impregnated wood, or similar materials which produce dense smoke operations by open burning. 
(2)  Open burning under the exceptions of subsection (b) of this section does not exempt or excuse a person from the consequences, damages or injuries which may result from such conduct, nor does it excuse or exempt any person from complying with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations and orders of the governmental entities having jurisdiction, even though the open burning is conducted in compliance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(3)  All open burning permitted under subsection (b) of this section shall be immediately terminated upon the declaration by competent authority that the "alert" stage of an air pollution episode has been reached. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Open fires may be set in performance of an official duty of any public health or safety officer, after notification of, and approval by, state and local air pollution control agencies, if the fire is necessary for one or more of the following reasons or purposes: 
a.  Prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by other means. 
b.  Instruction of public firefighters under the supervision of a designated fire marshal. 
c.  Protection of public health. 
(2)  Fires may be used for cooking of food, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
(3)  Open fires may be set for recreational purposes or for ceremonial occasions, provided no smoke violation or nuisance is created. 
(4)  The open burning of leaves and other organic yard debris, including tree and shrubbery trimmings not exceeding three inches in diameter, originating on the premises of individuals domiciled on the premises shall be permitted in agricultural districts between the hours of 12:00 noon and 4:00 p.m., provided no hazardous or increased air pollution problems, in the sole opinion of the state air pollution control officer, are created, upon the following conditions: 
a.  No material shall be added to the fire between 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
b.  The location of the burning shall be no less than 300 feet from any occupied building, unless written permission is obtained from the owner or adult occupants of all such buildings. 
c.  At no time shall the fire be unattended. 
d.  All forest fire laws of the state shall be complied with. 
e.  A written permit is obtained from the state air pollution control officer after he inspects the materials to be burned. 
The permit will include any restrictions required for the burning activity. 
(5)  Salamanders or other devices providing good combustion may be used for heating by construction or other workers, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
(6)  For the clearing of land, provided a permit is first obtained from the medical director and the fire marshal, and further provided that no nuisance is created by smoke. A permit shall be issued only in accordance with applicable criteria established by the state air pollution control board, and open burning shall be conducted under conditions and limitations established by the state air pollution control board. A permit shall not be issued under this section until after a public hearing has been held by the medical director and the fire marshal. Such hearing shall be held only after notice published in at least one newspaper of general circulation published in Roanoke Valley, not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the date on which the public hearing will be held. The published notice shall include a statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing. At the public hearing, an opportunity shall be afforded all interested persons to be heard concerning the issuance of the permit. The fire marshal and the medical director shall in any such permit set forth the conditions or the manner under which any such burning shall be conducted. 
(c)  Exclusions. 
(1)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the construction, reconstruction, repair or use of any interior fireplace of residential character for residential-type uses of heat, light or display. 
(2)  This section does not apply to open burning using devices specifically designed to provide controlled conditions reducing the emission of contaminants resulting from combustion. Section 30-42(a) and (b) shall apply to such devices. All such devices and their locations shall be approved by the medical director or his designated representative prior to installation. 
(3)  Where alternate means of disposal are not economical or practical and when it is in the best interest of the citizens of the city, the medical director with the concurrence of the state air pollution control board may permit open burning to dispose of debris caused by floods, tornadoes, hurricanes or other natural disasters under such conditions as may then be prescribed by the state air pollution control board. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-10) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34. 
Sec. 30-50. - Air pollution episode system. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  An air pollution episode system provides standards and procedures to be followed whenever pollution of the air has the potential of reaching an emergency condition if allowed to go unchecked. 
(2)  Whenever the medical director or his designated representative determines that the accumulation of air pollution may attain, is attaining or has attained a level considered injurious to human health, conditions of air pollution designated as forecast, alert, warning and emergency shall be declared. In making a determination, the criteria defined in subsection (b) of this section shall be used as guidelines. Any stage may be declared by the medical director on the basis of deteriorating air quality alone if in his judgment such action is required. 
(3)  To provide a logical means of emission reduction by stationary air pollution sources during the various stages of the air pollution episode system, sources designated by the medical director shall submit standby emission reduction plans in accordance with section 7.03 of the Commonwealth of Virginia Regulations for the Control and Abatement of Air Pollution (August 9, 1975), as amended. 
(b)  Episode criteria. 
(1)  Forecast stage. 
a.  An administrative watch shall be maintained by the medical director whenever the national, local or state meteorologist issues a forecast indication that an atmospheric stagnation will cover any substantial portion of the state for the next 36 hours. Such a weather forecast will indicate meteorological conditions which are expected to inhibit local pollutant dispersion. The watch shall continue throughout the atmospheric stagnation period. The forecast will take the form of: 
1.  An atmospheric stagnation advisory for the next 36 hours including any substantial part of the state issued by the National Meteorological Center (NMC); and 
2.  A regional 12-hour air stagnation advisory including any substantial part of Roanoke Valley issued by the local meteorologist at the environmental meteorological support unit (EMSU). 
b.  Action. The medical director shall accelerate the manual sampling of air pollutants and coordinate his findings with neighboring jurisdictions and the weather bureau. 
_____ 
(2)  Alert stage. 
a.  An alert shall be declared by the medical director or his designee when any one of the following pollutant levels is reached at any monitoring site, and: 
1.  Consultation with the national, local or state meteorologist indicates that an atmospheric stagnation exists for the next 12 hours or more; and/or 
2.  The medical director or his designee determines that the pollutant level is representative of air quality in a significant portion of the region. Consultation with the air pollution control agencies of the affected jurisdictions will be accomplished to help evaluate local situations. 
b.  Action. When the alert stage has been declared, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  The action provision of the forecast stage shall continue to apply. 
2.  No open burning shall be allowed. 
3.  The medical director shall advise the city manager who shall direct the directors of public works, building and mechanical inspections and traffic departments and the police department and the fire marshal to take appropriate actions within their power to help abate the level of air pollution. 
4.  Implement appropriate section of emission reduction plan. 
Pollutant Average ug/m 3 ppm SO 2 24-hour    800  0.3  Particulates 24-hour    375 (3.0 COk) Product of SO 2 × particulates 24-hour 65,000 (0.2 COH-ppm 
product) CO  8-hour 17,000 15.0  Oxidants  1-hour    400  0.2  NO 2  1-hour  1,130  0.6  24-hour    282  0.15  
(3)  Warning stage. 
a.  A warning shall be declared by the medical director or his designee when any one of the following pollutant levels is reached at any monitoring site, and: 
1.  Consultation with the national, local or state meteorologist indicates that an atmospheric stagnation exists for the next 12 hours or more; and/or 
2.  The medical director or his designee determines that the pollutant level is representative of air quality in a significant portion of the region. Consultation with the air pollution control agencies of the affected jurisdictions will be accomplished to help evaluate local situations. 
b.  Action. When the warning stage has been declared, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  The action provisions of the forecast and alert stages shall continue to apply. 
2.  The medical director shall establish an air pollution control center in the department of public health to provide information and advice on how to alleviate the effects of the pollutant level. 
3.  The department of public health shall increase its investigations of the sources of air pollution. 
4.  The medical director shall advise public, commercial, and industrial establishments to suspend or reduce their level of pollutant emissions to the minimum essential level of operation in accordance with preplanned emission reduction schedules. 
5.  The medical director shall notify local hospitals of the possible effect that the air pollution level might have on their case load. 
Pollutant Average ug/m 3 ppm SO 2 24-hour   1,600  0.6 Particulates 24-hour     625 (5.0 COH) Product of SO 2 × particulates 24-hour 261,000 (0.8 COH-ppm product) CO  8-hour  34,000 30.0 Oxidants  1-hour     800  0.4 NO 2  1-hour   2,260  1.2 24-hour     565  0.3  
(4)  Emergency stage. 
a.  An emergency shall be declared by the medical director when any one of the following pollutant levels is reached at any monitoring site, and: 
1.  Consultation with the national, local or state meteorologist indicates that an atmospheric stagnation exists for the next 12 hours or more; and/or 
2.  The medical director or his designee determines that the pollutant level is representative of air quality in a significant portion of the region. Consultation with the air pollution control agencies of the affected jurisdictions will be accomplished to help evaluate local situations; and 
3.  The concentration of that pollutant is continuing to increase, and the medical director determines that because of meteorological or other factors, the concentration of that pollutant will continue to increase. 
b.  Action. When the emergency state has been declared, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  The action provision of the forecast, alert and warning stages shall continue to apply. 
2.  The medical director shall mobilize all resources of his department and may operate his department on an overtime basis. 
3.  The medical director shall recommend to the proper authorities the closing of all schools, nonessential public buildings and places of public assembly. 
4.  The medical director shall notify local hospitals that it may be advisable to delay all but emergency surgery because of the possible increased risks resulting from the pollution levels. 
5.  The medical director shall advise the public to limit the use of motor vehicles to essential and emergency travel. 
6.  The medical director may order a ban on the use of all incinerators, except municipal, if in his professional judgment he has reason to believe that it is necessary to protect the public health. 
Pollutant Average ug/m 3 ppm SO 2 24-hour   2,100  0.8 Particulates 24-hour    825 (7.0 COH) Product of SO 2 × particulates 24-hour 398,000 (1.2 COH-ppm product) CO  8-hour  45,000 40.0 Oxidants  1-hour   1,000  0.5 NO 2  1-hour   3,000  1.6 24-hour     750  0.4  
_____ 
(5)  Announcement of stages and termination. 
a.  Termination of any or all stages of the air pollution episode system shall be called by the medical director or his designee based on: 
1.  Consultation with the national, local or state meteorologist which indicates that the atmospheric conditions justify termination; and/or 
2.  Appropriate reduction in pollutant levels below the stage criteria terminated. The medical director shall, upon termination of any stage, declare what stage, if any, of the city's air pollution episode system is still in effect. 
b.  Whenever the medical director declares that any stage of the city's air pollution episode system, other than the forecast stage, is in effect or is terminated, he shall announce it immediately to the area radio and television stations and newspapers so that the public will be informed. The declaration of any stage but the forecast stage shall include: 
1.  A statement of the effect on public health that might result unless preventive action is taken; 
2.  A statement of the action provisions of the declared stage; 
3.  A statement listing actions that people in the city should take to lower the pollution level and minimize its effects. 
(6)  Determination of pollutant levels. The pollutant levels for the alert, warning and emergency stages shall be determined from instrument readings at a site representative of ambient air quality in the city. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-11) 
Sec. 30-51. - Operation of equipment. 
(a)  General. Any equipment that may produce air pollutants shall not be maintained in such a manner that a nuisance is created. Nothing in this section relating to regulation of emission of air contaminants shall in any manner be construed as authorizing or permitting the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. 
(b)  Malfunction of equipment. Emissions exceeding any of the limits established in this article as a direct result of unusual conditions in or malfunction of any incinerator or any process, fuel-burning, or control equipment or related operating equipment beyond the control of the person owning or operating such equipment shall not be deemed to be in violation of this article; provided, that the owner or operator: 
(1)  Advises the medical director immediately; 
(2)  Within 48 hours submits to the medical director a written statement of the circumstances; and 
(3)  Outlines a corrective and preventive program acceptable to the medical director. 
(c)  Preventive program. The preventive program shall constitute an order of the medical director. The preventive program may include, but is not limited to, provisions for operating procedures, training, stockpiles of replacement parts, and maintenance standards. 
(d)  Circumvention. No owner shall build, erect, install or use any article, equipment or other contrivance, the sole purpose of which is to conceal an unlawful emission without resulting in a reduction in the total release of air pollutants into the atmosphere. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-12) 
Sec. 30-52. - Administration. 
(a)  The medical director shall be charged with administering and enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The state air pollution control officer and the medical director shall whenever possible coordinate their activities to the end that the air resources of the city are preserved, protected and improved and air pollution is regulated, prevented, abated and controlled. 
(c)  The medical director shall at all times be available to the state air pollution control officer for consultation and help, and the state air pollution control officer shall at all times be available to the medical director for consultation and help. 
(d)  In addition to any other powers invested in him, the medical director may, subject to the availability of funds: 
(1)  Conduct studies, investigations and research relating to air pollution and its prevention, abatement and control. 
(2)  Issue such orders as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article and enforce such orders by all appropriate administration of this article. 
(3)  Hold hearings relating to any aspect of or matter in the administration of this article. 
(4)  Secure necessary scientific, technical, administrative and operational services, including laboratory facilities, by contract or otherwise. 
(5)  Prepare and develop a comprehensive plan or plans for the prevention, abatement and control of air pollution. 
(6)  Advise, consult and cooperate with other local governmental units, agencies of the state, industries, interstate or interlocal agencies and the federal government, and with interested persons and groups. 
(7)  Review those matters having a bearing upon air pollution referred by other agencies (such as planning, zoning, building and fire departments) and make reports, including recommendations to the referring agencies with respect thereto. 
(8)  Collect and disseminate information and conduct educational and training programs relating to air pollution. 
(9)  Encourage voluntary cooperation by persons or affected groups to achieve the purposes of this article. 
(10)  Do any and all acts which may be necessary for the successful prosecution of the policy of this article and such other acts as may be specifically enumerated in this article. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-13) 
Sec. 30-53. - Registration; monitoring; records; testing. 
(a)  Owners engaged in operations which may result in air pollution shall, if so required, register with the medical director such sources, providing information as to: 
(1)  Location and description of source; 
(2)  Rate, duration and composition of contaminant emission; and 
(3)  Such other information as the medical director may require in accordance with the state air pollution control regulations. 
(b)  No owner shall cause or permit the commencement of construction of a new source, or modification of any air pollution source, without first obtaining from the medical director with the concurrence of the state air pollution control board a permit approving the location and basic pollution control design criteria of the proposed new source and modification of an existing source and its operation. Standards for granting the permit shall be in accordance with section 2.33(d) of the Commonwealth of Virginia Regional Air Pollution Regulations for the Control and Abatement of Air Pollution (August 9, 1975), as amended. For new and modified stationary sources, the federal standards of performance, where promulgated, shall apply. Where federal standards of performance have not been promulgated, the source shall employ the best available control technology for the abatement and control of emissions. 
(c)  All new sources constructed after the effective date of this article must comply with appropriate performance standards or best available control technology, whichever is applicable, on commencement of operation. The owner or operator of existing sources not in compliance as of the effective date of this article must submit to the medical director, in a form and manner satisfactory to the medical director, a control program and schedule to contain a date on or before which full compliance will be attained. Control programs will be submitted in accordance with Commonwealth of Virginia Regulations for the Control and Abatement of Air Pollution (August 9, 1975), as amended. If approved by the medical director with the concurrence of the state air pollution control board, the schedule of compliance contained in the control plan will be the date on which the person shall comply. 
(d)  The medical director may require the owner or operator of any source to: 
(1)  Install, use and maintain monitoring equipment and sample emissions in accordance with approved methods; and 
(2)  Maintain records and make periodic emission reports. 
(e)  Emission tests shall be conducted and reported and data reduced as set forth in the appropriate reference method; if not appropriate, then equivalent or alternative methods shall be used. 
(f)  Emission testing shall be subject to testing guidelines as may be approved by the state air pollution control officer. Procedures may be adjusted or changed by the state air pollution control officer to suit specific sampling conditions or needs based upon good practice, judgment and experience. When such tests are adjusted, consideration shall be given to the effect of such change on established emission standards. Tests shall be performed under the direction of persons whose qualifications are acceptable to the state air pollution control officer. 
(g)  Emission tests shall be conducted under such conditions as the state air pollution control officer shall specify to the owner based on representative performance of the source. The owner shall make available to the state air pollution control officer such records as may be necessary to determine the conditions of the emission tests. Operations during periods of startup, shutdown, and malfunction shall not constitute representative conditions of emission tests unless otherwise specified in the applicable standard. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-14) 
Sec. 30-54. - Inspections. 
    Any duly authorized officer, employee or representative of the state air pollution control officer or the medical director may, when granted permission by the owner, or some person with reasonably apparent authority to act for the owner, enter and inspect any property, premises or place at any reasonable time for the purpose of investigating or testing either an actual or suspected source of air pollution, or of ascertaining the state of compliance with this article and regulations enforced pursuant thereto. When permission is refused or cannot be obtained, a proper warrant shall be obtained. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-15) 
Sec. 30-55. - Enforcement procedure; medical director. 
(a)  Whenever the medical director has reason to believe that a violation of any provision of this article, or a rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto, has occurred, he may give notice of such violation to the owner failing to comply with this article, ordering him to take such corrective measures as are necessary within a reasonable time thereafter. Such notice and order shall be in writing and shall be served personally upon the person to whom directed, or, if he cannot be found, by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to his usual place of abode and conspicuously posting a copy thereof on the premises affected by the notice and order, if any. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the medical director from making efforts to obtain voluntary compliance through warning, conference or any other appropriate means. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-16) 
Sec. 30-56. - Air quality. 
(a)  The ambient air quality standards for the county are those stipulated in part III of the Commonwealth of Virginia Regulations for the Control and Abatement of Air Pollution (August 9, 1975), as amended, and shall serve as the basis for effective and reasonable management of the air resources of the city. 
(b)  No action authorized or taken under this article shall result in substantial degradation of present air quality in any portion of the county which has an air quality superior to that stipulated in part III of the Commonwealth of Virginia Regulations for the Control and Abatement of Air Pollution (August 9, 1975), as amended. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-17) 
Sec. 30-57. - Emergency procedure. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this article or any other provision of law, if the medical director finds that any owner is causing or contributing to air pollution and that such causing or contributing to air pollution creates an emergency which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, the medical director shall order such owner to reduce or discontinue immediately the causing or contributing to air pollution and such order shall be complied with immediately. Such order shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is delivered personally, or if the owner involved is not found, by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the owner involved at the premises involved and his business and residence address, if known, and by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the premises affected. Upon service of any such order, the medical director, if requested by the owner so ordered, within 72 hours after service, shall schedule an appeal before the council. 
(b)  Any owner who shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with an order to reduce or discontinue the causing or contributing to air pollution, as provided in subsection (a), and who does not within 72 hours request an appeal to the council, shall be guilty of violating the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-23) 
Sec. 30-58. - Confidentiality of records. 
    Any records or other information (except emission records) which relate to processes of production unique to the owner or operator or which would tend to alter adversely the competitive position of such owner or operator shall be only for the confidential use of the medical director, the state air pollution control officer and other departments, agencies and officers of the city, and appropriate federal and state air pollution control officials, unless such owner or operator shall expressly agree to their publication or availability to the general public. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the use of such records or information by any department, agency or officer of the city in compiling or publishing analyses or summaries relating to the general condition of the outdoor atmosphere; provided, that such analyses or summaries do not reveal any information otherwise confidential under this section. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-26) 
Sec. 30-59. - Application of article. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to supplant or take the place of other provisions of this Code, or any other applicable provisions of law, and such Code and other applicable provisions of law shall continue to apply. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-27) 
Sec. 30-60. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any owner violating any provision of this article or failing, neglecting or refusing to comply with an order of the medical director or the council shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each violation, within the discretion of the court, and each day of continued violation after conviction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 2A-18) 
Secs. 30-61-30-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of Jan. 13, 2003, provided for the amendment of art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III pertained to the same subject matter as enacted by an ordinance of June 8, 1992(2), § 8A. 
State Law reference- Erosion and Sediment Control Law, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-86. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person submitting an erosion and sediment control plan for approval or requesting the issuance of a permit, when required, authorizing land disturbing activities to commence. 
    Agreement in lieu of a plan means a contract between the plan-approving authority and the owner, which specifies conservation measures, which must be implemented in the construction of a single-family residence; this contract may be executed by the plan- approving authority in lieu of a formal site plan. 
    Certified inspector means an employee or agent of the plan-approving authority who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board (herein "board") in the area of project inspection or (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for project inspection and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
    Certified plan reviewer means an employee or agent of a program authority who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of plan review, (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for plan review and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment, or (iii) is licensed as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect, or land surveyor pursuant to Article 1 (Section 54.1-400 et seq.) or Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the 1950 Code of Virginia, as amended. 
    Certified program administrator means an employee or agent of a program authority who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of program administration or (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for program administration and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
    Clearing means any activity, which removes the vegetative ground cover, including but not limited to root mat removal or topsoil removal. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan or plan means a document containing material for the conservation of soil and water resources of a unit or a group of units of land, as required by this article. 
    Erosion impact area means an area of land not associated with current land disturbing activity but subject to persistent soil erosion and resulting in the delivery of sediment onto neighboring properties or into state waters. This definition shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land 10,000 square feet or less used for residential purposes or to shorelines where the erosion results from wave action or other coastal processes. 
    Excavating means any digging, scooping or other method of removing earth materials. 
    Filling means any depositing or stockpiling of earth materials. 
    Grading means any excavating or filling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
    Land disturbing activity means any land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands in the state, including but not limited to clearing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. 
    Land disturbing permit means a permit issued by the city for clearing, filling, excavating, grading or transporting, or any combination thereof, of all lands, except as excluded elsewhere in this article. 
    Local erosion and sediment control program means an outline of the various methods employed by a locality to regulate land disturbing activities and thereby minimize erosion and sedimentation in compliance with the state program, and may include such items as local ordinances, policies and guidelines, technical materials, inspection, enforcement and evaluation. 
    Owner means the owner of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person in control of a property. 
    Plan approving authority means the engineering department of the city, responsible for determining the adequacy of a conservation plan submitted for land disturbing activities on a unit of land and for approving and administering plans. 
    Responsible land disturber means an individual from the project or development team, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out a land-disturbing activity covered by an approved plan or agreement in lieu of a plan, who (i) holds a responsible land disturber certificate of competence, (ii) holds a current certificate of competence from the board in the areas of combined administration, program administration, inspection, or plan review (iii) holds a current contractor certificate of competence for erosion and sediment control, or (iv) is licensed in Virginia as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect, or land surveyor pursuant to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) or Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the 1950 Code of Virginia, as amended. 
    State erosion and sediment control program means the program administered by the state soil and water conservation board pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq., including regulations designed to minimize erosion and sedimentation. 
    State waters means all waters on the surface and under the ground, wholly or partially within or bordering the state or within its jurisdiction. 
    Subdivision means the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, or other subdivision of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, including all changes in street or lot lines. 
    Transporting means any moving of earth materials from one place to another, other than such movement incidental to grading, to the extent that erosion and sediment will result from the soil or earth materials over which such transporting occurs. 
(Ord. of 1-13-03) 
Sec. 30-87. - Purpose and review. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide for the control of erosion and sediment and to establish procedures for the administration and enforcement of such controls. 
(b)  Pursuant to § 10.1-561.1 of the Code of Virginia, an erosion control plan shall not be approved until it is reviewed by a certified plan reviewer. Inspections of land-disturbing activities shall be conducted by a certified inspector. The erosion control program of the city shall contain a certified program administrator, a certified plan reviewer, and a certified inspector, who may be the same person. 
(Ord. of 1-13-03) 
Sec. 30-88. - Plan and permit required for land disturbing activities; article. 
(a)  Except as provided for in section 30-89, no person may engage in any land disturbing activity until such person has submitted to, has had reviewed by and has had approved by the plan approving authority an erosion and sediment control plan for such land disturbing activity and has been issued a land disturbing permit. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article that it be administered in conjunction with both the city's subdivision and zoning ordinances, wherein such apply to the development and subdivision of land within the city or to development on previously subdivided land within the city. 
(Ord. of 1-13-03) 
Sec. 30-89. - Article inapplicable to certain activities. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be construed to apply to the following: 
(1)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home repairs and maintenance work. 
(2)  Individual service connections. 
(3)  Installation, maintenance or repair of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard-surfaced road, street or sidewalk, provided such land disturbing activity is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard-surfaced. 
(4)  Tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural or forest crops, or livestock feedlot operations, including related engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation. However, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11 (§ 10.1-1100 et seq.) of Title 10.1 of the 1950 Code of Virginia, as amended, or is converted to bonafide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in Subsection (b) of 10.1-1163. 
(5)  Repair or rebuilding of the tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities, and other related structures and facilities of a railroad company. 
(6)  Septic tank lines or drainage fields, unless included in an overall plan for land disturbing activity relating to construction of the building to be served by the septic tank system. 
(7)  Installation of fences and signposts or telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles. 
(8)  Emergency work to protect life, limb or property, and emergency repairs; however, if the land disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control plan if the activity were not an emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of the plan approving authority. 
(9)  Disturbed land areas of less than 10,000 square feet in size. 
(10)  Agricultural engineering operations, including but not limited to the construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the Dam Safety Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-604 et seq., ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation. 
(11)  Exploration or drilling for oil and gas, including the well site, roads, feeder lines and offsite disposal areas. 
(12)  Surface or deep mining. 
(13)  Shore erosion control projects on tidal waters when the projects are approved by local wetlands boards, the marine resources commission, or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(Ord. of 1-13-03) 
Sec. 30-90. - Enforcement by plan approving authority. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall rest with the plan approving authority, who shall enforce the provisions of this article as a portion of its obligations for review, approval and inspection under section 106-651 and under the provisions of chapter 78 of this Code. 
(b)  The plan approving authority (i) shall provide for biweekly and after-rain inspections of land disturbing activity, and (ii) may require monitoring and reports from the person responsible for carrying out the plan, to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sediment. The owner, occupier or operator shall be given notice of the inspection and an opportunity to accompany the inspectors. If the permit issuing authority or plan approving authority determines that there is a failure to comply with the plan, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or in the plan certification, or by delivery at the site of the land disturbing activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. Where the plan approving authority serves notice, a copy of the notice shall also be sent to the issuer of the permit. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, a stop work order may be issued and/or the permit may be revoked, and the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties provided by section 30-93. 
(Ord. of 1-13-03) 
Sec. 30-91. - Control measures to be undertaken at expense of applicant; bonding. 
(a)  All control measures required by the provisions of this article shall be undertaken at the expense of the applicant, and pending such actual provision thereof, the applicant, owner, developer or subdivider shall execute and file with the city treasurer, prior to issuance of the land disturbing permit, an agreement and bond (or agreements, cash escrow, letter of credit, or other legal arrangements and bonds), in an amount determined by the plan approving authority equal to the approximately total cost of providing erosion and sediment control improvements, with surety approved by the city attorney, and certification that the plan will be followed. Such agreement and bond shall ensure that measures could be taken by the city at the applicant's expense should he fail after proper notice within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate conservation action which may be required of him by such approved plan as a result of his land disturbing activity. Such bonding may be combined with other performance bonds required in conjunction with chapter 78 or chapter 106 of this Code. 
(b)  Within 60 days of the achievement of adequate stabilization of the land disturbing activity, the bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement provided for under subsection (a), or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated, as the case may be. If the bond is not adequate to cover the cost to the city for any work involved in stabilizing erosion and sediment control, the city may collect the difference between the bond and the actual cost from the applicant. These requirements are in addition to all other provisions of law relating to the issuance of such permits and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirement for such permits. 
(Ord. of 1-13-03) 
Sec. 30-92. - Land-disturbing permit. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 30-89, no person shall engage in any land disturbing activity within the city until he has acquired a land-disturbing permit. Where land-disturbing activities involve lands under jurisdiction of more than one local control program, an erosion and sediment control plan may, at the option of the applicant, be submitted to the state soil and water conservation board for review and approval rather than to each jurisdiction concerned. Where the land-disturbing activity results from the construction of a single-family residence, an agreement in lieu of a plan may be substituted for an erosion and sediment control plan if executed by the plan approving authority. 
(b)  Issuance of a land-disturbing permit is conditioned on an approved erosion and sediment control plan, which plan or certification of such shall be presented at the time of application for such a permit, and in addition, the requirements of section 30-91 concerning a performance bond, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof or such other legal arrangement as is acceptable under the provisions of section 30-91, and to the fees levied in this article for land disturbing activities. In addition, as a pre-requisite to approval of the plan, the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall provide the name of a responsible land disturber, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity, in accordance with the approved plan. 
(c)  An applicant submitting a plan pursuant to this article shall pay a filing fee of $100.00 based on disturbed area, plus $100.00 for each acre or a portion thereof not to exceed $1,000.00 to cover the administrative expenses of review and inspection. 
(d)  The plan approving authority shall review conservation plans submitted to it and grant written approval within 45 days of the receipt of the plan if it determines that the plan meets the requirements of the board's regulations and if the person responsible for carrying out the plan certifies that he will properly perform the conservation measures included in the plan and will conform to the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Any erosion and sedimentation plan submitted under the provisions of this article will be acted upon by the plan approving authority within 45 days from receipt by either approving or disapproving such plan in writing and giving specific reasons for disapproval. If no formal action has been taken by the plan approving authority within the time specified in this subsection, the plan shall be deemed approved, and the person authorized to proceed with the proposed activity. 
(f)  An approved plan may be changed by the authority that approved the plan in the following cases: 
(1)  Where inspection has revealed that the plan is inadequate to satisfy applicable regulations; or 
(2)  Where the person responsible for carrying out the approved plan finds that because of changed circumstances or for other reasons the approved plan cannot be effectively carried out, and proposed amendments to the plan, consistent with the requirements of this article, are agreed to by the plan approving authority and the person responsible for carrying out the plan. 
(g)  Electric, natural gas, and telephone utility companies, interstate and intrastate natural gas pipeline companies and railroad companies shall file general erosion and sediment control specifications annually with the board for review and written comments. The specifications shall apply to: 
(1)  Construction, installation or maintenance of electric, natural gas and telephone utility lines and pipelines; and 
(2)  Construction of the tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities, and other related structures and facilities of the railroad company. 
Individual approval of separate projects within subdivisions (1) and (2) of this subsection is not necessary when board approved specifications are followed; however, projects included in subdivisions (1) and (2) must comply with board approved specifications. Projects not included in subdivisions (1) and (2) of this subsection shall comply with the requirements of the city erosion and sediment control program. 
(h)  In order to prevent further erosion, approval of a conservation plan for any land identified as an erosion impact area shall be required. 
(i)  When land disturbing activity will be required of a contractor performing construction work pursuant to a construction contract, the preparation, submission and approval of an erosion and sediment control plan shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. of 1-13-03) 
Sec. 30-93. - Penalty for violations of article. 
(a)  Violators of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Civil penalties: 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of this article. Upon a finding of a violation of any provision of this article, the district court of the city shall assess a civil penalty. The civil penalty for anyone violation shall be $100.00, except that a civil penalty for commencement of land-disturbing activities without an approved plan shall be $1,000.00. 
(i)  Upon becoming aware of any violation of any provision of this article, the plan approving authority shall send to the owner, permittee, or the person responsible for carrying out the plan, if such be different persons, by certified mail, to the address specified in the permit application, or by delivery at the site of the land-disturbing activities, a notice of violation. The notice shall require such violation to cease within a reasonable time, which is specified in such notice. After such notice is sent or given, and such violation is not ceased within such reasonable time as is specified in the notice, then the plan approving authority may proceed to remedy the violation as provided below. 
(ii)  Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts result in civil penalties, which exceed a total of $3,000.00, except that a series of violations arising from the commencement of land-disturbing activities without an approved plan for any site shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $10,000.00. 
(Ord. of 1-13-03) 
Sec. 30-94. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any applicant under the provisions of this article who is aggrieved by any action of the plan approving authority in disapproving plans submitted in accordance with this article or by the plan approving authority's interpretation of the regulations of this article shall have the right to apply for and receive review of such action by the planning commission. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by any final decision of the planning commission may present to a court of record of the city a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision. 
(Ord. of 1-13-03) 
Sec. 30-95. - Liability for damages. 
    Neither the approval of an erosion and sediment control plan under the provisions of this article nor the compliance with the conditions of such plan shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to other persons or property or impose any liability upon the city from damage to other persons or property. 
(Ord. of 1-13-03) 
Secs. 30-96-30-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN 

Sec. 30-116. - Standards and specifications set forth; plan compliance regulations. 
(a)  Approved standards and specifications for control techniques to be utilized in preparing an erosion and sediment control plan are set forth in part III of the latest edition of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, which standards and specifications, by reference, are adopted as a portion of this article. 
(b)  Erosion and sediment control plans shall comply with the latest Virginia Erosion and Sediment and Control Regulations (4VAC50-30) and shall meet minimum standards as outlined in Section 40 thereof, as amended. 
(Ord. of 1-13-03) 
Sec. 30-117. - "Erosion and sediment control plan" defined; form; required contents; guidelines generally for development and submission. 
(a)  An "erosion and sediment control plan" is defined as a document containing material for the conservation of soil and water resources of a unit or group of units of land. It may include appropriate maps, an appropriate soil and water plan inventory and management information with needed interpretations and a record of decisions contributing to conservation treatment. The plan shall contain all major conservation decisions to assure that the entire unit or group of units of land will be so treated to achieve the conservation objectives (definition from Erosion and Sediment Control Law, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq.). 
(b)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall consist of the following two parts: 
(1)  A narrative report describing the project and giving the purposes, schedule or phasing of major construction activities, schedule of application of conservation practices, engineering assumption and calculations for the control measures. 
(2)  Maps of the same scale or a base map with overlays, depicting the topography of the area, the limits for clearing and grading, other proposed alterations of the area and the location of the control measures and facilities. 
(c)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall spell out the methods, techniques and procedures to be followed to control accelerated erosion and sedimentation. 
(d)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall: 
(1)  Clearly identify the type, magnitude and location of both existing and anticipated conservation problems. 
(2)  Define the areas to be affected by clearing and grading. 
(3)  Show the areas to be mulched and the areas to be established to temporary or permanent vegetation. 
(4)  Account for the staging of major land disturbing activities and include the timing and sequence of installing the conservation practices and facilities. 
(5)  Show the location of erosion and sediment control practices, such as sediment basins, diversions, waterways, storm drains, dikes, terraces, and similar structures when such practices are needed. 
(e)  In addition to the information required by subsection (d), the erosion and sediment control plan should: 
(1)  Identify the predominant soils and provide details on topography, drainage and existing vegetation. 
(2)  Be an integral part of any site plan, subdivision plan or grading plan required by local government. 
(f)  Conservation practices for erosion and sediment control shall meet or exceed the state minimum criteria, standards and specifications promulgated, from time to time, by the state soil and water conservation board, as provided in the most recent edition of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook. Practices for which standards and specifications are not contained in the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook may be approved by the local plan approving authority, based on the merits of the practice as proposed for use in individual circumstances. 
(g)  Even within a locality, the conservation practices needed to control accelerated erosion and sedimentation vary widely from site to site. Such factors as degree of slope, nature and types of soil, drainage characteristics, proximity to property boundaries and watercourses, acreage disturbed, amount of cut and fill, as well as other factors, have a direct bearing on what combination of conservation practices will result in an adequate erosion and sediment control plan. 
(h)  Recognizing the wide variations from one site to another, the following elements are to be considered in the development of a plan: 
(1)  A general statement of the project (included in the narrative). 
a.  Brief description of the overall project. 
b.  Date project is to begin and expected date final stabilization will be completed. 
c.  Brief description of accelerated erosion control program. 
d.  Brief description of sediment control program. 
e.  Brief description of stormwater management program. 
(2)  The topographic features (shown on the map). 
a.  The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities, major streams, or other identifiable landmarks. 
b.  Acreage of the project. 
c.  Contours at an interval and scale that will adequately describe the area. 
d.  Approximate limits of the floodplain. 
e.  Critical environmental areas located within or in proximity of the project areas, such as streams, lakes, ponds and wetland areas. 
f.  Nature and extent of existing vegetation. 
g.  Other significant features including map scale and north arrow. 
(3)  Information on the soils (presented in the narrative and shown on the map). 
a.  Adequate description of each soil, including soil name, texture, slope, depth, drainage and structure (as defined in the Agricultural Handbook 18-Soil Survey Manual, Soil Conservation Service, U.S.D.A.). 
b.  Surface area of each soil. 
c.  Estimate of soil loss by use of the universal soil loss formula or other acceptable methods. In the absence of a soil survey, a mechanical analysis of the soil will be made to the depth of planned disturbance or an onsite evaluation will be made by a qualified soil scientist. Soils data is readily available in areas having a modern soil survey and in other areas where a progressive survey is underway. 
(4)  The amount of runoff from the project area and the upstream watershed (described in narrative). 
a.  Runoff producing factors considered. 
b.  Peak runoff from a ten-year or 100-year frequency storm, based on present and future developed conditions and according to the existing hazards and degrees of protection required. If the watershed is greater than one square mile in area, a peak runoff study of the 100-year frequency storm shall be prepared, taking into account present and future developed conditions and the existing hazards and degree of protection required. If the watershed is less than one square mile in area, a peak runoff study of the ten-year frequency storm shall be prepared, taking into account present and future developed conditions and the existing hazards and degree of protection required. 
c.  Methods of calculations. 
(5)  The stormwater management program (described in the narrative and the location of facilities shown on the map). 
a.  Brief analysis of problems posed by storm runoff on downstream areas. 
b.  Analysis of the hydrologic factors of the project which may contribute to the offsite problems. 
c.  Brief description of the permanent measures and facilities designed to cope with the problem. 
d.  Plans for the long-range management of the control facilities. 
(6)  The proposed alteration of the area (shown on the map). 
a.  Limits of clearing and grading. 
b.  Areas of cuts and fills. 
c.  Roads, buildings, pond areas and other structures. 
d.  Stormwater management facilities. 
(7)  The phasing or staging of land disturbing activities (described in the narrative). 
a.  Sequence of land clearing operations. 
b.  Removal and stockpiling of topsoil. 
c.  Major earthmoving and grading. 
d.  Control facility installation. 
e.  Program of operations. 
(8)  Temporary erosion and sediment control (vegetative and mechanical) measures for use during active construction (included in the narrative and shown on the map). 
a.  Purpose. 
b.  Types of measures and facilities. 
c.  Location of measures facilities. 
d.  Dimensional details of the facilities. 
e.  Design consideration and calculations (mechanical measures only). 
(9)  Permanent erosion and sediment control measures for long-term protection (included in the narrative and shown on the map). 
a.  Purpose. 
b.  Types of measures and facilities. 
c.  Location of measures facilities. 
d.  Dimensional details of the facilities. 
e.  Design consideration and calculations (mechanical measures only). 
(10)  The maintenance program for the control facilities (described in narrative). 
a.  Inspection program, including frequency and schedule. 
b.  Resodding or reseeding of vegetated areas. 
c.  Repair or reconstruction of damaged structural measures. 
d.  The method and frequency of removal and disposal of solid waste materials removed from the control facilities or the project area. 
e.  The method of disposing of temporary structural measures after they have served their purposes. 
(i)  Approved standards and specifications for control techniques to be utilized in preparing the erosion and sediment control, plan are set forth in part III of the latest edition of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, which standards and specifications, by reference, are adopted as a portion of this article. 
(j)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall, for any project, be submitted in conjunction with a subdivision plat or a site plan and shall be reviewed in accordance with the review procedures set forth in chapter 78 of this Code for subdivision plats and in chapter 106 of this Code for site plans. 
(k)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall contain a statement authorizing the plan approving authority right of entry on the project at any time for the purpose of inspecting and determining compliance with the provisions of this article. This right shall continue until the project and erosion and sediment control measures have been completed in compliance with this article. Furthermore, the plan approving authority shall have right of entry for the purpose of inspecting any items that require ongoing maintenance. 
(Ord. of 1-13-03) 
Sec. 30-118. - Approval or disapproval. 
    Any erosion and sedimentation plan submitted under the provisions of this article will be acted upon by the plan approving authority within 45 days from receipt by either approving or disapproving the plan in writing and giving specific reasons for disapproval. If no formal action has been taken by the plan approving authority within the time specified in this section, the plan shall be deemed approved and the person authorized to proceed with the proposed activity. 
(Ord. of 1-13-03) 
Secs. 30-119-30-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 6-9-2014 amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 30-131-30-159, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of 6-25-2007. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 30-131. - Statutory authority. 
    The Virginia Stormwater Management Act ("Law"), Title 62.1, Chapter 3.1, Article 2.3 of the Code of Virginia requires localities to establish a Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) consistent with state regulations promulgated pursuant to the law. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-132. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect properties and the general health and safety of the public within this jurisdiction by minimizing flooding, stream bank erosion and non-point source pollution of aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Require that land disturbing activities control the post-development runoff characteristics to reduce the magnitude and frequency of flooding, siltation, stream bank erosion, and property damage. 
(2)  Establish minimum design criteria for the protection of properties and aquatic resources downstream from land disturbing activities from damages due to increases in velocity, frequency, and duration, and peak flow rate of stormwater runoff. 
(3)  Establish minimum design criteria for measures to minimize non-point source pollution from stormwater runoff, which would otherwise reduce water quality. 
(4)  Establish provisions for long-term responsibility for maintenance and repair of stormwater management control devices and other techniques specified to manage the quality and quantity of runoff. 
(5)  Establish provisions for submission and approval of plans, issuance of permits, payment of fees, and coordination of inspection and enforcement activities. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-133. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all land disturbance projects except as provided herein. The article also applies to land disturbance activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land disturbance activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from these stormwater performance criteria; unless otherwise required by federal law: 
(1)  Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted under the provisions of Title 45.1 of the Act; 
(2)  Clearing of lands specifically for agricultural purposes and the management, tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, livestock feedlot operations, or as additionally set forth by the state board in regulations, including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11 (§ 10.1-1100 et seq.) of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in subsection B of § 10.1-1163 of Article 9 or Chapter 11 of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia; 
(3)  Single-family residences separately built and disturbing less than one acre and not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, including additions or modifications to existing single-family detached residential structures (provided that there are no existing or anticipated flooding or erosion problems downstream of the discharge point); 
(4)  Land disturbance projects that disturb less than 5,000 square feet of land area and are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one acre or greater of disturbance (provided that there is no existing or anticipated flooding or erosion problems downstream of the discharge point); 
(5)  Discharges to a sanitary sewer or a combined sewer system; 
(6)  Activities under a state or federal reclamation program to return an abandoned property to an agricultural or open land use; 
(7)  Routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original construction of the project. The paving of an existing road with a compacted or impervious surface and reestablishment of existing associated ditches and shoulders shall be deemed routine maintenance if performed in accordance with this subsection; 
(8)  Conducting land-disturbing activities in response to a public emergency where the related work requires immediate authorization to avoid imminent endangerment to human health or the environment. In such situations, the administrator shall be advised of the disturbance within seven days of commencing the land-disturbing activity and compliance with the administrative requirements of subsection (a) is required within 30 days of commencing the land-disturbing activity. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-134. - Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements. 
    This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-135. - Severability. 
    If the provisions of any division, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any division, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-136. - Program administration and appeals. 
    The City of Salem designates the city engineer, or any duly authorized agent of the city engineer, as the local stormwater management program administrator. Appeals will be conducted in accordance with the city's appeal procedures. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 30-137. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings described to them in this division except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) authority, which is designated herein as the city engineer for the City of Salem or designee. 
    Agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan means a contract on a form approved by the administrator between the City of Salem and the person who is applying for a permit that specifies methods that will be implemented to comply with the requirements of a VSMP for the construction of a single family residence. 
    Applicant means any person submitting an application for a permit or requesting issuance of a permit under this article. 
    Best management practice (BMP) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land-disturbing activities. 
    Board means the state water control board. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a defined bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
    Clean Water Act or CWA means the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public Law 97-117, or any subsequent revisions thereto. 
    Common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules. 
    Control measure means any best management practice or stormwater facility, or other method used to minimize the discharge of pollutants to state waters. 
    Department means the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
    Development means land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation or utility facilities or structures or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
    Director means the director of the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
    General permit means the state permit titled General VPDES Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities found in Part XIV (9VAC25-880 et seq.) of the regulations authorizing a category of discharges under the CWA and the Act within a geographical area of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Land disturbance or land disturbance activity means a man-made change to the land surface that potentially changes its runoff characteristics including clearing, grading, or excavation except that the term shall not include those exemptions specified in section 30-133(b) of this article. 
    Layout means a conceptual drawing sufficient to provide for the specified stormwater management facilities required at the time of approval. 
    Locality means the City of Salem. 
    Minor modification means an amendment to an existing general permit before its expiration not requiring extensive review and evaluation including, but not limited to, changes in EPA promulgated test protocols, increasing monitoring frequency requirements, changes in sampling locations, and changes to compliance dates within the overall compliance schedules. A minor general permit modification or amendment does not substantially alter general permit conditions, substantially increase or decrease the amount of surface water impacts, increase the size of the operation, or reduce the capacity of the facility to protect human health or the environment. 
    Operator means the owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to regulation under this article. 
    Owner means the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a property. 
    Permit or VSMP authority permit means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the administrator for the initiation of a land-disturbing activity, in accordance with this article, and which may only be issued after evidence of general permit coverage has been provided by the department. 
    Permittee means the person to whom a VSMP authority permit is issued. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, state, municipality, commission, or political subdivision of a state, governmental body, including federal, state, or local entity as applicable, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Regulations means the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Regulations, 9VAC25-870, as amended. 
    Site means the land or water area where any facility or land-disturbing activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used or preserved in connection with the facility or land-disturbing activity. 
    State means the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    State board means the state water control board. 
    State permit means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the state board in the form of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued under a state general permit or an approval issued by the state board for stormwater discharges from an MS4. Under these state permits, the commonwealth imposes and enforces requirements pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act and regulations, the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and the regulations. 
    State Water Control Law means Chapter 3.1 (§ 62.1-44.2 et seq.) of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    State waters means all water, on the surface and under the ground, wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands. 
    Stormwater means precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
    Stormwater management (SWM) plan or plan means a document containing material describing methods for compliance with section 30-141 of this article. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan or SWPPP means a document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that identifies potential sources of pollutants that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction site, and otherwise meets the requirements of this article. In addition the document shall identify and require the implementation of control measures, and shall include, but not be limited to the inclusion of, or the incorporation by reference of, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, and a pollution prevention plan. 
    Subdivision means as defined in section 78-300 of the City Code. 
    Total maximum daily load or TMDL means the sum of the individual wasteload allocations for point sources, load allocations for nonpoint sources, natural background loading and a margin of safety. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of either mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure. The TMDL process provides for point versus nonpoint source tradeoffs. 
    Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse website means a website that contains detailed design standards and specifications for control measures that may be used in Virginia to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and associated regulations. 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Act or Act means Article 2.3 (§ 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Program or VSMP means a program approved by the state board after September 13, 2011 that has been established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized in this article, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of this article and associated regulations. 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Program authority or VSMP authority means the City of Salem, an authority approved by the state board to operate a Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
DIVISION 3. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 30-138. - Land disturbing permits. 
(a)  It is the intent of this division that it is to be administered in conjunction with the subdivision, zoning, erosion and sediment control, and illicit discharge ordinances, wherein such apply to the development and subdivision of land or to development on previously subdivided land. No land disturbance permit shall be issued by the administrator until an erosion and sediment control plan approved in accordance with the City of Salem Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance Article III has been submitted to and approved by the administrator as prescribed herein. 
(b)  No person shall engage in any land disturbing activity greater than or equal to 5,000 square feet until a land disturbing permit has been issued by the administrator in accordance with the provisions of this article, or an executed agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan. 
(c)  Where land disturbing activities involve lands under jurisdiction of more than one local control program, the provisions which are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health and safety and the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(d)  In addition to requirements [of] section 30-138(b), no person shall engage in any land disturbing activity greater than or equal to one acre until he has acquired a VSMP authority permit and complied with the provisions of divisions 4 and 5 of this article. 
(e)  Land disturbance permits for activities disturbing greater than or equal to 5,000 square feet and less than one acre of land shall comply with the provisions of divisions 4 and 5 of this article with the exception of 9VAC25-870-63 [water quality design criteria requirements] and 9VAC25-870-65 [water quality compliance]. 
(f)  Issuance of a land disturbing permit is conditioned on an approved stormwater management plan per section 30-144, including a maintenance agreement per section 30-139, and an erosion and sediment control plan. Submittal of plans to the authority for review requires fee(s) per section 30-146. Any necessary performance bond, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement as is acceptable under the provisions of section 30-140 shall be presented at the time of application for a land disturbing permit. No land disturbance permit shall be issued until the fees and bonds required to be paid pursuant to this article are received. 
(g)  Any stormwater management plan submitted under the provisions of this section will be acted upon by the plan approving authority within 45 days from the communication of completeness notification by the administrator as described in section 30-144. Action will either approve or disapprove such plan in writing and, if necessary, giving specific explanation for disapproval. Approval or denial shall be based on the plan's compliance with the requirements of this article. If no formal action has been taken by the plan approving authority within the time specified in this subsection, the plan shall be deemed approved, and the person authorized to proceed with the proposed activity. 
(h)  No grading, building or other local permit shall be issued for a property unless a land disturbance permit has been issued by the administrator. 
(i)  For land disturbance of one acre or greater no land disturbance permit shall be issued by the administrator until a permit application that includes a general permit registration statement has been submitted to and approved by the administrator as prescribed herein. A registration statement is not required for detached single-family home construction within or outside of common plan of development or sale, but that such projects must adhere to the requirements of the general permit. 
(j)  No land disturbance permit shall be issued until evidence of general permit coverage is obtained for land disturbance of one acre or greater. 
(k)  No land disturbance permit shall be issued unless and until the permit application and attendant materials and supporting documentation demonstrate that all land clearing, construction, disturbance, land disturbance, and drainage will be done according to the approved permit. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-139. - Stormwater facility maintenance agreements. 
    Prior to the issuance of any land disturbing permit that has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the applicant or owner of the site must submit a maintenance agreement and maintenance covenant for review and approval by the administrator or duly authorized agent of the administrator. The applicant or owner must execute the approved maintenance easement agreement and a formal maintenance covenant that shall be binding (by deed or plat) on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management facility. 
(1)  Maintenance easement agreement. The maintenance easement agreement shall provide for all necessary access to the property for performing maintenance and inspections of the stormwater management facility. Access shall be provided at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the plan approving authority, or their contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this article. The easement agreement shall be recorded by the plan approving authority in the land records. When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between private property and a public drainage control system, the property owner shall grant, after given notice and the opportunity to accompany the inspection, to the plan approving authority the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(2)  Maintenance covenants. Maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved by the plan approving authority and recorded into the land record prior to final plan approval. The covenant shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor or owner. If portions of the land are to be sold, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the basic responsibility to successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each property owner, homeowner's association, or other legally established entity to be permanently responsible for maintenance. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility with submission of inspection and maintenance reports to the administrator. The covenant shall also include plans and schedules for inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and should also include "failure to maintain" provisions. In the event that maintenance or repair is neglected, or the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public health or safety, the plan approving authority reserves the authority to perform the work and to recover the costs from the owner. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-140. - Performance surety. 
(a)  All control measures required by the provisions of this article shall be undertaken at the expense of the applicant, and pending such actual provision thereof, the applicant, owner, developer or subdivider shall execute and file with the city treasurer, prior to issuance of the land disturbing permit, an agreement and surety (cash escrow, letter of credit, or other legal arrangements satisfactory to the city attorney, in his sole discretion), in an amount determined by the plan approving authority equal to the approximate total cost of providing stormwater management improvements, with surety approved by the city attorney, and certification that the plan will be followed. Such agreement and bond shall ensure that measures could be taken by the city at the applicant's expense should he fail, after proper notice, and within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate actions which may be required of him by permit conditions or an approved plan as a result of his land disturbing activity. Such bonding may be combined with other performance bonds required in conjunction with chapter 30, 78 or 106 of this Code. 
(b)  Within 60 days of the completion of the requirements of the approved stormwater management plan and after the approval of record/as-built per section 30-149, the surety, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, except for the landscaping survivability, shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated, as the case may be. The landscaping portion of the stormwater management plan shall be inspected one year after installation with replacement in accordance with the final plans and specifications prior to final release. 
(c)  If the surety is not adequate to cover the cost to the plan approving authority for any work involved in stormwater management controls and/or best management practices, the city may collect the difference between the surety and the actual cost from the applicant. These requirements are in addition to all other provisions of law relating to the issuance of such permits and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirement of such permits. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
DIVISION 4. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN CONTENTS, REVIEW, AND TECHNICAL CRITERIA 

Sec. 30-141. - Stormwater management plan; contents of plan. 
    No application for land disturbance will be approved unless it includes a stormwater management plan, as required by this article, detailing how runoff and associated water quality impacts resulting from the activity will be controlled or managed. A stormwater management plan shall consist of a plan and profile view showing stormwater management facilities and storm sewers, hydrologic and hydraulic computations required as part of the design of facilities and conveyances, and a stormwater management narrative. The stormwater management narrative shall evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. The stormwater management plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in divisions 4 and 5, where applicable. Individual lots in new residential, commercial, or industrial developments shall not be considered separate land-disturbing activities. No land disturbing permit shall be issued until a satisfactory stormwater management plan, or a waiver thereof, shall have undergone a review and been approved by the plan approving authority after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(1)  The stormwater management plan must apply the stormwater management general and technical criteria set forth in this section to the entire land-disturbing activity. Individual lots in new residential, commercial, or industrial developments, including those developed under subsequent owners shall not be considered separate land-disturbing activities. A stormwater management plan shall consider all sources of surface runoff and all sources of subsurface and groundwater flows converted to subsurface runoff, and include the following information: 
a.  Information on the type and location of stormwater discharges; information on the features to which stormwater is being discharged including surface waters or karst features, if present, and the predevelopment and post-development drainage areas; 
b.  Contact information including the name, address, and telephone number of the owner and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties affected; 
c.  A narrative that includes a description of current site conditions and final site conditions; 
d.  A general description of the proposed stormwater management facilities and the mechanism through which the facilities will be operated and maintained after construction is complete; 
e.  Information on the proposed stormwater management facilities, including: 
1.  The type of facilities; 
2.  Location, including geographic coordinates; 
3.  Acres treated; and 
4.  The surface waters or karst features, if present, into which the facility will discharge. 
f.  Hydrologic and hydraulic computations, including runoff characteristics; 
g.  Documentation and calculations verifying compliance with the applicable water quality and quantity criteria; 
h.  A map or maps of the site that depicts the topography of the site and includes: 
1.  All contributing drainage areas; 
2.  Existing streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, wetlands, other water bodies, and floodplains; 
3.  Soil types, geologic formations if karst features are present in the area, forest cover, and other vegetative areas; 
4.  Current land use including existing structures, roads, and locations of known utilities and easements; 
5.  Sufficient information on adjoining parcels to assess the impacts of stormwater from the site on these parcels; 
6.  The limits of clearing and grading, and the proposed drainage patterns on the site; 
7.  Proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, and stormwater management facilities; and 
8.  Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses, including but not limited to planned locations of utilities, roads, and easements. 
(2)  If an operator intends to meet the water quality and/or quantity requirements set forth in section 30-145 of this article through the use of off-site compliance options, where applicable, then a letter of availability from the off-site provider must be included. Approved off-site options must achieve the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the applicant's land-disturbing activity except as otherwise allowed by § 62.1-44.15:35 of the Code of Virginia. 
(3)  Elements of the stormwater management plans that include activities regulated under Chapter 4 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014; Ord. of 10-12-2015) 
Sec. 30-142. - VSMP stormwater pollution prevention plan; contents of plans. 
(a)  For activities with land disturbance equal to or greater than one acre, the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall include the content specified by Section 9VAC25-870-54 and must also comply with the requirements and general information set forth in Section 9VAC25-880-70, Section II [stormwater pollution prevention plan] of the general permit. 
(b)  The SWPPP shall be amended by the operator whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance that has a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants to state waters which is not addressed by the existing SWPPP. 
(c)  The SWPPP must be maintained by the operator at a central location onsite. If an onsite location is unavailable, notice of the SWPPP's location must be posted near the main entrance at the construction site. Operators shall make the SWPPP available for public review in accordance with Section II of the general permit, either electronically or in hard copy. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-143. - VSMP pollution prevention plan; contents of plan. 
(a)  For activities with land disturbance equal to or greater than one acre, a pollution prevention plan, required by 9VAC-25-870-56, shall be developed, implemented, and updated as necessary and must detail the design, installation, implementation, and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a minimum, such measures must be designed, installed, implemented, and maintained to: 
(1)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters. Wash waters must be treated in a sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent or better treatment prior to discharge; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste, and other materials present on the site to precipitation and to stormwater; and 
(3)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement chemical spill and leak prevention and response procedures. 
(b)  The pollution prevention plan shall include effective best management practices to prohibit the following discharges: 
(1)  Wastewater from washout of concrete, unless managed by an appropriate control; 
(2)  Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, and other construction materials; 
(3)  Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance; and 
(4)  Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing. 
(c)  Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from dewatering of trenches and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by appropriate controls. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-144. - Review of stormwater management plan. 
(a)  The administrator shall review stormwater management plans and shall approve or disapprove a stormwater management plan according to the following: 
(1)  The administrator shall determine the completeness of a plan in accordance with section 30-144 of this article, and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of such determination, within 15 calendar days of receipt. If the plan is deemed to be incomplete, the above written notification shall contain the reasons the plan is deemed incomplete. 
(2)  The administrator shall have an additional 45 calendar days from the date of the communication of completeness to review the plan, except that if a determination of completeness is not made within the time prescribed in subdivision (1), then plan shall be deemed complete and the administrator shall have 60 calendar days from the date of submission to review the plan. 
(3)  The administrator shall review any plan that has been previously disapproved, within 45 calendar days of the date of resubmission. 
(4)  During the review period, the plan shall be approved or disapproved and the decision communicated in writing to the person responsible for the land-disturbing activity or his designated agent. If the plan is not approved, the reasons for not approving the plan shall be provided in writing. Approval or denial shall be based on the plan's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(5)  If a plan meeting all requirements of this article is submitted and no action is taken within the time provided above in subdivision (2) for review, the plan shall be deemed approved. 
(b)  Approved stormwater plans may be modified as follows: 
(1)  Modifications to an approved stormwater management plan shall be allowed only after review and written approval by the administrator. The administrator shall have 60 calendar days to respond in writing either approving or disapproving such request. 
(2)  The administrator may require that an approved stormwater management plan be amended, within a time prescribed by the administrator, to address any deficiencies noted during inspection. 
(c)  The administrator shall require the submission of a construction record/as-built drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities in accordance with section 30-149. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-145. - Technical criteria for regulated land disturbing activities. 
(a)  To protect the quality and quantity of state water from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities, City of Salem hereby adopts the technical criteria for regulated land-disturbing activities with land disturbance equal to or greater than one acre set forth in Part II B of the regulations, as amended, expressly to include 9VAC25-870-63 [water quality design criteria requirements]; 9VAC25-870-65 [water quality compliance]; 9VAC25-870-66 [water quantity]; 9VAC25-870-69 [offsite compliance options]; 9VAC25-870-72 [design storms and hydrologic methods]; 9VAC25-870-74 [stormwater harvesting]; 9VAC25-870-76 [linear development project]; and, 9VAC25-870-85 [stormwater management impoundment structures or facilities], which shall apply to all land-disturbing activities regulated pursuant to this section, except as expressly set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  The technical criteria in subsection (a) shall also apply to all land-disturbing activities over 5,000 square feet but less than one acre with the exception of 9VAC25-870-63 [water quality design criteria requirements] and 9VAC25-870-65 [water quality compliance]. 
(c)  Grandfathering: 
(1)  Any land-disturbing activity shall be considered grandfathered by the city and shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of this chapter provided: 
a.  A proffered or conditional zoning plan, zoning with a plan of development, preliminary or final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan, or any document determined by the locality to be equivalent thereto: (i) was approved by the city prior to July 1, 2012, (ii) provided a layout as defined in 9VAC25-870-10, (iii) will comply with the Part II C technical criteria of this chapter, and (iv) has not been subsequently modified or amended in a manner resulting in an increase in the amount of phosphorus leaving each point of discharge, and such that there is no increase in the volume or rate of runoff; 
b.  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and 
c.  Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014. 
(2)  City, state and federal projects shall be considered grandfathered by the VSMP authority and shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of this chapter provided: 
a.  There has been an obligation of city, state, or federal funding, in whole or in part, prior to July 1, 2012, or the department has approved a stormwater management plan prior to July 1, 2012. 
b.  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and 
c.  Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014. 
(3)  Land disturbing activities grandfathered under subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall remain subject to the Part II C technical criteria of this chapter for one additional state permit cycle. After such time, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to any new technical criteria adopted by the board. 
(4)  In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued for a project prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall be subject to the technical criteria of Part II C. 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at his discretion. 
(d)  In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued for a project prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall be subject to the technical requirements Part II C of the regulations, as adopted by City of Salem in subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  The administrator may grant exceptions to the technical requirements of Part II B or Part II C of the regulations, provided that (i) the exception is the minimum necessary to afford relief, (ii) reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed so that the intent of the Act, the regulations, and this article are preserved, (iii) granting the exception will not confer any special privileges that are denied in other similar circumstances, and (iv) exception requests are not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-imposed or self-created. Economic hardship alone is not sufficient reason to grant an exception from the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Exceptions to the requirement that the land-disturbing activity obtain required VSMP authority permit shall not be given by the administrator, nor shall the administrator approve the use of a BMP not found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse website, or any other control measure duly approved by the administrator. 
(2)  Exceptions to requirements for phosphorus reductions shall not be allowed unless offsite options otherwise permitted pursuant to 9VAC25-870-69 have been considered and found not available. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at their discretion. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014; Ord. of 10-12-2015) 
Sec. 30-146. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees to cover costs associated with the implementation of a land disturbance permit related to land disturbing activities and issuance of general permit coverage and VSMP authority permits shall be imposed in accordance with Table 1. When a site or sites has been purchased for development within a previously permitted common plan of development or sale, the applicant shall be subject to fees ("fee" column) in accordance with the disturbed acreage of their site or sites according to Table 1. 
Table 1: Fees for Permit Issuance 
Fee Type Fee Amount* General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than one acre and, if required by state law, detached single family residences within or without a common plan of development or sale with land-disturbance acreage equal to or greater than one acre and less than five acres) $290.00 General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than one acre and less than five acres, not to include detached single family residences within or without a common plan of development or sale) $2,700.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than five acres and less than ten acres) $3,400.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than ten acres and less than 50 acres) $4,500.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) $6,100.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 100 acres) $9,600.00  
* 28% of fee conveyed from the city to the department. 
(b)  Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements from the general permit issued by the state board shall be imposed in accordance with Table 2. If the permit modifications result in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the City of Salem, such reviews shall be subject to the fees set out in Table 2. The fee assessed shall be based on the total disturbed acreage of the site. In addition to the general permit modification fee, modifications resulting in an increase in total disturbed acreage shall pay the difference in the initial permit fee paid and the permit fee that would have applied for the total disturbed acreage in Table 1. 
Table 2: Fees for the Modification or Transfer of Registration Statements for the General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities 
Type of Permit Fee Amount General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than one acre) $20.00 General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than one and less than five acres) $200.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than five acres and less than ten acres) $250.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than ten acres and less than 50 acres) $300.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) $450.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 100 acres) $700.00  
(c)  The following annual permit maintenance shall be imposed in accordance with Table 3, including fees imposed on expired permits that have been administratively continued. With respect to the permit, these fees shall apply until the permit coverage is terminated. 
Table 3: Permit Maintenance Fees 
Type of Permit Fee Amount General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than one acre) $50.00 General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance equal to or greater than one acre and less than five acres) $400.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than five acres and less than ten acres) $500.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than ten acres and less than 50 acres) $650.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) $900.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater [than] 100 acres) $1,400.00  
    General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be paid annually to the City of Salem, by the anniversary date of general permit coverage. No permit will be reissued or automatically continued without payment of the required fee. General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be applied until a notice of termination is effective. 
(d)  The fees set forth in subsections (a) through (c) above, shall apply to: 
(1)  All persons seeking coverage under the non-VSMP and VSMP general permit. 
(2)  All permittees who request modifications to or transfers of their existing registration statement for coverage under a VSMP general permit. 
(3)  Persons whose coverage under the general permit has been revoked shall apply to the department for an individual permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities. 
(4)  Permit and permit coverage maintenance fees may apply to each general permit holder. 
(e)  No general permit application fees will be assessed to: 
(1)  Permittees who request minor modifications to general permits as defined in section 30-137 of this article. Permit modifications at the request of the permittee resulting in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the administrator shall not be exempt pursuant to this section. 
(2)  Permittees whose general permits are modified or amended at the initiative of the department, excluding errors in the registration statement identified by the administrator or errors related to the acreage of the site. 
(f)  All incomplete payments will be deemed as non-payments, and the applicant shall be notified of any incomplete payments. Interest may be charged for late payments at the underpayment rate set forth in § 58.1-15 of the Code of Virginia and is calculated on a monthly basis at the applicable periodic rate. A ten percent late payment fee shall be charged to any delinquent (over 90 days past due) account. The City of Salem shall be entitled to all remedies available under the Code of Virginia in collecting any past due amount. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
DIVISION 5. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS GENERAL CRITERIA 

Sec. 30-147. - General criteria. 
    The general criteria within this division apply to all land disturbance permits and are in addition to the technical criteria described in section 30-145. 
(1)  All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Maximizing the use of overland flow paths through vegetated areas. 
b.  Protection of inlet and outfall structures. 
c.  Elimination of erosive flow velocities. 
d.  Providing of underdrain systems, where applicable. 
(2)  Downstream properties and waterways shall be protected from damages from localized flooding due to increases in velocity, frequency, and peak flow rate of stormwater runoff in accordance with the minimum design standards set out in this article. 
(3)  If hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the plan approving authority reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to protect downstream properties and water resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff. All stormwater management discharges shall be to an adequate channel. 
(4)  Stormwater management facilities shall be designed to meet the following criteria: the ten- and five-year post-developed peak runoff rate from the development site shall not exceed the two- and one-year pre-developed peak runoff rate, respectively. 
(5)  Fencing around the stormwater management facilities shall be constructed to prevent unauthorized access to the facility. Fencing shall comply with VDOT and City of Salem standards and shall not conflict with subdivision and zoning ordinances standards: one foot to three feet from invert out to berm elevation - no fencing required; three feet and over from invert out to berm elevation - six-foot high fence - board on board or galvanized chain link. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
DIVISION 6. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION 

Sec. 30-148. - Notice of construction commencement and inspection. 
(a)  Pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:40 of the Code of Virginia, the administrator may require every land disturbance permit applicant or permittee, or any such person subject to VSMP authority permit requirements under this article, to furnish when requested such application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the effect of his discharge on the quality of state waters, or such other information as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this article. 
(b)  The administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator shall inspect the land-disturbing activity during construction for: 
(1)  Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan and specifications; 
(2)  Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan and specifications or agreement in lieu; 
(3)  Development, updating, and implementation of a stormwater pollution prevention plan, pollution prevention plan; and 
(4)  Development and implementation of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL. 
(c)  In addition, inspections shall comply with the latest version of the Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations, promulgated pursuant to Article 2.4 (§ 62.1-44.15:58) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. Enforcement of this division shall rest with the plan approving authority, which shall enforce the provisions of this division as a portion of its obligations for review, approval and inspection under the provisions of chapter 78 of this Code. 
(d)  The applicant must notify the plan approving authority in advance before the commencement of construction. It is critical that the erosion and sediment controls and stormwater management facilities are the first steps in the construction project. In addition, the applicant must notify the plan approving authority in advance of construction of critical components of the SWM facility. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the plan approving authority or a professional engineer or their designee who has been approved by the plan approving authority. 
(e)  If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No additional work shall proceed until all violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the plan approving authority. In addition, the person responsible for carrying out the plan may be required to provide inspection monitoring and reports to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan provide effective stormwater management. If the plan approving authority determines that there is a failure to comply with the plan, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan in accordance with division 6 of this article. 
(f)  The administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator may, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(g)  In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement or instrument, the administrator may also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land-disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-149. - Post-construction final inspection and as-built plans. 
(a)  All applicants are required to submit actual "as-built" plans for any stormwater management practices located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer. The certification must describe inspections performed of all aspects of the BMP construction, including surface as-built surveys, and geotechnical inspections during subsurface or backfilling, riser and principal spillway installation, bioretention soil placement and compaction activities. All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any violations that exist. 
(b)  A construction record drawing, or as-built drawing, must be submitted for review and approval prior to release of any performance bond, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement as is acceptable held by the City of Salem under the provisions of section 30-140. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
DIVISION 7. - MAINTENANCE INSPECTION AND REPAIR OF STORMWATER FACILITIES 

Sec. 30-150. - Maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities. 
    Post-construction inspections of stormwater management facilities required by the provisions of this article shall be conducted by the administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator pursuant to the locality's adopted and state board approved inspection program, and shall occur, at minimum, at least once every five years. 
    All stormwater management facilities must undergo inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this article and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include: removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes; grass cutting and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation and any repair or replacement of structural features. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the plan approving authority shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the maintenance covenant. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, the plan approving authority, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition, and recover the costs from the owner. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-151. - Records of maintenance and repair activities. 
    Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least five years. These records shall be made available to the plan approving authority during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
DIVISION 8. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 30-152. - Violations. 
    Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this article, the approved plans, or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this division and the Virginia Stormwater Management Law. Violations for which a penalty may be imposed under this subsection shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  No state permit registration; 
(2)  No SWPPP; 
(3)  Incomplete SWPPP; 
(4)  SWPPP not available for review; 
(5)  No approved erosion and sediment control or stormwater plan; 
(6)  Failure to install stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls; 
(7)  Stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls improperly installed or maintained; 
(8)  Operational deficiencies; 
(9)  Failure to conduct required inspections; 
(10)  Incomplete, improper, or missed inspections. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-153. - Notice of violation. 
    When the plan approving authority determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this article or determines there is an unauthorized discharge, it shall issue a written notice of violation delivered by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or by delivery at the site of the development activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. 
    The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  Description of the measures needed to comply with the permit conditions and a specified timeframe within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, a stop work order may be issued in accordance with section 30-154 or the permit may be revoked by the administrator. A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-154. - Stop work orders. 
    If a permittee fails to comply with a notice issued in accordance with section 30-155 within the time specified, the administrator may issue an order requiring the owner, permittee, person responsible for carrying out an approved plan, or the person conducting the land-disturbing activities without an approved plan or required permit to cease all land-disturbing activities until the violation of the permit has ceased, or an approved plan and required permits are obtained, and specified corrective measures have been completed. 
    Such orders shall become effective upon service on the person by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to the address specified in the permit application or by delivery at the site of the development activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. However, if the administrator finds that any such violation is grossly affecting or presents an imminent and substantial danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth or otherwise substantially impacting water quality; it may issue, without advance notice or hearing, an emergency order directing such person to cease immediately all land-disturbing activities on the site and shall provide an opportunity for a hearing, after reasonable notice as to the time and place thereof, to such person, to affirm, modify, amend, or cancel such emergency order. If a person who has been issued an order is not complying with the terms thereof, the administrator may institute a proceeding for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy in accordance with section 30-158. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-155. - Administrative enforcement procedures. 
    In addition to any other remedy provided by this article, if the administrator or his designee determines that there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this article, they may initiate such informal and/or formal administrative enforcement procedures in a manner that is consistent with the following steps except in the case of an emergency order described in section 30-154: 
(1)  Verbal warnings and inspections per division 6 of this article; 
(2)  Notice of violation per section 30-153 of this division; 
(3)  Stop work orders per section 30-154 of this division; and 
(4)  Where the administrator finds a failure to comply within the timeframe specified in the stop work order, the administrator may revoke the non-VSMP or VSMP permit; and 
(5)  Any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any rule, regulation, ordinance, order, approved standard or specification, or any permit condition issued by the administrator may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the Salem Circuit Court by the locality to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-156. - Civil and criminal penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article or who fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with any order of the administrator, shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $32,500.00 for each violation within the discretion of the court. Each day of violation of each requirement shall constitute a separate offense. 
(1)  The administrator may issue a summons for collection of the civil penalty and the action may be prosecuted in the appropriate court. 
(2)  In imposing a civil penalty pursuant to this subsection, the court may consider the degree of harm caused by the violation and also the economic benefit to the violator from noncompliance. 
(3)  Any civil penalties assessed by a court as a result of a summons issued by the locality shall be paid into the treasury of the City of Salem to be used for the purpose of minimizing, preventing, managing, or mitigating pollution of the waters of the locality and abating environmental pollution therein in such manner as the court may, by order, direct. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other civil or equitable remedy provided by this section or by law, any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, any order of the administrator, any condition of a permit, or any order of a court shall, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not more than 12 months or a fine of not less than $2,500.00 nor more than $32,500.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-157. - Restoration of lands. 
    Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition or in accordance with a notice of violation, stop work order, or permit requirements. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the plan approving authority may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall be covered by the performance bond, or become a lien upon the property until paid, or both. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-158. - Holds on certificate of occupation. 
    Occupation permits shall not be granted until corrections to all stormwater practices have been made in accordance with the approved plans, notice of violation, stop work order, or land disturbance permit requirements, and accepted by the plan approving authority. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-159. - Liability for damages. 
    Neither the approval of a stormwater management plan under the provisions of this division nor the compliance with the conditions of such plan shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to other persons or property or impose any liability upon the city from damage to other persons or property. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-160. - Hearings. 
(a)  Any permit applicant or permittee, or person subject to ordinance requirements, aggrieved by any action of the City of Salem taken without a formal hearing, or by inaction of the City of Salem, may demand in writing a formal hearing by the planning commission causing such grievance, provided a petition requesting such hearing is filed with the administrator within 30 days after notice of such action is given by the administrator. 
(b)  The hearings held under this section shall be conducted by the planning commission at a regular or special meeting of the planning commission, or by at least one member of the planning commission designated by the planning commission to conduct such hearings on behalf of the planning commission at any other time and place authorized by the planning commission. 
(c)  A verbatim record of the proceedings of such hearings shall be taken and filed with the planning commission. Depositions may be taken and read as in actions at law. 
(d)  The planning commission or its designated member, as the case may be, shall have power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, and at the request of any party shall issue such subpoenas. The failure of a witness without legal excuse to appear or to testify or to produce documents shall be acted upon by the local governing body, or its designated member, whose action may include the procurement of an order of enforcement from the circuit court. Witnesses who are subpoenaed shall receive the same fees and reimbursement for mileage as in civil actions. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 30-161. - Appeals. 
    Any permit applicant or permittee, or person subject to the requirements of this article, aggrieved by a permit or enforcement decision of the planning commission may file an appeal with the Salem Circuit Court if allowed by state law. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2014) 
Secs. 30-162-30-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ILLICIT STORM SEWER SYSTEM DISCHARGES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- It should be noted that this article become effective Dec. 6, 2007. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 30-181. - Statutory authority. 
(a)  The Virginia Stormwater Management Law ("Law"), Title 10.1, Chapter 6, Article 1.1 of the Code of Virginia, enables localities to adopt, by ordinance, a stormwater management program consistent with state regulations promulgated pursuant to the Law. 
(b)  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly known as the Clean Water Act, established the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program, which requires permits for discharges from municipal storm sewer systems into the waters of the United States. The Environmental Protection Agency has promulgated regulations implementing the NPDES program. 
(Ord. of 11-26-07) 
Sec. 30-182. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to establish minimum requirements to protect properties and the general health and safety of the public within this jurisdiction by regulation of illicit non-stormwater discharges to the storm sewer system. Therefore this article shall: 
(1)  Control the contribution of pollutants to storm sewer systems by stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity and the quality of stormwater discharged from sites of industrial activity; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges to storm sewer systems; 
(3)  Control discharges to storm sewer systems of spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater; 
(4)  Require compliance with conditions in ordinances, permits, contracts or orders; and 
(5)  Carry out all inspection, surveillance mapping and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with permit conditions, including prohibitions of illicit discharges to the storm sewer system. 
(b)  This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the storm sewer system in order to comply with the requirements of the NPDES program and the Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) program. 
(c)  The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the storm sewer system by stormwater discharges by any user; 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and illicit discharges to the storm sewer system; 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspections, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 11-26-07) 
Sec. 30-183. - Severability. 
    If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-26-07) 
Sec. 30-184. - Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements. 
    This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 30-185. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms used in this article shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Best management practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce pollutants from entering the storm sewer system or being discharged from the storm sewer system. BMPs include, but are not limited to, treatment methods and practices to control discharge of pollutants. 
    Clean Water Act (CWA). The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 22 United States Code 1251 et seq. 
    Discharge. Dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, pump, leak or place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, pumped leaked or placed by any means. 
    Illicit connection. Point source discharges to the City of Salem's storm sewer system or to the waters of the United States, which are not composed entirely of stormwater and are not authorized by a NPDES permit. Failure of an industrial facility or construction site to notify the City of Salem City Engineer of a connection to the city's storm sewer system constitutes an illicit connection. 
    Illicit discharge. Any discharge to the storm sewer system or to the waters of the United States that is not composed entirely of stormwater, with the exception of discharges which are exempt pursuant to section 30-186(b) of this article. Any discharge in violation of a NPDES or VPDES permit shall constitute an illicit discharge. 
    Industrial wastes. Liquid or wastes resulting from any process of industry, manufacture, trade or business, or from the development of any natural resource. 
    Inspection. Includes, but is not limited to, any on-site physical examination of all facilities and grounds which may discharge to a storm sewer system, a review of a all records on operation and maintenance of facilities and the results of any monitoring performed for compliance with state, federal and local regulations or permit conditions. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). Federal program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under sections 307, 318, 402 and 418 of the CWA. 
    Other wastes. Wastes that can adversely affect waters of the United States when discharged into those waters, including, but not limited to, garbage, refuse, lime, fertilizer, ashes, offal, tar, paint, solvents, petroleum products, antifreeze and chemicals. 
    Person. Any individual, firm, organization, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, organization or other entity, including governmental entities, or any combination thereof, or any agent or employee of any such person. 
    Sanitary sewer. A system of underground conduits located within the City of Salem that collect and deliver sanitary wastewater to a wastewater treatment plant. 
    Storm sewer system. The conveyance or system of conveyances located within the City of Salem, which are designed or used for collecting, storing or conveying stormwater or through which stormwater is collected, stored or conveyed, including, but not limited to, roads, streets, catch basins, drop inlets, curbs, gutters, ditches, pipes, lakes, ponds, man-made channels, storm drains, outfalls, retention, detention and infiltration basins and other facilities. 
    Stormwater. Runoff from rain, snow, sleet or other precipitation, surface runoff and drainage. 
    Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES). The permit issued by the State of Virginia for imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements pursuant to the CWA. 
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGE TO THE STORM SEWER SYSTEM 

Sec. 30-186. - Prohibited discharge to the storm sewer system. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article to: 
(1)  Discharge, or cause or allow to be discharged, sewage, industrial wastes or solvents, or other wastes into the storm sewer system, or any component thereof, or onto driveways, sidewalks, parking lots or other areas draining to the storm sewer system, or to a natural drainage way or stream. 
(2)  Connect, or cause or allow to be connected, any sanitary sewer to the storm sewer system, including any sanitary sewer connected to the storm sewer system as of the date of the adoption of this article. 
(3)  Connect, or cause or allow to be connected to the storm sewer system, without a valid VPDES or NPDES permit, any structure that conveys any liquid other than stormwater or discharges listed in subsection (b), including, but not limited to, pipes, drains, sanitary sewer lines, washing machine drains or floor drains. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (c), the following activities shall not be in violation of this article: 
(1)  Water line flushing; 
(2)  Landscape irrigation; 
(3)  Diverted stream flows or rising groundwater; 
(4)  Infiltration of uncontaminated groundwater; 
(5)  Pumping of uncontaminated groundwater; 
(6)  Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl spaces or footing drains; 
(7)  Air conditioning condensation; 
(8)  Lawn watering; 
(9)  Residential car washing; 
(10)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharge; 
(11)  Discharges or flows from emergency fire fighting activities and emergency respond activities employing BMPs; 
(12)  Any activity authorized by a valid VPDES or NPDES permit or Virginia Pollution Abatement (VPA) permit. 
(c)  In the event any of the activities listed in subsection (b) are found to be the cause of pollutants to be discharged into the storm sewer system, the city manager or his designee shall so notify the person performing such activities, and shall order that such activities be ceased or conducted in such a manner as to avoid the discharge of pollutants into the storm sewer system. The failure to comply with any such order shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-26-07) 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTIONS AND MONITORING 

Sec. 30-187. - Inspections and monitoring. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to inspect and monitor discharges and sources of potential discharge to the storm sewer system to ensure compliance with this article. The property owner shall grant within ten business days, after given notice and the opportunity to accompany the inspection, the plan approving authority the right to enter the property for inspection and monitoring of such discharges or sources of potential discharge. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall also have the authority to initiate enforcement actions in accordance with division 5 of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-26-07) 
DIVISION 5. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 30-188. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any owner, agent or person who knowingly violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that such violation is committed, and each day that such violation is permitted to remain uncorrected, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who, intentionally or otherwise, commits any of the acts prohibited by division 3 of this article shall be liable to the City of Salem for all costs of containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and disposal of any substance unlawfully discharged into the storm sewer system. 
(c)  In addition to criminal penalties outlined in section 30-188(a), any person who, intentionally or otherwise, violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 for each day that a violation of this article continues. The court assessing such penalties, may, at its discretion, order such penalties to be paid into the treasury of the City of Salem for the purposes of abating, preventing or mitigating environmental pollution. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this article, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or in equity, shall be no defense to any such action. 
(e)  The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative, not exclusive; and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted. 
(Ord. of 11-26-07) 
Chapter 34 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Feb. 25, 2008, amended and reordained ch. 34 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly chapter 34 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1969, §§ 10-1-10-41. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; regulation of teenage dancehalls, § 10-36; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; amendments to building code, § 18-38; massage parlor permit, § 22-166 et seq.; environment, ch. 30; open burning, § 30-49; health and sanitation, ch. 38; law enforcement, ch. 46; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; calling firefighting equipment without just cause, § 58-7; automatic police or fire alarm dialing systems, § 58-11; signs, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 70; service charge on certain dwellings for police and fire protection and for collection and disposal of refuse, § 82-7; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; authority of members of fire department to direct traffic, § 86-67; utilities, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Composition of fire department. 
    The city fire department shall consist of such officers and employees as shall be authorized by the council. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Sec. 34-2. - Management and control of fire department. 
    The fire department shall be subject to the management and control of the city manager. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Sec. 34-3. - Entry to room where city fire apparatus is kept. 
    No person other than the members of the fire department and the city officers shall enter the room in which is kept the engines and fire apparatus belonging to the city, except by invitation or permission of the city officers, or members of the fire department. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Sec. 34-4. - Fire lines. 
    The fire department and city police officers may stretch lines around any fire area and no person shall be allowed within this enclosure except persons connected with the fire department, police department and city officials. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Sec. 34-5. - Liability for expenses incurred in fighting certain fires. 
    Any person who negligently, carelessly or intentionally, without using reasonable care and precaution to prevent its escape, starts a fire which burns on forest land, brush land or waste land or burns property of any kind, shall, in addition to any other penalty imposed by the provision of this Code and other ordinances of the city, be liable for the full amount of expenses incurred by the city in fighting or extinguishing such fire. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Sec. 34-6. - Authority of fire-fighting officials. 
    While the fire department is in the process of answering a fire alarm or extinguishing a fire, the fire chief or other officer in charge at that time shall have the authority to maintain order at the fire or its vicinity, direct the actions of the firefighters at the fire, keep bystanders or other persons at a safe distance from the fire and fire equipment, facilitate the speedy movement and operation of fire-fighting equipment and firefighters and, until the arrival of a police officer, direct and control traffic, in person or by deputy, and facilitate the movement of traffic. The fire chief or other officer in charge shall display his firefighter's badge or other proper means of identification. Any person refusing to obey the orders of the fire chief or other officer in charge at that time shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08; Ord. of 1-9-2017) 
Sec. 34-7. - Damage or injury to fire department equipment or personnel. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to damage or deface any fire department vehicle at any time, or to injure, or attempt to injure or conspire to injure fire department personnel while such personnel are in the performance of departmental duties. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Sec. 34-8. - Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire or rescue vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without proper authorization from the fire department officer in charge of said vehicle, to cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department vehicle, whether such vehicle is in motion or at rest, or to sound any warning device thereon, or to manipulate, tamper with or destroy or attempt to manipulate, tamper with or destroy any lever, valve, switch, starting device, brake, pump or any equipment, protective clothing or tool, on or a part of such fire department vehicle. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Sec. 34-9. - Interference with operations. 
    It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel of any fire or rescue emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any operation of the department of fire and rescue service. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Sec. 34-10. - Impersonating firefighter, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to impersonate, with the intent to make another believe he/she is, a firefighter, fire marshal or other fire official. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Sec. 34-11. - Penalty. 
    Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the sections of this chapter or any provisions of the Fire Prevention Code adopted as provided in section 34-61, shall separately for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a violation of this chapter, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor. A violation of this chapter shall be construed to be an infringement, breach, or failure to comply with any provision of this chapter or any order made thereunder, or any act of building in violation of any detailed statement, specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or any failure to comply with such an order within the time fixed therein. Each day that a violation continues after a service of notice as provided for in this Code shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Secs. 34-12-34-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE MARSHAL 

Sec. 34-36. - Office created; appointment. 
    The office of city fire marshal is hereby created. The city council may, upon the recommendation of the city manager, appoint the city fire marshal and assistant fire marshals whose powers and duties shall be as set forth in this chapter and as authorized by the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Sec. 34-37. - Oath of office. 
    The city fire marshal, assistant fire marshals and members of the fire marshal's staff, before entering upon their duties, shall respectively, take an oath, before any officer authorized to administer oaths, faithfully to discharge the duties of their office. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Sec. 34-38. - Authority of fire marshal and assistant fire marshals. 
    The city fire marshal and his/her assistants, who shall be appointed by the city council pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 27-36, shall have the authority to arrest, to procure and serve warrants and to issue summonses in the manner authorized by general law for violations of this chapter and all fire safety, fire prevention and related ordinances, as permitted by Code of Virginia, § 27-34.2. 
    The city fire marshal and those assistants appointed pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 27-36 who have met the training requirements outlined in the Code of Virginia, § 27-34.2:1 shall have the same police powers as a police officer or law enforcement officer. The investigation and prosecution of all offenses involving hazardous materials, fires, fire bombings, bombings, attempts or threats to commit such offenses, false alarms relating to such offenses, possession and manufacture of explosive devices, substances and fire bombs shall be the responsibility of the fire marshal and the city police department, as permitted by Code of Virginia, § 27-34.2:1. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Sec. 34-39. - Right of entry to investigate releases of hazardous materials, hazardous waste, or regulated substances. 
    The fire marshal shall have the right to enter upon any property from which a release of any hazardous materials, hazardous waste, or regulated substances, as defined by state law, has occurred or is reasonably suspected to have occurred and which has entered into the groundwater, surface water or soils of the city, in order to investigate the extent and cause of any such release. If, in undertaking such an investigation, the fire marshal makes an affidavit under oath that the origin or cause of any such release is undetermined and that he has been refused admittance to the property, or is unable to gain permission to enter the property, any magistrate of the city may issue an investigation warrant to the fire marshal authorizing him to enter such property for the purpose of determining the origin and source of the release. If the fire marshal, after gaining access to any property pursuant to such investigation warrant, has probable cause to believe that the release was caused by any act constituting a criminal offense, he shall discontinue the investigation until a search warrant has been obtained or consent to conduct the search has otherwise been given. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Sec. 34-40. - Fire hydrants. 
    During the site and/or construction plans review process for construction or change in use of any building or structure, the fire official shall have the authority to require the installation of fire hydrants, as he deems necessary, to have water available for firefighting purposes prior to the use of combustible materials in construction being commenced on any floor above the first or ground floor level. Such hydrants shall be accessible to firefighting apparatus at the time they are installed and at all times thereafter. The fire official will determine the need for fire hydrants based on the use and size of the structure involved and the availability of water in the area of the property. The number of fire hydrants, their placement and the desired flow shall be determined by regulations established from nationally recognized standards. 
(Ord. of 1-9-2017) 
Sec. 34-41. - Authority to take photographs. 
    The fire official or his duly authorized representative is authorized to make sketches and take photographs to document conditions he observes that he believes are violations of the provisions of this Code. Subsequent to a fire, explosion, or other emergency, photographs may be taken as are necessary to adequately depict the conditions of the property for the purpose of investigation. No person shall prevent the fire official from making sketches or taking photographs. 
(Ord. of 1-9-2017) 
Sec. 34-42. - Rights of the fire marshal. 
    The city fire marshal shall have all other rights and authorities as provided in Chapter 3 of Title 27 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. of 1-9-2017) 
Secs. 34-43-34-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 34-61. - Adoption. 
    The City of Salem adopts and shall enforce, in its entirety, the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code promulgated by the Board of Housing and Community Development of the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 27-98. The provisions of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code and Chapter 34 of this Code shall be enforced by the fire marshal, or his duly authorized representative from the fire marshal's office. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Sec. 34-62. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms, as used in the Fire Prevention Code adopted by section 34-61, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
(1)  Wherever the words "name of jurisdiction" is used, they shall mean the City of Salem. 
(2)  Wherever the term "fire official" is used, it shall mean the fire marshal, or his/her duly authorized representative. 
(3)  Wherever the term "legal counsel of the municipality" is used, it shall mean the city attorney of the city. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08) 
Sec. 34-63. - Amendments. 
    The Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code is hereby amended and changed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 27-97, in the following respects: 
107.2 Permits Required. Delete and substitute changes to table 107.2 as follows: 
Table 107.2. 
OPERATIONAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 
Description Permit 
Required 
(yes or no) Permit 
Fee Inspection 
Fee Aerosol products. An operational permit is required to manufacture, store or handle an aggregate quantity of Level 2 or Level 3 aerosol products in excess of 500 (227 kg) net weight. No Amusement buildings. An operational permit is required to operate a special amusement building. No Aviation facilities. An operational permit is required to use a Group H or Group S occupancy for aircraft servicing or repair and aircraft fuel-servicing vehicles. Additional permits required by other sections of this Code include, but are not limited to, hot work, hazardous materials and flammable or combustible finishes. No Carnivals and fairs. An operational permit is required to conduct a carnival or fair. No Cellulose nitrate film. An operational permit is required to store, handle or use cellulose nitrate film in a Group A occupancy. No Combustible dust-producing operations. An operational permit is required to operate a grain elevator, flour starch mill, feed mill, or a plant pulverizing aluminum, coal, cocoa, magnesium, spices or sugar, or other operations producing combustible dusts as defined in Chapter 2. No Combustible fibers. An operational permit is required for the storage and handling of combustible fibers in quantities greater than 100 cubic feet (2.8 m3). 
  Exception: An operational permit is not required for agricultural storage. No Compressed gas. An operational permit is required for the storage, use or handling at normal temperature and pressure (NTP) of compressed gases in excess of the amounts listed below. No   Exception: Vehicles equipped for and using compressed gas as a fuel for propelling the vehicle. PERMIT AMOUNT FOR COMPRESSED GASES TYPE OF GAS AMOUNT
(cubic feet at NTP) Corrosive 200 Flammable 
 (except cryogenic fluids and liquefied petroleum gases) 200 Highly toxic Any amount Inert and simple asphyxiant 6,000 Oxidizing (including oxygen) 504 Toxic Any amount For SI: 1 cubic foot = 0.02832 m3 Covered mall buildings. An operational permit is required for: No  1. The placement of retail fixtures and displays, concession equipment, displays ofhighly combustible goods and similar items in the mall.  2. The display of liquid or gas fired equipment in the mall.  3. The use of open-flame or flame-producing equipment in the mall. Cryogenic fluids. An operational permit is required to produce, store transport on site, use, handle or dispense cryogenic fluids in excess of the amounts listed below. No   Exception: Operational permits are not required for vehicles equipped for andusing cryogenic fluids as a fuel for propelling the vehicle or for refrigerating the lading. PERMIT AMOUNTS FOR CRYOGENIC GASES 
TYPE OF CRYOGENIC FLUID INSIDE BUILDING OUTSIDE BUILDING (gallons) (gallons) Flammable More than 1 60 Inert 60 500 Oxidizing (includes oxygen) 10 50 Physical or health hazard 
not indicated above Any amount Any amount For SI: 1 gallon = 3.785 L. Cutting and welding. An operational permit is required to conduct cutting or welding operations within the jurisdiction. No Dry cleaning plants. An operational permit is required to engage in the business of dry cleaning or to change to a more hazardous cleaning solvent used in existing dry cleaning equipment. No Exhibits and trade shows. An operational permit is required to operate exhibits and trade shows. No Explosives, fireworks and pyrotechnics. An operational permit is required for the manufacture, storage, handling, sale or use of any quantity of explosive, explosive material, fireworks, pyrotechnic special effects or pyrotechnic special effects material within the scope of Chapter 56. 
  Exception: Storage in Group R-3 or R-5 occupancies of smokeless propellant, black powder and small arms primers for personal use, not for resale and in accordance with quantity limitations and conditions set forth in Section 5601.1, exception numbers four and twelve. Yes 100.00 No Fire hydrants and valves. An operational permit is required to use or operate fire hydrants or valves intended for fire suppression purposes that are installed on water systems and accessible to a fire apparatus access road that is open to or generally used by the public. No   Exception: An operational permit is not required for authorized employees of thewater company that supplies the system or the fire department to use or operate fire hydrants or valves. Flammable and combustible liquids. An operational permit is required: No  1. To use or operate a pipeline for the transportation within facilities of flammable or combustible liquids. This requirement shall not apply to the offsite transportation in pipelines regulated by the Department of Transportation (DOTn) nor does it apply to piping systems.  2. To store, handle or use Class I liquids in excess of 5 gallons (19 L) in a building or in excess of 10 gallons (37.9 L) outside of a building, except that a permit is not required for the following:  2.1. The storage or use of Class I liquids in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, mobile power plant or mobile heating plant, unless such storage, in the opinion on the fire official, would cause an unsafe condition.  2.2. The storage or use of paints, oils, varnishes or similar flammable mixtures when such liquids are stored for maintenance, painting or similar purposes for a period of not more than 30 days.  3. To store, handle or use Class II or Class IIIA liquids in excess of 25 gallons (95 L) in a building or in excess of 60 gallons (227 L) outside a building, except for fuel oil used in connection with oil-burning equipment.  4. To remove Class I or Class II liquids from an underground storage tank used for fueling motor vehicles by any means other than the approved, stationary on-site pumps normally used for dispensing purposes.  5. To operate tank vehicles, equipment, tanks, plants, terminals, wells, fuel-dispensing stations, refineries, distilleries and similar facilities where flammable and combustible liquids are produced, processed, transported, stored, dispensed or used.  6. To install, alter, remove, abandon, place temporarily out of service (for more than 90 days) or otherwise dispose of an underground, protected above-ground flammable or combustible liquid tank.  7. To change the type of contents stored in a flammable or combustible liquid tank to a material which poses a greater hazard than that for which the tank was designed and constructed.  8. To manufacture, process, blend or refine flammable or combustible liquids. Floor finishing. An operational permit is required for floor finishing or surfacing operations exceeding 350 square feet (33 m2) using Class I or Class II liquids. No Fruit and crop ripening. An operational permit is required to operate a fruit- or crop-ripening facility or conduct a fruit-ripening process using ethylene gas. No Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging. An operational permit is required to operate a business of fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging and to maintain a room, vault or chamber in which a toxic or flammable fumigant is used. No Hazardous materials. An operational permit is required to store, transport on site, dispense, use or handle hazardous materials in excess of the amounts listed below. No PERMIT AMOUNTS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TYPE OF MATERIAL AMOUNT Combustible liquids See flammable and combustible liquids Corrosive materials  Gases See compressed gases  Liquids 55 gallons  Solids 1,000 pounds Explosive materials See explosives Flammable materials  Gases See compressed gases  Liquids See flammable and combustible liquids  Solids 100 pounds Highly toxic materials  Gases See compressed gases  Liquids Any amount  Solids Any amount Oxidizing materials  Gases See compressed gases  Liquids   Class 4 Any amount   Class 3 1 gallon   Class 2 10 gallons   Class 1 55 gallons  Solids   Class 4 Any amount   Class 3 10 pounds   Class 2 100 pounds   Class 1 500 pounds Organic peroxides  Liquids   Class I Any amount   Class II Any amount   Class III 1 gallon   Class IV 2 gallons   Class V No permit required  Solids   Class I Any amount   Class II Any amount   Class III 10 pounds   Class IV 20 pounds   Class V No permit required Pyrophoric materials  Gases >See compressed gases  Liquids Any amount  Solids Any amount Toxic materials  Gases See compressed gases  Liquids 10 gallons  Solids 100 pounds Unstable (reactive) materials  Liquids   Class 4 Any amount   Class 3 Any amount   Class 2 5 gallons   Class 1 10 gallons  Solids   Class 4 Any amount   Class 3 Any amount   Class 2 50 pounds   Class 1 100 pounds Water-reactive materials  Liquids   Class 3 Any amount   Class 2 5 gallons   Class 1 55 gallons  Solids   Class 3 Any amount   Class 2 50 pounds   Class 1 500 pounds For SI: 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1 pound = 0.454 kg. HPM facilities. An operational permit is required to store, handle or use hazardous production materials. No High piled storage. An operational permit is required to use a building or portion thereof as a high-piled storage area exceeding 500 square feet (46 m2). No Hot work operations. An operational permit is required for hot work including, but not limited to: No  1. Public exhibitions and demonstrations where hot work is conducted.  2. Use of portable hot work equipment inside a structure.     Exception: Work that is conducted under a construction permit.  3. Fixed-site hot work equipment such as welding booths  4. Hot work conducted within a hazardous fire area.  5. Application of roof coverings with the use of an open-flame device.  6. When approved, the fire official shall issue a permit to carry out Hot Work Program. This program allows approved personnel to regulate their facility's hot work operations. The approved personnel shall be trained in the fire safety aspects denoted in this chapter and shall be responsible for issuing permits requiring compliance with the requirements found in this chapter. 
These permits shall be issued only to their employees or hot work operations under their supervision. Industrial ovens. An operation permit is required for operation of industrial ovens regulated by Chapter 30. No Lumber yards and woodworking plants. An operational permit is required for the storage or processing of lumber exceeding 100,000 board feet (8,333 ft3) (236 m3). No Liquid-or gas-fueled vehicles or equipment in assembly buildings. An operational permit is required to display, operate or demonstrate liquid-or gas-fueled vehicles or equipment in assembly buildings. No LP-gas. An operational permit is required for: No  1. Storage and use of LP-gas.     Exception: An operational permit is not required for individual containers with a 500 gallon (1893 L) water capacity or less or multiple container systems having an aggregate quantity not exceeding 500 gallons (1893 L), serving occupancies in Group R-3.  2. Operation of cargo tankers that transport LP-gas. Magnesium. An operational permit is required to melt, cast, heat treat or grind more than 10 pounds (4.54 kg) of magnesium. No Miscellaneous combustible storage. An operational permit is required to store in any building or upon any premises in excess of 2,500 cubic feet (71 m3) gross volume of combustible empty packing cases, boxes, barrels or similar containers, rubber tires, rubber, cork or similar combustible materials. No Bonfire. An operational permit is required for kindling or maintaining a bonfire on any public street, alley, road, or other public or private ground. Instructions and stipulations of the permit shall be adhered to. 
  Exception: Recreational fires. Yes No No Open flames and candles. An operational permit is required to use open flames or candles in connection with assembly areas, dining areas of restaurants or drinking establishments. No Open flames and torches. An operational permit is required to remove paint with a torch; or to use a torch or open-flame device in a wildfire risk area. No Organic coatings. An operational permit is required for any organic-coating manufacturing operation producing more than 1 gallon (4 L) of an organic coating in one day. No Places of assembly. An operational permit is required to operate a place of assembly. No Private fire hydrants. An operational permit is required for the removal from service, use or operation of private fire hydrants. 
  Exception: An operational permit is not required for private industry with trained maintenance personnel, private fire brigade or fire departments to maintain, test use private hydrants. No Pyrotechnic special effects material. An operational permit is required for use and handling of pyrotechnic special effects material. No Pyroxylin plastics. An operational permit is required for storage or handling of more than 25 pounds (11 kg) of cellulose nitrate (pyroxylin) plastics and for the assembly or manufacture of articles involving pyroxylin plastics. No Refrigeration equipment. An operational permit is required to operate a mechanical refrigeration unit or system regulated by Chapter 6. No Repair garages and service stations. An operational permit is required for operation of repair garages and automotive, marine and fleet service stations. No Rooftop heliports. An operational permit is required for the operation of a rooftop heliport. No Spraying or dipping. An operational permit is required to conduct a spraying or dipping operation utilizing flammable or combustible liquids or the application of combustible powders regulated by Chapter 24. No Storage of scrap tires and tire byproducts. An operational permit is required to establish, conduct or maintain storage of scrap tires and tire byproducts that exceed 2,500 cubic feet (71 m3) of total volume of scrap tires and for indoor storage of tires and tire byproducts. No Temporary membrane structures and tents. An operational permit is required to operate an air-supported temporary membrane structure or a tent. No   Exceptions:   1. Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes.   2. Tents and air-supported structures that cover an area of 900 square feet (84 m2) or less, including all connecting areas or spaces with a common means of egress or entrance and with an occupant load of 50 or less persons. Tire-rebuilding plants. An operational permit is required for the operation and maintenance of a tire-rebuilding plant No Waste handling. An operational permit is required for the operation of wrecking yards, junk yards and waste material-handling facilities. No Wood products. An operational permit is required to store chips, hogged material, lumber or plywood in excess of 200 cubic feet (6m3). No  
307.1 General. Delete and substitute section 307.1 as follows: 
A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintain a bonfire or recreational fire or the use of portable outdoor fireplace unless conducted in accordance with Sections 307.1.1 through 307.5. 
307.1.1 Prohibited open burning. Delete and substitute Section 307.1.1 as follows: 
All open burning within the limits of the city shall be prohibited. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Open burning for training and instruction of government and public fire fighters under the supervision of the designated official. 
2.  Open burning for the destruction of any combustible liquid or gaseous material by burning in a flare or flare stack. 
3.  Open burning for the disposal of hazardous or toxic materials where the fire code official and the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality determine that there is no practical alternative method of disposal. 
4.  Open burning for the disposal of debris or to remedy an emergency resulting from a disaster situation and when operating under an emergency declaration of the federal, state, or local government. 
307.3 Extinguishment authority. Delete and substitute section 307.3 as follows: 
When a bonfire, recreational fire or the use of a portable outdoor fireplace creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation, or a required permit for a bonfire has not been obtained, the fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment of any burning operation. 
307.4 Location. Delete and substitute section 307.4 as follows: 
The location for a bonfire shall not be less than 50 feet from any structure or combustible material. The location for a recreational fire shall not be less than 25 feet from any structure or combustible material. Provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to a structure prior to ignition. 
307.4.1.1 Bonfire size and duration; materials. Add Subsection 307.4.1.1 as follows: 
1.  A bonfire shall not exceed 5'x5' in size and shall not burn longer than three (3) hours. 
2.  Fuel for a bonfire shall consist only of seasoned dry firewood and shall be ignited with a small quantity of paper. The fire shall not be utilized for waste disposal purposes, and the fuel shall be chosen to minimize the generation of smoke and air contaminants. 
307.4.2.1 Recreational Fire size; materials. Add Subsection 307.4.2.1 as follows: 
1.  A recreational fire shall not exceed 3'x3' in size and two (2) feet in height. 
2.  Fuel for a recreational fire shall consist only of seasoned dry firewood and shall be ignited with a small quantity of paper. The fire shall not be utilized for waste disposal purposes, and the fuel shall be chosen to minimize the generation of smoke and air contaminants. 
307.4.3 Portable outdoor fireplaces. Delete exception. 
307.5 Attendance. Delete and substitute Section 307.5 as follows: 
Bonfires, recreational fires and the use of portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08; Ord. of 1-9-2017) 
Secs. 34-64-34-80. - Reserved. 
Chapter 38 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to regulate health, safety and general welfare (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-839) and to regulate beverages, foods and sanitation of food establishments (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-853) adopted, § 2.2. 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14; environment, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; signs, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 90; vegetation, ch. 94. 
State Law reference- Certain local regulations pertaining to food and beverage containers prohibited, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1425; power to prevent injury or annoyance from anything dangerous, offensive or unhealthy, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-14(5); state funds for drug enforcement, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-131.12; local ordinances regulating smoking, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-291.4; regulation of well covers, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-318; inspection warrant for inspecting or testing for toxic substances, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-393 et seq.; sanitation in transportation terminals, festivals, fairs, service stations, etc., Code of Virginia, § 32.1-202. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FOOD[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Power to regulate milk, food and food products (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-853) adopted, § 2.2. 
State Law reference- Sanitary requirements for food and food establishments, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-365 et seq.; restaurants, Code of Virginia, § 35.1-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-36. - Display of foods for human consumption upon sidewalks, etc. 
    No foods for human consumption, including meats and fish, shall be displayed upon the sidewalks of the city or in any doors opening on sidewalks, unless such foods shall be displayed on adequately elevated and removable racks or platforms and otherwise properly protected. 
(Code 1969, § 11-1) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
Secs. 38-37-38-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Restaurant license, § 22-67; tax on prepared food and beverages, § 82-101 et seq. 
State Law reference- Sanitary requirements for food and food establishments, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-365 et seq.; restaurants, Code of Virginia, § 35.1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 38-56. - Protection from contamination of foodstuffs displayed or stored. 
    No establishment where foods are manufactured, prepared, packed, handled, stored, offered for sale, sold, consumed or distributed, including hotels, restaurants and other public eating houses, bakeries, ice cream parlors or manufacturers of ice cream, groceries, markets, retail or wholesale stores, or manufacturers of any of the aforementioned articles, shall display or store any foodstuff in the city unless such foodstuff so displayed or stored shall be properly protected from flies, dogs, insects, animals or from any other sources of contamination. 
(Code 1969, § 11-2) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14. 
Sec. 38-57. - Sanitary condition required. 
    The proprietor of any food establishment, as referred to in section 38-56, shall keep such food establishment in a clean, wholesome and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1969, § 11-3) 
Sec. 38-58. - Cleanliness of employees. 
    Employees in any food establishment, as referred to in section 38-56, shall, when engaged in the preparation, handling or disposition of foods, be clean in their person and wear clean garments. 
(Code 1969, § 11-4) 
Sec. 38-59. - Toilets and washing facilities for employees. 
    The proprietor of any food establishment, as referred to in section 38-56, shall provide adequate toilet and washing facilities for his employees of a type approved by appropriate authority. 
(Code 1969, § 11-5) 
Secs. 38-60-38-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FOOD HANDLER'S CERTIFICATE OF HEALTH 

Sec. 38-76. - Prerequisite to working in eating or drinking establishment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to work in an eating or drinking establishment in the city where food or drinks are offered for sale and consumption on the premises, except where the services performed are in a supervisory or clerical capacity and where such work does not bring one in contact with food or drinks or their containers, unless such person holds a food handler's certificate of health, issued by the health director, as provided in this division. 
(Code 1969, § 11-6) 
Sec. 38-77. - Chest X-ray and blood serology test; issuance. 
    A certificate of health shall be issued only after a chest X-ray and blood serology test of the applicant for the certificate of health, as required in section 38-76, has been made by a qualified physician, and a report thereof transmitted to the health director, who shall then determine whether or not the certificate of health shall be issued. 
(Code 1969, § 11-7) 
Sec. 38-78. - Revocation or suspension. 
    Food handlers' certificates of health issued under this division may at any time be revoked or suspended by the health director for just cause. 
(Code 1969, § 11-8) 
Sec. 38-79. - Transfer. 
    Food handlers' certificates of health issued under this division shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1969, § 11-9) 
Sec. 38-80. - Renewal. 
    Food handlers' certificates of health issued under this division shall be renewed annually, with the same requirements as for the original issuance. 
(Code 1969, § 11-10) 
Sec. 38-81. - Employment of person without certificate of health. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, manager or person in control of any eating or drinking establishment in the city where food or drinks are offered for sale or consumption on the premises to employ or permit any person to work in any such eating or drinking establishment, except in a supervisory or clerical capacity doing work not bringing such person in contact with food or drinks, unless there has been issued to, and such person has in his possession, a food handler's certificate of health as required by section 38-76. 
(Code 1969, § 11-11) 
Sec. 38-82. - Periodic check of establishments. 
    The health director shall be responsible for making a periodic check of the eating and drinking establishments to see that the employees thereof conform to the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1969, § 11-12) 
Chapter 42 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 58. 
State Law reference- Human rights ordinances and commissions on human rights, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-37.3:8; discrimination in appointment of deputies and employees of constitutional officers, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-48.1; fair housing ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Virginia Fair Housing Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-36. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board means the fair housing board. 
    Elderliness means an individual who has attained his 55th birthday. 
    Familial status means one or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years being domiciled with (i) a parent or other person having legal custody of such individual or individuals, or (ii) the designee of such parent or other person having custody with the written permission of such parent or other person. The term "familial status" also includes any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years. For purposes of this section, "in the process of securing legal custody" means having filed an appropriate petition to obtain legal custody of such minor in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
    Housing means any building, structure or facility, or portion thereof, located in the city that is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as the home, residence or sleeping place of one or more individuals, groups or families, and any vacant land located in the city offered for sale or lease for the purpose of constructing or locating such building, structure or facility, including any interest in housing as so defined, fee simple, leasehold or other. 
    Lending institution means any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association, credit union, mortgage lender or any other person regularly engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans. 
    Person in the business of building, developing, selling, renting or leasing housing means any person who, within the preceding 12 months, has participated as principal or real estate broker, real estate salesman or rental agent in three or more transactions involving the sale, lease or rental of any housing. 
    Personal residence means a building or structure containing living quarters and occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four individuals, four groups or four families living independently of each other and used by the owner thereof as a bona fide residence for himself and any member of his family forming his household. 
    Real estate broker means a person doing business in the city who is the holder of a real estate broker's license issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 54.1-2100 et seq. 
    Real estate salesperson means a person doing business in the city who is the holder of a real estate salesperson's license issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 54.1-2100 et seq. 
(Code 1969, §§ 13A-1, 13A-4) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-37. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 42-38(a)(3), this article shall not apply to any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that such private individual does not own more than three single-family houses at any one time. In the case of the sale of any single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of the sale or who was not the most recent resident of the house prior to sale, the exemption granted shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be exempt from the application of this article only if the house is sold or rented (i) without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, salesperson, or of the facilities or the services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee, independent contractor, or agent of any broker, agent, salesperson, or person; and (ii) without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this article. However, nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other professional assistance as is necessary to perfect or transfer the title. This exemption shall not apply to or inure to the benefit of any licensee of the real estate board, regardless of whether the licensee is acting in his personal or professional capacity. 
(b)  Except for section 42-38(a)(3), this article shall not apply to rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preferences to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap. Nor shall anything in this article apply to a private membership club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. Nor, where matters of personal privacy are involved, shall anything in this article be construed to prohibit any private, state-owned or state-supported educational institution, hospital, nursing home, religious or correctional institution from requiring that persons of both sexes not occupy any single-family residence or room or unit of dwellings or other buildings, or restrooms in such room or unit in dwellings or other buildings, which it owns or operates. 
(d)  Nothing in this article prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in federal law. 
(e)  It shall not be unlawful under this article for any owner to deny or limit the rental of housing to persons who pose a clear and present threat of substantial harm to others or to the dwelling itself. 
(f)  A rental application may require disclosure by the applicant of any criminal convictions, and the owner or managing agent may require as a condition of acceptance of the rental application that the applicant consent in writing to a criminal record check to verify the disclosures made by the applicant in the rental application. The owner or managing agent may collect from the applicant monies to reimburse the owner or managing agent for the exact amount of the out-of-pocket costs for such criminal record checks. Nothing in this article shall require an owner or managing agent to rent a dwelling to an individual who, based on a prior record of criminal convictions involving harm to persons or property, would constitute a clear and present threat to the health or safety of other individuals. 
(g)  Nothing in this article limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state or federal restriction regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. Owners or managing agents of dwellings may develop and implement reasonable occupancy and safety standards based on factors such as the number and size of sleeping areas or bedrooms and overall size of a dwelling unit, so long as the standards do not violate local, state or federal restrictions. Nothing in this article prohibits the rental application or similar document from requiring information concerning the number, ages, sex and familial relationship of the applicants and the dwelling's intended occupants. 
(Code 1969, § 13A-2(b)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.2. 
Sec. 42-38. - Unlawful discriminatory housing practices. 
(a)  It shall be an unlawful discriminatory housing practice for any person to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, or familial status. 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in the connection therewith to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness or familial status. 
(3)  Make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status or handicap. The use of words or symbols associated with a particular religion, national origin, sex or race shall be prima facie evidence of an illegal preference under this article, which shall not be overcome by a general disclaimer. 
(4)  Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status or handicap that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  Deny any person access to membership in or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status or handicap. 
(6)  Include in any transfer, sale, rental or lease of housing any restrictive covenant that discriminates because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status or handicap, or for any person to honor or exercise, or attempt to honor or exercise, any such discriminatory covenant pertaining to housing. 
(7)  Induce or attempt to induce to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of persons of a particular race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status or handicap. 
(8)  Refuse to sell or rent, or refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise discriminate or make unavailable or deny, a dwelling because of a handicap of: 
a.  The buyer or renter; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with the buyer or renter. 
(9)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of a handicap of: 
a.  That person; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it was so sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with that buyer or renter. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, discrimination includes: 
(1)  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by any person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; 
(2)  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, practices, policies or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
(3)  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct dwellings in such a manner that: 
a.  The public use and common use areas of the dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons; 
b.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and 
c.  All premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain an accessible route into and through the dwelling; light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls are in accessible locations; there are reinforcements in the bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and there are usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. As used in this subsection the term "covered multifamily dwellings" means buildings consisting of four or more units if such buildings have one or more elevators and ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units. 
(c)  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standards for Building and Facilities (commonly cited as "ANSI A117.1") or with any other standards adopted as part of regulations promulgated by HUD providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to invalidate or limit any state law or regulation which requires dwellings to be designed and constructed in a manner that affords handicapped persons greater access than is required by this article. 
(Code 1969, § 13A-2(a)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.3. 
Sec. 42-39. - Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions; unlawful practices by lenders, insurers, appraisers, etc.; deposit of funds in such institutions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity, including any lending institution, whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions, to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction, or in the manner of providing such a transaction, because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status or handicap. It shall not be unlawful, however, for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential real estate transactions to require any applicant to qualify financially for the loan or loans for which such person is making application. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "residential real estate-related transaction" means any of the following: 
(1)  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance (i) for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or (ii) secured by residential real estate; or 
(2)  The selling, brokering, insuring or appraising of residential real property. However, nothing in this article shall prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status or handicap. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any state, county, city or municipal treasurer or governmental official whose responsibility it is to account for, to invest, or to manage public funds to deposit or cause to be deposited any public funds in any lending institution provided for in this section which is found to be committing discriminatory practices, where such findings were upheld by any court of competent jurisdiction. Upon such a court's judicial enforcement of any order to restrain a practice of such lending institution or for such institution to cease or desist in a discriminatory practice, the appropriate fiscal officer or treasurer of the state or any political subdivision thereof which has funds deposited in any lending institution which is practicing discrimination, as set forth in this section, shall take immediate steps to have such funds withdrawn and redeposited in another lending institution. If for reasons of sound economic management, this action will result in a financial loss to the state or any of its political subdivisions, the action may be deferred for a period not longer than one year. If the lending institution in question has corrected its discriminatory practices, any prohibition set forth in this section shall not apply. 
(Code 1969, § 13A-2(a)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.4. 
Sec. 42-40. - Interference with enjoyment of rights of others. 
    It shall be an unlawful discriminatory housing practice for any person to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed, or on the account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this article. 
(Code 1969, § 13A-2(a)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.5. 
Sec. 42-41. - Familial status protection not applicable to housing for older persons. 
(a)  Nothing in this article regarding unlawful discrimination because of familial status shall apply to housing for older persons. As used in this section, "housing for older persons" means housing: 
(1)  Provided under any state or federal program that is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program; 
(2)  Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older; or 
(3)  Intended for, and solely occupied by, at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit. The following criteria shall be met in determining whether housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this subsection (a)(3): 
a.  The existence of significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, that such housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons; 
b.  That at least 80 percent of the units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit; and 
c.  The publication of, and adherence to, policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. 
(b)  Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older persons by reason of: 
(1)  Persons residing in such housing as of September 13, 1988, who do not meet the age requirements of subsections (a)(2) and (3), provided that new occupants of such housing meet the age requirements of those subsections; or 
(2)  Unoccupied units, provided that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the provisions of subsections (a)(2) and (3). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.7. 
Sec. 42-42. - Civil action; enforcement by private parties. 
(a)  An aggrieved person may commence a civil action in an appropriate United States district court or state court not later than two years after the occurrence or the termination of an alleged discriminatory housing practice or the breach of a conciliation agreement entered into under this article, whichever occurs last, to obtain appropriate relief with respect to such discriminatory housing practice or breach. 
(b)  An aggrieved person may commence a civil action under subsection (a) no later than 180 days after the conclusion of the administrative process with respect to a complaint or charge, or not later than two years after the occurrence or the termination of an alleged discriminatory housing practice, whichever is later. This subsection shall not apply to actions arising from a breach of a conciliation agreement. An aggrieved person may commence a civil action under this section whether or not a complaint has been filed under Code of Virginia, § 36-96.9, and without regard to the status of any such complaint. If the board or a federal agency has obtained a conciliation agreement with the consent of an aggrieved person, no action may be filed under this section by such aggrieved person with respect to the alleged discriminatory housing practice which forms the basis for such complaint except for the purpose of enforcing the terms of such an agreement. 
(c)  In a civil action under subsection (a), if the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may award to the plaintiff, as the prevailing party, compensatory and punitive damages, reasonable attorney's fees and costs, and, subject to subsection (d), may grant as relief any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, including an order enjoining the defendant from engaging in such practice, or order such affirmative action as may be appropriate. 
(d)  Relief granted under subsection (c) shall not affect any contract, sale, encumbrance, or lease consummated before the granting of such relief and involving bona fide purchasers, encumbrancers or tenants, without actual notice of the filing of a complaint with the board or civil action under this article. 
(e)  Upon timely application, the attorney general may intervene in such civil action, if the attorney general certifies that the case is of general public importance. Upon intervention, the attorney general may obtain such relief as would be available to the private party under subsection (c). 
(Code 1969, § 13A-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.18. 
Sec. 42-43. - Other remedies. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prevent any person from exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which he might otherwise be lawfully entitled or from filing any complaint with any other public agency. 
(Code 1969, § 13A-12) 
Secs. 42-44-42-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FAIR HOUSING BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 42-61. - Created; composition; appointment; compensation, terms and removal of members; vacancies; absence from meetings; administrator; additional personnel. 
(a)  There is hereby created in the city a fair housing board, which shall consist of five members, all of whom shall reside in the city. The members shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve without compensation. Members shall be appointed for staggered terms of three years each. Any member may be removed by the council upon good cause appearing to the council. Any vacancy shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired portion of a term. Absence from five consecutive meetings by any member shall vacate such member's position on the board. 
(b)  There shall be an administrator of the fair housing board, not a member of the board, who shall be appointed by the city manager. He shall serve as secretary of the board and shall be responsible for keeping the records of the board's proceedings. The administrator may be a person otherwise employed by the city, and the duties of the administration of this article may be assigned in addition to other duties. 
(c)  The city council may authorize the employment of such additional personnel to the fair housing board as are deemed warranted to secure effective enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 13A-4) 
Sec. 42-62. - Organization; meetings; quorum; reports. 
(a)  At the first meeting of the fair housing board following annual appointments thereto, the board shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from its membership and establish such procedures of organization and conduct as it may deem necessary. 
(b)  The fair housing board shall meet not less than quarter-annually and upon a call of the chairman or of any three members of the board. All meetings of the board shall be with due written notice to each member. No business shall be conducted unless three or more members are present. 
(c)  The fair housing board shall render as of January 1 of each year, and thereafter quarterly during each year, to the city council a full written report of its activities under the provisions of this article, and any recommendations of the board concerning measures to be taken to further the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 13A-5) 
Sec. 42-63. - Procedure in handling complaints. 
    The procedure of the administrator of the fair housing board in the case of the filing of a complaint shall be as follows: 
(1)  A complaint alleging the commission of a discriminatory housing practice, in writing and sworn to or affirmed, may be filed with the administrator by the complainant. Such a complaint shall state the name and address of the complainant and of the person against whom complaint is made and shall also state the alleged facts surrounding the alleged commission of a discriminatory housing practice, the date the discriminatory housing practice was allegedly committed, and such other information as the board by regulation may require. Upon receipt of such complaint, the administrator shall furnish a copy of the complaint to the person who allegedly committed or is about to commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice and to the chairman of the board. For the protection of the privacy of the individuals involved, in personal matters, every complaint shall be held in confidence by the board, its administrator and employees, unless and until the complainant and the person complained against consent to its being made public or until a hearing such as is described in subsections (5) and (6) of this section is begun. No complaint shall be filed more than 30 days after the date of the alleged discriminatory housing practice. 
(2)  Upon the filing of a complaint as set forth in subsection (1) and notice thereof to the person against whom such complaint is made, the administrator of the board shall make such investigation as he deems appropriate to ascertain the facts. If the administrator of the board shall determine that there are reasonable grounds to believe a violation has occurred and is susceptible of conciliation (such determination to be made within 15 days of the filing of the complaint), he shall attempt to conciliate the matter by methods of conference and persuasion with all interested parties and such representatives as the parties may choose to assist them. Conciliation conferences shall be informal, and nothing said or done during such initial conferences shall be made public by the board or its members or any of its staff, unless all parties thereto agree in writing. 
(3)  The terms of conciliation agreed to by the parties may be reduced to writing and incorporated into a consent agreement signed by the parties, which agreement is for conciliation purposes only and does not constitute an admission by any party that this article has been violated. Consent agreements shall be signed on behalf of the board by the chairman or the vice-chairman. 
(4)  It shall be a violation of this article to violate or fail to adhere to any provision contained in a consent agreement. A failure by the board to enforce a violation of any provision of a consent agreement shall not constitute a waiver of any right of any party to such agreement. 
(5)  If the administrator determines that the complaint lacks reasonable grounds upon which to base a violation of this article, he shall give written notice of such determination to the complainant, the person complained against and the board. The notice shall also state that the complaint will stand dismissed unless, within 20 days after mailing of such notice, the complainant files with the board, in writing, a request for a hearing by the board. Upon the filing of request for such hearing, the administrator shall immediately mail a copy of such request to the person complained against, together with notice of the time and place fixed by the board for such hearing. Thereafter, and at such time, the board shall afford the parties an opportunity to appear before the board in person or by counsel. Upon such hearing, the board may, in its discretion, dismiss such complaint or determine that there are reasonable grounds to believe the alleged violation of this article has occurred. 
(6)  If the administrator or the board has determined that there are reasonable grounds to believe the alleged violation of this article has occurred and the administrator (i) fails to conciliate a complaint after the parties have, in good faith, attempted such conciliation, or (ii) fails to effect an informal conciliation agreement or a formal consent agreement, or (iii) determines that the complaint is not susceptible of conciliation, he shall notify the chairman of the board immediately and in all cases shall give such notice within 30 days after the filing of the complaint; provided, that such period may be extended not more than 30 additional days by the board for good cause appearing to the board. Upon receiving such notice, the chairman of the board shall promptly thereafter schedule a public hearing to determine whether a violation of this article has been committed. The board shall give written notice to the respondent and the complainant containing a statement of charges and of the time and place of hearing. The respondent or his counsel may file such statements with the board prior to the hearing date as he deems necessary in support of his position. The hearing shall be open to the public, unless for the protection of the privacy of the individuals involved, in personal matters, the respondent requests in writing a private hearing, in which case the hearing shall be private. The hearing shall be held within 20 days after mailing of the statement of charges and notice of hearing. The notices so issued shall be signed by the chairman or the secretary of the board and sent by certified mail. The interested parties may, at their option, appear before the board in person or by duly authorized representatives and may be represented by an attorney. The parties may testify and present evidence, and the right to cross examine witnesses shall be preserved; and, for these purposes, the board may invite such additional persons to appear as the ends of justice may require. All testimony and evidence shall be given under oath or by affirmation. The board shall not be bound by strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law but shall adhere to rules of equity. The board shall keep a full record of the hearing, which record shall, unless such hearing is private, be public and open to inspection by any person, and upon request by any principal party to the proceedings, the board shall furnish such party a copy of the hearing record at the cost of the party so requesting. 
(7)  If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall determine that the respondent has committed or is committing the discriminatory housing practice charged, the board shall state its finding and conclusions and shall issue and cause to be mailed by certified mail to the respondent a copy of such decision, which shall contain a warning to cease and desist from such discriminatory practice and to take such affirmative action as may be indicated to effect the purposes of this article, including, if the board so determines, reporting on the manner of his compliance. 
(8)  If, upon all the evidence at the hearing, the board shall find the respondent has not engaged in the discriminatory housing practice charged, the board shall state its findings and conclusions and shall dismiss the complaint. Notice of such action shall be given to the complainant and to the respondent by certified mail. 
(Code 1969, § 13A-6) 
Sec. 42-64. - Procedure when acting on own initiative. 
    In a case in which the fair housing board proceeds on its own initiative, without receiving a formal complaint, the procedure followed shall be that prescribed in section 42-66. No investigation shall be undertaken by the board on its own initiative if more than 60 days have elapsed since the occurrence of the discriminatory housing practice that the board has reason to believe occurred. In a case in which there is no complainant, the administrator of the board shall be responsible for developing the evidentiary record before the board. 
(Code 1969, § 13A-7) 
Sec. 42-65. - Powers generally. 
    In making the investigations, pursuing conciliation and persuasion and conducting hearings, all as described in sections 42-62-42-64, the fair housing board shall have authority to hear testimony under oath, to make findings of fact, and to issue decisions and warnings in accordance with the provisions of this article, and to make and adopt and publish such rules of procedure as may be necessary or proper for carrying out its functions under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 13A-8) 
Sec. 42-66. - Authority to seek interlocutory relief. 
    If, at any time after a complaint has been filed or upon institution of an investigation on the fair housing board's own initiative, the board believes that appropriate civil action to abate or prevent any discriminatory housing practice, to preserve the status quo or to prevent irreparable harm appears advisable, the board may, after consultation with the commonwealth's attorney or his authorized designee, certify the matter to the commonwealth's attorney to bring any action necessary to abate or prevent such practice, preserve such status quo or to prevent such irreparable harm, including but not limited to temporary restraining orders and preliminary injunctions. 
(Code 1969, § 13A-9) 
Sec. 42-67. - Judicial review of decisions. 
(a)  Any party aggrieved by a written decision of the fair housing board made after hearing held pursuant to section 42-63 may present to the circuit court for the city a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality, and making party defendant thereto the opposing party in proceedings before the board. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. 
(b)  Upon presentation of such petition, the court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the fair housing board to review such decision of the board and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made, which shall not be less than ten days and may be extended by the court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, on application, on notice to the board and to the opposing party and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. 
(c)  The fair housing board shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by the writ of certiorari provided for in subsection (b). The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified by the chairman or the administrator. 
(d)  If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a commissioner to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the court with his findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceeding upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review. 
(e)  Costs shall not be allowed against the fair housing board, unless it shall appear to the court that it acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from. 
(Code 1969, § 13A-10) 
Sec. 42-68. - Enforcement by court generally. 
    If the respondent refuses or fails to comply with any decision or warning of the fair housing board, the board shall refer the matter to the commonwealth's attorney, who shall bring an action against such respondent in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce compliance with such decision. Any person who shall be found by the board to have violated the intent of this article or the public policy stated in this article relating to discriminatory housing practices shall be subject to injunctive or other appropriate action or proceeding, and any court of competent jurisdiction may issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, or such form of relief as the court deems appropriate, and may award damages as provided in section 42-42. 
(Code 1969, § 13A-11) 
Sec. 42-69. - Addressing of notices. 
    All notices required under the provisions of this article to be given by certified mail shall be addressed to the person to whom such notice is intended at the last known address of such person or to the attorney of such person, should such attorney have formally appeared before the fair housing board on behalf of such person. 
(Code 1969, § 13A-13) 
Sec. 42-70. - Time limitation for complaints. 
    Any complaint filed under the provisions of this article shall stand dismissed unless the fair housing board has, within 90 days of the date of the filing of complaint of the alleged discriminatory housing practice, served upon the respondent a decision pursuant to the provisions of subsection (7) of section 42-63. 
(Code 1969, § 13A-14) 
Chapter 46 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Police jurisdiction over lands, buildings and structures, jurisdiction of offenses, appeals (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-887) adopted, § 2.2. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; regulation of teenage dancehalls, § 10-36; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; automatic police or fire alarm dialing systems, § 58-11; false report of commission of crime, § 58-15; purpose of chapter pertaining to signs, § 66-2; service charge on certain dwellings for police and fire protection and for collection and disposal of refuse, § 82-7; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Police and public order, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-131 et seq.; disposal of unclaimed property, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-133.01; destruction of unclaimed weapons, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-133.01:1; city sheriffs, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-796; powers of governor as to law enforcement agencies in localities, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-410. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Composition of police department; appointment, etc., of officers. 
    The police department shall consist of as many police officers as the council shall determine, which officers shall be appointed by and be under the immediate control of the director of the department of public safety. 
(Code 1969, § 21-1) 
Sec. 46-2. - Reports to council of arrests, complaints, etc. 
    The director of the department of public safety shall make such reports to the council of arrests, complaints, the amount of property stolen and all other such information as the council may by resolution require. 
(Code 1969, § 21-2) 
Sec. 46-3. - Powers and authority of police officers. 
    All police officers shall be invested with all the powers and authority belonging to any police officer or conservator of the peace in the state. 
(Code 1969, § 21-4) 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of police force, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-138. 
Sec. 46-4. - Duties of police officers generally. 
(a)  Each police officer shall preserve and enforce the laws of the state and the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city relative to crime. Each police officer shall use his best endeavors to prevent the commission of crime within the city and to prevent offenses against the laws of the state and against this Code and other ordinances of the city. Each police officer shall detect and arrest offenders against the laws of the state and this Code and other ordinances of the city, shall preserve the good order of the city and shall protect the inhabitants of the city from violence and the property of the citizens therein from injury. 
(b)  Police officers shall have no power or authority in civil matters, except that a police officer of the city may execute and serve an order of temporary detention and an emergency custody order and may exercise such other powers as may be specified for law enforcement officers pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 37.1-67.1, or may serve an order of protection pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-253.1, 16.1-253.4 and 16.1-279.1. However, a police officer of the city shall in all other cases execute such warrants or summons as may be placed in his hands by any magistrate for the city and shall make due return thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 21-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-138. 
Sec. 46-5. - Records generally. 
    The police officers, under the direction and authority of the director of the department of public safety, shall preserve all records which are essential to the effective administration and maintenance of the police department. Such records shall contain an accurate account of the performance of all duties required by the state laws and the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 21-6) 
Sec. 46-6. - Sale or other disposition of property seized by police. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all police officers to, as soon as practicable, deliver all property seized by them to the chief of police. The chief of police shall keep a record of all such property so seized or otherwise taken possession of. If such property so seized or taken possession of shall not be claimed and possession surrendered to the rightful owner within 60 days from the date of the final disposition of any court proceedings in connection with which such property was seized or otherwise taken possession of, or in case there are no court proceedings, then if such property so seized or taken possession of shall not be claimed by the rightful owner thereof and possession surrendered to such owner within 60 days from the date of such seizure, the chief of police or his duly authorized agents shall make reasonable attempts to notify the rightful owner of the property, obtain from the commonwealth's attorney in writing a statement advising that the item is not needed in any criminal prosecution, and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once a week for two successive weeks notice that there will be a public sale of unclaimed personal property. Such property shall be described generally in the notice, together with the date, time and place of the sale. The publication shall provide that if such property is not claimed by the rightful owner thereof within ten days from the date of such publication, such property will be sold at public auction at such place as the chief of police may select and in such manner as to expose to the inspection of bidders all property so offered for sale; provided, that such unclaimed property, if deemed by the chief of police to be of use to the department of police, may be retained for the use of such department. 
(b)  Should, however, any unclaimed property seized or taken possession of by the police be of a perishable nature, or so bulky or of such character as to make it dangerous or inadvisable or dangerous to retain possession thereof for 60 days as provided for in subsection (a), upon a certification of such fact by the chief of police, setting forth his reasons why such property should not be retained for the period of time provided for in subsection (a), the chief of police shall cause such property to be advertised forthwith in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city and sell such property at public auction at any time after three days shall have elapsed from the seizure or taking possession thereof. 
(c)  The chief of police or his duly authorized agents shall pay from the proceeds of sale of unclaimed property under this section the costs of advertisement, removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens, and notice of sale. The balance of the funds shall be held by such officer for the owner and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. If no claim has been made by the owner for the proceeds of such sale within 60 days of the sale, the remaining funds shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the city within three years from the date of the sale and, if timely application is made therefor, the city shall pay the remaining proceeds of the sale to the owner without interest or other charges. No claim shall be made nor any suit, action or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds after three years from the date of the sale. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall apply to the disposition of deadly weapons, such as pistols, revolvers, derringers, bowie knives, dirks, metallic knuckles and other like weapons, the seizure and disposition of which are covered by Code of Virginia, § 18.2-310. 
(Code 1969, § 21-7) 
State Law reference- Disposal of unclaimed property in possession of police, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-133.01; disposal of unclaimed firearms or other weapons in possession of police, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-133.01:1. 
Sec. 46-7. - Term of police officers. 
    All police officers appointed by the director of the department of public safety shall hold office during good behavior and at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 21-3) 
Sec. 46-8. - Refusal to aid officer in execution of his office. 
    If any person on being required by any sheriff or other officer refuse or neglect to assist him: (i) in the execution of his office in a criminal case, (ii) in the preservation of the peace, (iii) in the apprehending or securing of any person for a breach of the peace, or (iv) in any case of escape or rescue, he shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-34) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-463. 
Sec. 46-9. - Impersonating officer. 
    No person shall falsely assume or exercise the functions, powers, duties and privileges incident to the office of sheriff, police officer, marshal, chief of police, or other police officer or peace officer, or shall falsely assume or pretend to be any such officer. 
(Code 1969, § 17-35) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-174. 
Secs. 46-10-46-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRISONERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Prisoner escaping from jail, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-477 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 46-41-46-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WORK FORCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Power of city to require prisoners to work (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-904) adopted, § 2.2. 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Municipal work forces, Code of Virginia, § 53.1-128. 

Sec. 46-56. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established a city work force for the purpose of working on the streets, roads and public property in the city, or farms owned, leased or rented by the city and in or on any other public property or works owned, leased or operated by the city, whether such public property or works are located within or outside the city. 
(Code 1969, § 9-9) 
Sec. 46-57. - Who may be worked. 
    Every person 18 years of age or older who is convicted and confined for any violation of a local ordinance and who is confined as a punishment or for failure to pay a required fine shall be liable to work in such work force. Every person 18 years of age or older who is confined pending disposition of a nonviolent criminal offense or an offense under Code of Virginia, § 20-61 et seq. may work in such work force on a voluntary basis with the approval of and under the supervision of the sheriff. 
(Code 1969, § 9-10) 
Sec. 46-58. - How and by whom guarded. 
    The director of the street department, or the superintendent of the work force, if the appointment of one is deemed necessary by the city manager, shall guard, supervise and compel prisoners on the work force to do such work as may be ordered done by the city manager, and shall return such prisoners to the jail at night for safekeeping. 
(Code 1969, § 9-11) 
Sec. 46-59. - Police powers of director of street department, etc. 
    The director of the street department or the superintendent of the work force, as the case may be, shall in the discharge of his duties and in guarding and managing prisoners on the work force, be invested with all the powers and rights of a regular police officer, and shall, when necessary, be supplied with the requisite equipment to prevent the escape of such prisoners. 
(Code 1969, § 9-12) 
Sec. 46-60. - Clothing and supplies for prisoners. 
    The director of the street department, or the superintendent of the work force, as the case may be, shall be furnished with proper clothing and supplies, where necessary, for the prisoners working in the work force, and such clothing and supplies shall be procured by the purchasing agent and paid for out of the city treasury. 
(Code 1969, § 9-13) 
Chapter 50 - LIBRARY[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Local libraries generally, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-33 et seq. 

Sec. 50-1. - Management of public libraries. 
    The public libraries of the city shall be operated under the management and supervision of the city manager, in accordance with the provisions of section 5.2 of the Charter. 
(Code 1969, § 2-4.2) 
Chapter 54 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; planning, ch. 62; signs, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; taxation, ch. 82; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 90; zoning, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Construction and safety standards, Code of Virginia, § 36-85.11; enforcement of obligations imposed on landlords, Code of Virginia, § 55-248.49. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile home means any trailer, mobile home or any unit used for living and sleeping purposes, and which may be, or is, intended for transport from one place to another, whether by motive power or otherwise. 
    Mobile home park means any trailer court or place, lot or tract of land upon which is located, or which is held out for the location of, one or more trailers or mobile homes. 
(Code 1969, § 29-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-2. - Authority for adoption of chapter; purpose of chapter. 
    This chapter is adopted under the general police and Charter powers of the city. This chapter is intended to regulate mobile homes and mobile home parks in the city in such a manner as to protect the citizens of this community, as well as those occupying such mobile homes and mobile home parks. 
(Code 1969, § 29-2) 
Sec. 54-3. - Formulation and promulgation of rules and regulations by health director. 
    The health director may formulate and promulgate rules and regulations concerning mobile home parks. 
(Code 1969, § 29-3) 
Sec. 54-4. - Compliance with chapter, etc. 
    It shall be the duty of every person owning, leasing, renting, operating or in charge of any mobile home park in the city to comply with all the provisions of this chapter and the rules or regulations formulated and promulgated by the health director governing such mobile home parks. 
(Code 1969, § 29-4) 
Sec. 54-5. - Enforcement of chapter. 
    It shall be the duty of the health director and of the police force generally to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 29-5) 
Sec. 54-6. - Right of entry of health director. 
    For the purpose of securing enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the health director or any city police officer may, at any reasonable time, enter upon the premises of any mobile home park within the city to inspect such mobile home park and all accommodations connected therewith. 
(Code 1969, § 29-6) 
Sec. 54-7. - Limitations on parking mobile homes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any mobile home, while such mobile home is used for human habitation, on any street, alley or other public place in the city or to park any mobile home, when such mobile home is not so used, on the streets of the city for a longer period than three days. 
(Code 1969, § 29-7) 
Sec. 54-8. - Limitation on keeping mobile home used as human habitation, not in mobile home park. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, keep or maintain, for more than three consecutive days, any mobile home, while used for human habitation, upon any lot or parcel of land within the city, except in a mobile home park, as provided for in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 29-8) 
Secs. 54-9-54-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME PARKS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Mobile home courts district R-M, § 66-255. 
State Law reference- Campgrounds, Code of Virginia, § 35.1-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-36. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to mobile home parks in the city. 
(Code 1969, § 29-17) 
Sec. 54-37. - Drainage of area where located and premises. 
    Every mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained area and the premises graded so as to prevent the accumulation of storm, casual or surface waters. 
(Code 1969, § 29-18) 
Sec. 54-38. - Required space for trailer. 
    Every mobile home park in the city shall be laid off so as to provide a space of not less than 1,000 square feet of ground per mobile home, exclusive of the ground underneath the mobile home in the particular space. 
(Code 1969, § 29-19) 
Sec. 54-39. - Distance between mobile homes; arrangement of mobile homes. 
(a)  No mobile home shall be closer than 15 feet to any other mobile home, nor within 25 feet of the right-of-way line of any street, nor closer than five feet to the mobile home park property line. 
(b)  The mobile homes shall be arranged in rows abutting or facing on a driveway or on an unoccupied space of not less than 30 feet in width. Where there is provided a continuous driveway with an entrance and exit to a public highway, such driveway shall be not less than 16 feet in width. Such driveway or space shall have unobstructed access to a public street. 
(Code 1969, § 29-20) 
Sec. 54-40. - Adequate water supply required; water tap or connection for each mobile home space. 
    An adequate supply of water from the city water system, for drinking and domestic purposes, shall be supplied by the owner or operator to meet the requirements of each mobile home park. Each mobile home space in a mobile home park shall have a separate and independent water tap or connection permanently installed and ready to be connected to the plumbing fixtures within each mobile home. 
(Code 1969, § 29-21) 
Cross reference- Waterworks system and water supply generally, § 90-71 et seq. 
Sec. 54-41. - Sewer connections and plumbing fixtures; disposition of wastewater, etc. 
(a)  Each mobile home space, as provided for in this article, shall have a separate and independent sewer connection, connected to the city's sanitary sewer system, permanently installed, and ready to be connected to the plumbing fixtures within each mobile home. All such sewer connections and appurtenances shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to permit any wastewater or materials from sinks, baths, showers or other plumbing fixtures in any mobile home park to be deposited upon the surface of the ground. All such fixtures, when in use, shall be connected to the city's sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1969, § 29-22) 
Sec. 54-42. - Facilities for water closets, lavatories, etc. 
    There shall be provided in every mobile home park one room equipped with one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower for each sex, and there shall be provided an additional water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower for each sex for every ten or fractional part thereof in excess of ten males or ten females occupying mobile homes in the mobile home park in question, which mobile homes are not equipped with individual toilet facilities. One of such rooms shall be distinctly marked "Men" and one of such rooms shall be distinctly marked "Women" or "Ladies." The rooms for such toilet facilities shall be separated by a sound resistant wall. A vestibule or screen wall shall be provided to prevent direct view into the toilet room when exterior doors are open. 
(Code 1969, § 29-23) 
Sec. 54-43. - Receptacles for garbage, refuse, etc. 
    Each mobile home space, as provided for in this article, while occupied by any mobile home, shall have at least one metal watertight container of not more than 30 gallons, nor less than 15 gallons' capacity, with a closefitting cover for the deposit of garbage, refuse, rubbish and the like. Such waste and garbage receptacles shall at all times be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; and in addition thereto, the requirements of all other city ordinances relative to the collection and disposal of garbage and trash shall be complied with. 
(Code 1969, § 29-24) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 70. 
Sec. 54-44. - Lighting. 
    Every mobile home park shall be provided with adequate means of lighting the mobile home park at night. Such sufficient lighting facilities shall be kept lighted during the time from one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise. 
(Code 1969, § 29-25) 
Sec. 54-45. - Recreation area. 
    At least 200 square feet per mobile home space in a mobile home park shall be made available for recreational uses. These areas shall be located so as to be free of traffic hazards. 
(Code 1969, § 29-26) 
Sec. 54-46. - Heating appliances and fuel. 
    All heating appliances and fuels used in mobile home parks shall meet the rules, regulations and requirements of the National Fire Protection Association or the American Insurance Association. Any mobile home using liquefied petroleum gas shall comply with, and be subject to, the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city relative to standards for liquefied petroleum gas equipment and its use. Any person occupying a mobile home using oil as a fuel shall store such oil in a cylinder which shall be connected to the stoves or heaters of the mobile home by copper or other metallic tubing, and shall have leakproof connections. Such oil cylinders shall be securely fastened in place not less than five feet from any mobile home exit. 
(Code 1969, § 29-28) 
Cross reference- Liquefied petroleum gas, § 34-201 et seq. 
Sec. 54-47. - Electricity. 
    Every mobile home park shall be provided with electric power. An electric outlet supplying 110-220 volts shall be provided for each mobile home space and such outlets shall be weatherproof and within easy reach of the parked mobile home. In no instance shall any power line across the mobile home park area be less than 18 feet above the ground if it is not under the ground. Service drops to each mobile home space shall be weatherproof, insulated, and not smaller than two number 8 wires. Adequate overcurrent protection shall be provided on all circuits. All electric wiring in every mobile home park shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 29-29) 
Cross reference- Electricity, § 18-166 et seq.; city electric system, § 90-26 et seq. 
Sec. 54-48. - Removal of wheels. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a mobile home park to remove, or cause to be removed, or permit the removal of, the wheels or any similar transporting devices, except for necessary repairs, from any mobile home or to otherwise permanently fix or attach such mobile home to the ground. Any alteration of, addition to, or removal of the wheels from any mobile home, as set forth in this section, shall be construed as removing it from the provisions of this article and converting it into a dwelling and it shall thereupon be subject to the requirements of chapters 18 and 106 and all other similar provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 29-30) 
Sec. 54-49. - Inspection of premises; effect of discovery of condition in violation of article. 
    Each mobile home park located within the city shall be inspected by the fire chief at least twice each month to see that the provisions of this article are complied with. The chief of police or health director, either or both, shall also inspect such mobile home parks periodically, at least once each 30 days, to see that the provisions of this article are complied with. If such inspection reveals that any of the provisions of this article are violated, such violation shall subject the owner, operator, lessee or person in charge of such mobile home park not only to penalties for the violation of this article, but the permit provided for in this article may be forthwith revoked. 
(Code 1969, § 29-31) 
Secs. 54-50-54-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 54-76. - Required; fee. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate within the city any mobile home park without first having secured a written permit therefor from the city manager. The fee for the issuance of such permit shall be $20.00, which fee shall be paid into the city treasury and placed in the general funds of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 29-9) 
Sec. 54-77. - Application, contents. 
    Any person desiring a permit as required in section 54-76 shall make application therefor in writing to the city manager, stating his name and address, the location and general layout of the proposed mobile home park, the detailed plans and specifications of the water supply, electric wiring plans, parking facilities, provisions for sewage and garbage disposal of such proposed mobile home park, and such other information as the city manager may deem necessary. 
(Code 1969, § 29-10) 
Sec. 54-78. - Investigation of applicant, etc. 
    Upon the filing of any application as required by section 54-77, the city manager and the chief of police shall make, or cause to be made, an investigation of the character of the applicant and the premises whereon or wherein the mobile home park in question is to be located. 
(Code 1969, § 29-11) 
Sec. 54-79. - Issuance and refusal generally. 
    On receipt of evidence by the city manager that the applicant in question is a proper person to receive a permit, as required in section 54-76, and if the premises whereon or wherein the proposed mobile home park is to be located is found to be in compliance with the provisions of this article and other ordinances of the city and laws of the state relative to mobile home parks, the city manager shall issue the permit as required in section 54-76; otherwise, the city manager shall refuse to issue such permit. 
(Code 1969, § 29-12) 
Sec. 54-80. - To be deemed personal privilege; transfer prohibited. 
    Any permit issued under section 54-79 shall be deemed to be a personal privilege and no such permit shall be transferable. 
(Code 1969, § 29-13) 
Sec. 54-81. - Posting. 
    It shall be unlawful for the holder of a permit issued under section 54-79 to fail, neglect or refuse to keep such permit posted at all times in a conspicuous place in the mobile home park in question. 
(Code 1969, § 29-14) 
Sec. 54-82. - Revocation. 
    Any permit issued as provided in section 54-79 may be revoked by the city manager at any time for failure to comply with the provisions of this article or any other ordinance of the city, or law of the state or regulations of the state board of health regarding public health, applicable to mobile home parks. 
(Code 1969, § 29-15) 
Sec. 54-83. - Appeal of refusal or revocation. 
    There shall be a right of an appeal to the council from the action of the city manager in refusing to issue a permit to the person applying therefor, as provided in section 54-79, and from the action of the city manager revoking a permit, as provided in section 54-82. Such appeal shall be by written application only, directed to the council and delivered to the clerk of council within ten days after the refusal to issue such permit or within ten days from the revocation of the permit, as the case may be. 
(Code 1969, § 29-16) 
Chapter 58 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Human relations, ch. 42. 
State Law reference- Local control of firearms restricted, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-29.15; local ordinances prohibiting obscenity, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-389. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Abusive language. 
    If any person shall, in the presence or hearing of another, curse or abuse such other person, or use any violent abusive language to such person concerning himself or any of his relations, or otherwise use such language, under circumstances reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, he shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-416. 
Sec. 58-2. - Adultery and fornication-Adultery defined. 
    Any person, being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any person not his spouse shall be guilty of adultery. 
(Code 1969, § 17-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-365. 
Sec. 58-3. - Same-Fornication defined. 
    Any person, not being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any other person shall be guilty of fornication. 
(Code 1969, § 17-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-344. 
Sec. 58-4. - Same-How punished. 
    If any person commits adultery or fornication, such person shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-4) 
State Law reference- Penalty for adultery or fornication, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-344, 18.2-365. 
Sec. 58-5. - Same-By persons forbidden to marry. 
    If any person commits adultery or fornication with any person whom he is forbidden by law to marry, such person shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-7; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to apply to a person committing adultery or fornication with his daughter or granddaughter, or with her son or grandson, or her father or his mother. 
(Code 1969, § 17-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-366. 
Sec. 58-6. - Advertisements, etc., tearing down, etc. 
    No person shall tear down an advertisement, poster, sign or the like put up by or with the consent of the owner of the property whereupon the advertisement, poster, sign or the like is posted or erected, or alter or mutilate the advertisement, poster, sign or the like without the consent of such owner. 
(Code 1969, § 17-6) 
Sec. 58-7. - Ambulances and firefighting equipment, calling or summoning without just cause. 
    No person shall without just cause therefor call or summon, by telephone or otherwise, any ambulance or firefighting apparatus. 
(Code 1969, § 17-7) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212. 
Sec. 58-8. - Assault and battery. 
    No person shall commit an unjustifiable assault or unjustifiable assault and battery upon another, which assault or assault and battery does not amount to a felony under the laws of the state. 
(Code 1969, § 17-8) 
State Law reference- Assaults and bodily woundings, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-51 et seq. 
Sec. 58-9. - Attempts-Generally. 
    Every person who attempts to commit an offense which is a violation of this Code or of any other ordinance of the city shall be punishable by the same punishment prescribed for the offense the commission of which was the object of the attempt. 
(Code 1969, § 17-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-27. 
Sec. 58-10. - Same-Maximum punishment. 
    Any provision in this chapter notwithstanding, in no event shall the punishment for an attempt to commit an offense exceed the maximum punishment had the offense been committed. 
(Code 1969, § 17-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-28. 
Sec. 58-11. - Automatic police or fire alarm dialing systems prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install, sell, lease or use, or cause or allow to be installed, sold, leased or used, within the corporate limits of the city, any police or fire telephone dial alarm device or system. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, a "police or fire telephone dial alarm device or system" is defined as being or consisting of any mechanical, electrical or radio-electronic device or system so made or designed as to automatically actuate or call any city police or fire department or radio circuit and use a pre-taped or prerecorded or programmed verbal message or signal, which operates through overhead or underground wires or by radio frequencies, and which is set or programmed to directly dial, actuate or call or in any other manner make direct contact with any telephone line or radio circuit of the police department, fire department or emergency services communications center. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the installation, sale, leasing or use of any alarm device, so long as such device is not designed or programmed to dial, actuate, call or in any other manner directly contact by telephone or radio circuit the police department, fire department, or emergency services communications center on any telephone line or radio circuit assigned any such department. 
(Code 1969, § 17-33.1) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- Regulation of alarm company operators, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-28.2. 
Sec. 58-12. - Discarding or abandoning iceboxes, etc.; precautions required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, abandon, leave or allow to remain in any place any icebox, refrigerator or other container, device or equipment of any kind with an interior storage area of more than two cubic feet of clear space which is airtight, without first removing the doors or hinges from such icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment which is being used for the purpose for which it was originally designed, or is being used for display purposes by any retail or wholesale merchant, or is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. 
(c)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-319. 
Sec. 58-13. - Disorderly conduct in public places. 
(a)  A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, he: 
(1)  In any street, highway, public building, or while in or on a public conveyance or public place engages in conduct having a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such conduct is directed; 
(2)  Willfully or being intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupts any meeting of the governing body of any political subdivision of this state or a division or agency thereof, or of any school, literary society or place of religious worship, if the disruption (i) prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of the meeting or (ii) has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, the disruption is directed; or 
(3)  Willfully or while intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupts the operation of any school or any activity conducted or sponsored by any school, if the disruption (i) prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of the operation or activity or (ii) has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, the disruption is directed. 
(b)  The conduct prohibited under subsection (a) shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under this chapter. 
(c)  The person in charge of any such building, place, conveyance, meeting, operation or activity may eject therefrom any person who violates any provision of this section, with the aid, if necessary, of any persons who may be called upon for such purpose. 
(d)  A person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, §§ 17-11.1, 17-13) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct in public places, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415. 
Sec. 58-14. - Disturbance of audiences gathered for amusement, etc. 
    No person shall, in any disorderly manner, disturb any audience or gathering assembled for amusement, instructions or business of any lawful kind. 
(Code 1969, § 17-12) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct in public places, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415. 
Sec. 58-15. - False report of commission of crime. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to give a false report as to the commission of any crime to any police officer or other law enforcement official of the city, with intent to mislead. 
(Code 1969, § 17-33) 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-461. 
Sec. 58-16. - Hindering, obstructing, etc., city officers, etc. 
    No person shall hinder, obstruct, resist or abuse any officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his duty or any contractor or other person in the execution of work for the city. 
(Code 1969, § 17-36) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees of city generally, § 2-86 et seq. 
Sec. 58-17. - Indecent exposure. 
    No person shall intentionally make an obscene display or exposure of his person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place, or in any place where others are present, or procure another to so expose himself. 
(Code 1969, § 17-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387. 
Sec. 58-18. - Inhaling drugs or other noxious chemical substances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person deliberately to smell or inhale any drugs or any other noxious chemical substances, including but not limited to fingernail polish or model airplane glue, containing any ketones, aldehydes, organic acetates, ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons or vapors, with the intent to become intoxicated, inebriated, excited, stupefied or to dull the brain or nervous system. 
(Code 1969, § 17-41.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-264. 
Sec. 58-19. - Injuring, etc., public or private property-Generally. 
    No person shall willfully injure public or private property. 
(Code 1969, § 17-16) 
Cross reference- Injuring traffic signs, § 86-69; injuring polls, wires, lamps, transformers, etc., § 90-31; tampering with electric meter, § 90-32; injuring equipment used in city water system, § 90-77. 
Sec. 58-20. - Same-Benchmarks, etc. 
    No person shall remove or disturb any benchmark, monument or stake set by any city employee in the prosecution of his duties. 
(Code 1969, § 17-17) 
Sec. 58-21. - Lewd and lascivious cohabitation. 
    If any persons not married to each other lewdly and lasciviously associate and cohabit together, or, whether married or not, be guilty of open and gross lewdness and lasciviousness, each of them shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor; and upon a repetition of the offense, and conviction thereof, each of them shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-22) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-345. 
Sec. 58-22. - Loitering-Generally. 
    No persons shall assemble in groups so as to obstruct the streets, sidewalks or bridges; nor sit, stand or lounge in front of private doors or churches or business houses so as to interfere with the use of the building; nor sit, stand or lounge upon street or bridge railings. 
(Code 1969, § 17-23) 
Sec. 58-23. - Same-Peace and good order. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Loiter means to stand around or remain, park or remain parked in a motor vehicle at a public place or place open to the public and to engage in any conduct prohibited under law. "Loiter" also means to collect, gather, congregate or be a member of a group or a crowd of people who are gathered together in any public place or place open to the public and to engage in any conduct prohibited under this law. 
(2)  Public place means any public street, road or highway, alley, lane, sidewalk, crosswalk or other public way, or any public resort, place of amusement, park, playground, public building or grounds appurtenant thereto, school building or school grounds, public parking lot or any vacant lot. 
(3)  Place open to the public means any place open to the public or any place to which the public is invited and in, on or around any privately owned place of business, private parking lot or private institution, including places of worship, cemetery or any place of amusement and entertainment, whether or not a charge of admission or entry thereto is made. The term includes the elevators, lobbies, halls, corridors and areas open to the public of any store, office or apartment building. 
(b)  Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter at, on or in a public place or place open to the public in such manner: 
(1)  As to interfere, impede or hinder the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(2)  As to interfere with, obstruct, harass, curse or threaten or do physical harm to another member of the public. 
(3)  As to threaten or do physical harm to the property of another member of the public. 
(4)  That by words, acts or other conduct it is clear there is a present danger of a breach of the peace or disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter at a public place or place open to the public and to fail to obey the direction of a uniformed police officer or the direction of a properly identified police officer not in uniform to move on, when not to obey such direction shall endanger the public peace. 
(c)  Identification. It shall be unlawful for any person at a public place or place open to the public to refuse to identify himself by name and address at the request of a uniformed police officer or of a properly identified police officer not in uniform, if the surrounding circumstances are such as to indicate to a reasonable man that the public safety requires such identification. 
(d)  Lawful assembly. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit orderly picketing or other lawful assembly. 
(e)  Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and punished as provided by law. 
(Code 1969, § 17-24) 
Sec. 58-24. - Obscene language. 
    No person shall use obscene language. 
(Code 1969, § 17-30) 
Sec. 58-25. - Obstructing justice. 
    If any person, by threats or force, knowingly attempts to intimidate or impede a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, witness, or any law enforcement officer, lawfully engaged in his duties as such, or to obstruct or impede the administration of justice in any court, he shall be deemed to be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460. 
Sec. 58-26. - Petit larceny, defined; how punished. 
    Any person who: (i) commits larceny from the person of another of money or other thing of value of less than $5.00, or (ii) commits simple larceny not from the person of another of goods and chattels of the value of less than $200.00, except as provided in subsection (iii) of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-95, shall be deemed guilty of petit larceny, which shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-32) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-96. 
Sec. 58-27. - Profane swearing and intoxication in public; penalty; transportation of public inebriates to detoxification center. 
    If any person profanely curses or swears or is intoxicated in public, whether such intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug or other intoxicant or drug of whatever nature, he shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. In any area in which there is located a court-approved detoxification center, a law enforcement officer may authorize the transportation, by police or otherwise, of public inebriates to such detoxification center in lieu of arrest; however, no person shall be involuntarily detained in such center. 
(Code 1969, §§ 17-14, 17-38) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388. 
Sec. 58-28. - Profane, threatening or indecent language over public airways. 
    If any person shall use obscene, vulgar, profane, lewd, lascivious, or indecent language, or make any suggestion or proposal of an obscene nature, or threaten any illegal or immoral act with the intent to coerce, intimidate or harass any person, over any telephone or citizen's band radio, in this city, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-1.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-427. 
Sec. 58-29. - Shoplifting-Altering price tags; transferring goods from one container to another; counseling, etc., another in performance of such acts. 
    Whoever, without authority, with the intention of converting goods or merchandise to his own or another's use without having paid the full purchase price thereof, or of defrauding the owner of the value of the goods or merchandise, (i) willfully conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment, or (ii) alters the price tag or other price marking on such goods or merchandise, or transfers the goods from one container to another, or (iii) counsels, assists, aids or abets another in the performance of any of the above acts, shall be deemed guilty of larceny and upon conviction thereof shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. The willful concealment of goods or merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment, while still on the premises thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to convert and defraud the owner thereof out of the value of the goods or merchandise. 
(Code 1969, § 17-39(a)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-103. 
Sec. 58-30. - Same-Exemption from civil liability in connection with arrest or detention of suspected person. 
    A merchant, agent or employee of the merchant who causes the arrest or detention of any person pursuant to the provisions of section 58-29 shall not be held civilly liable for unlawful detention if such detention does not exceed one hour, slander, malicious prosecution, false imprisonment, false arrest, or assault and battery of the person so arrested or detained, whether such arrest or detention takes place on the premises of the merchant, or after close pursuit from such premises by such merchant, his agent or employee; provided that, in causing the arrest or detention of such person, the merchant, agent or employee of the merchant had at the time of such arrest or detention probable cause to believe that the person had shoplifted or committed willful concealment of goods or merchandise. The activation of an electronic article surveillance device as a result of a person exiting the premises or an area within the premises of a merchant where an electronic article surveillance device is located shall constitute probable cause for the detention of such person by such merchant, his agent or employee, provided such person is detained only in a reasonable manner and only for such time as is necessary for an inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the activation of the device, and provided that clear and visible notice is posted at each exit and location within the premises where such a device is located indicating the presence of an antishoplifting or inventory control device. For purposes of this section, "electronic article surveillance device" means an electronic device designed and operated for the purpose of detecting the removal from the premises, or a protected area within such premises, of specially marked or tagged merchandise. 
(Code 1969, § 17-39(b)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-105. 
Sec. 58-31. - Same-Definition. 
    As used in sections 58-29 and 58-30, the term "agents of the merchant" shall include attendants at any parking lot owned or leased by the merchant, or generally used by customers of the merchant through any contract or agreement between the owner of the parking lot and the merchant. 
(Code 1969, § 17-39(c)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-106. 
Sec. 58-32. - Sleeping in automobiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use an automobile for sleeping quarters in lieu of hotel, tourist cabin, boardinghouse, roominghouse or other similar accommodations, within the city. 
(Code 1969, § 17-41) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 
Sec. 58-33. - Unlawful operation of coinbox telephone, parking meter, vending machine, etc. 
    Any person who shall operate, cause to be operated, or attempt to operate or cause to be operated any coinbox telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine that operates on the coin-in-the-slot principle, whether of like kind or not, designed only to receive lawful coin of the United States of America, in connection with the use or enjoyment of telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges or any other service, or the sale of merchandise or other property, by means of a slug or any false, counterfeit, mutilated, sweated or foreign coin, or by any means, method, trick or device whatsoever not authorized by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coinbox telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine; or who shall obtain or receive telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges, merchandise, or any other service or property from any such coinbox telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machines, designed only to receive lawful coin of the United States of America, without depositing in or surrendering to such coinbox telephone, parking meter, vending machine, or other machine lawful coin of the United States of America to the amount required therefor by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coinbox telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-179. 
Sec. 58-34. - Urination or defecation in public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in or on any sidewalk, street or in any public place or any place where other persons are present, unless such urination or defecation is in a bathroom, restroom or other facilities specifically designed for such purposes. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-28.1) 
Sec. 58-35. - Vehicle, aircraft, etc.-Breaking, injuring, defacing, destroying or preventing operation. 
    Any person who shall individually or in association with one or more others willfully break, injure, tamper with or remove any part of any vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel for the purpose of injuring, defacing or destroying such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or temporarily or permanently preventing its useful operation, or for any purpose against the will or without the consent of the owner of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or who shall in any other manner willfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-42) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-146. 
Sec. 58-36. - Same-Entering or setting in motion. 
    Any person who shall, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, climb into or upon such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, with intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto, or who, while a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad is at rest and unattended, shall attempt to manipulate any of the levers and starting crank or other device, brakes or mechanism thereof or to set into motion such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, with the intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief, or injury thereto, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, except that the provisions of this section shall not apply when any such act is done in an emergency or in furtherance of public safety or by or under the direction of an officer in the regulation of traffic or performance of any other official duty. 
(Code 1969, § 17-43) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-147. 
Sec. 58-37. - Same-Bona fide repossession under lien. 
    The provisions of sections 58-35 and 58-36 shall not apply to a bona fide repossession of a vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel by the holder of a lien on such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or by the agents or employees of such lienholder. 
(Code 1969, § 17-44) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-148. 
Sec. 58-38. - Writing obscene language, etc., on walls, etc. 
    No person shall write obscene language or make obscene marks or drawings on any wall, fence or other thing in a public place or in any place exposed to the public view. 
(Code 1969, § 17-29) 
Secs. 58-39-58-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GAMBLING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Allowing betting or gambling in pool room, § 10-94. 

Sec. 58-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gambling device means and includes: 
(1)  Any device, machine, paraphernalia, equipment or other thing, including books, records and other papers, which are actually used in an illegal gambling operation or activity; and 
(2)  Any machine, apparatus, implement, instrument, contrivance, board or other thing, including but not limited to those dependent upon the insertion of a coin or other object for their operation, which operates, either completely automatically or with the aid of some physical act by the player or operator, in such a manner that, depending upon elements of chance, it may eject something of value or determine the prize or other thing of value to which the player is entitled; provided, however, that the return to the user of nothing more than additional chances or the right to use such machine is not deemed something of value within the meaning of this definition; and provided further, that machines that only sell, or entitle the user to, items of merchandise of equivalent value that may differ from each other in composition, size, shape or color, shall not be deemed gambling devices within the meaning of this definition. 
Such devices are no less gambling devices if they indicate beforehand the definite result of one or more operations but not all the operations. Nor are they any less a gambling device because, apart from their use or adaptability as such, they may also sell or deliver something of value on a basis other than chance. 
    Illegal gambling means the making, placing or receipt of any bet or wager in this city of money or other thing of value, made in exchange for a chance to win a prize, stake or other consideration or thing of value, dependent upon the result of any game, contest or any other event, the outcome of which is uncertain or a matter of chance, whether such game, contest or event occurs or is to occur inside or outside the limits of this city. 
    Interstate gambling means the conduct of an enterprise for profit which engages in the purchase or sale within the city of any interest in a lottery of another state or country, whether or not such interest is an actual lottery ticket, receipt, contingent promise to pay, order to purchase, or other record of such interest. 
    Operator means and includes any person who conducts, finances, manages, supervises, directs or owns all or part of an illegal gambling enterprise, activity or operation. 
(Code 1969, §§ 12-1, 12-2, 12-6) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325. 
Sec. 58-62. - Penalty for illegal gambling. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who illegally gambles or engages in interstate gambling shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. If an association or pool of persons illegally gambles, each person therein shall be guilty of illegal gambling. 
(Code 1969, §§ 12-1, 12-5) 
State Law reference- Penalty for illegal gambling, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-326. 
Sec. 58-63. - Owners, etc., of gambling place permitting its continuance; penalty. 
    If the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person in control of any place or conveyance knows, or reasonably should know, that it is being used for illegal gambling, and permits such gambling to continue without having notified a law enforcement officer of the presence of such illegal gambling activity, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, §§ 12-3, 12-9, 12-11) 
State Law reference- Owners, etc., of gambling place permitting its continuance, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-329. 
Sec. 58-64. - Accessories to gambling activity; penalty. 
    Any person, other than those persons specified in other sections of this article, who knowingly aids, abets or assists in the operation of an illegal gambling enterprise, activity or operation shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 12-4) 
State Law reference- Accessories to gambling activity, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-330. 
Sec. 58-65. - Illegal possession, etc., of gambling device; penalty. 
    A person is guilty of illegal possession of a gambling device when he manufactures, sells, transports, rents, gives away, places or possesses, or conducts or negotiates any transaction affecting or designed to affect ownership, custody or use of any gambling device, believing or having reason to believe that such gambling device is to be used in the advancement of unlawful gambling activity. Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 12-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-331. 
Sec. 58-66. - Exception to article; private residences. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to make it illegal to participate in a game of chance conducted in a private residence, provided such private residence is not commonly used for such games of chance and there is no operator as defined in section 58-61. 
(Code 1969, § 12-6) 
State Law reference- Game of chance in private residence, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-334. 
Sec. 58-67. - Forfeiture of money, gambling devices, etc., seized from illegal gambling enterprise; innocent owners or lienors. 
    All money, gambling devices, office equipment and other personal property used in connection with an illegal gambling enterprise or activity, and all money, stakes and things of value received or proposed to be received by a winner in any illegal gambling transaction, which are lawfully seized by any law enforcement officer or which shall lawfully come into his custody, shall be forfeited to the state by order of the court in which a conviction under this article is obtained. Such court shall order all money so forfeited to be paid over to the state, and by order shall make such disposition of other property so forfeited as the court deems proper, including award of such property to any state agency or charitable organization for lawful purposes; or in case of the sale thereof, the proceeds therefrom to be paid over to the state. Provided, however, that such forfeiture shall not extinguish the rights of any person without knowledge of the illegal use of such property who is the lawful owner or who has a lien on such property which has been perfected in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1969, § 12-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-336. 
Secs. 58-68-58-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROSTITUTION 

Sec. 58-86. - Being a prostitute or prostitution; penalty. 
    Any person who, for money or its equivalent, commits adultery, fornication or any act in violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-361, or offers to commit adultery, fornication or any act in violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-361, and thereafter does any substantial act in furtherance thereof, shall be guilty of being a prostitute, or prostitution, which shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 22-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-346. 
Sec. 58-87. - Keeping, residing in or frequenting a bawdy place. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any bawdy place, or to reside in or at or visit, for immoral purposes, any such bawdy place. Each and every day such bawdy place shall be kept, resided in or visited shall constitute a separate offense. In a prosecution under this section, the general reputation of the place may be proved. As used in this section, "bawdy place" shall mean any place within or without any building or structure which is used or is to be used for lewdness, assignation or prostitution. 
(Code 1969, §§ 22-2, 22-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-347. 
Sec. 58-88. - Aiding prostitution or illicit sexual intercourse. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or any officer, employee or agent of any firm, association or corporation, with knowledge of or good reason to believe the immoral purpose of such visit, to take or transport, or assist in taking or transporting, or offer to take or transport, on foot or in any way, any person to a place, whether within or without any building or structure, used or to be used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution within this city; or procure or assist in procuring for the purpose of illicit sexual intercourse, or any act violative of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-361; or to give any information or direction to any person with intent to enable such person to commit an act of prostitution. 
(Code 1969, § 22-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-348. 
Sec. 58-89. - Using vehicles to promote prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or chauffeur of any vehicle, with knowledge or reason to believe such vehicle is to be used for such purpose, to use such vehicle or to allow to be used for the purpose of prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse, or to aid or promote such prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse by the use of any such vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 22-5) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-349. 
Sec. 58-90. - Confinement of persons violating article. 
    Every person convicted of being a prostitute and every person convicted of violating any of the provisions of sections 58-87-58-89 shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor; provided, however, that in any case in which a city or county farm or hospital is available for the confinement of persons so convicted, confinement may be in such farm or hospital, in the discretion of the court or judge. 
(Code 1969, § 22-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-350. 
Secs. 58-91-58-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRESPASS 

Sec. 58-111. - Entering premises without lawful authority. 
    No person shall enter upon the premises of another without lawful authority or reasonable excuse so to do. 
(Code 1969, § 30-1) 
Sec. 58-112. - Trespass after having been forbidden to do so; penalties. 
    If any person without authority of law goes upon or remains upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or after having been forbidden to do so by a sign posted by such persons or by the holder of any easement or other right-of-way authorized by the instrument creating such interest to post such sign on such lands, structures, premises or portion or area thereof at a place where it may be reasonably seen, or if any person, whether he is the owner, tenant or otherwise entitled to the use of such land, building or premises, goes upon, or remains upon such land, building or premises after having been prohibited from doing so by a court of competent jurisdiction by an order issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-253, 16.1-253.1, 16.1-278.2 through 16.1-278.6, 16.1-278.8, 16.1-278.14, 16.1-278.15, or 16.1-279.1, or an ex parte order issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 20-103, and after having been served with such order, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-132 through 18.2-136. 
(Code 1969, § 30-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-119. 
Sec. 58-113. - Instigating, etc., trespass by others; preventing service to persons not forbidden to trespass. 
    If any person shall solicit, urge, encourage, exhort, instigate or procure another to go upon or remain upon the lands, buildings, or premises of another, or any part, portion or area thereof, knowing such other person to have been forbidden, either orally or in writing, to do so by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or knowing such other person to have been forbidden to do so by a sign posted on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof at a place where it may reasonably be seen; or if any person shall, on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof prevent or seek to prevent the owner, lessee, custodian, person in charge or any of his employees from rendering service to any person not so forbidden, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 30-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-120. 
Sec. 58-114. - Peeping or spying into structure occupied as dwelling. 
    If any person enters upon the property of another and secretly or furtively peeps, spies or attempts to peep or spy into or through a window, door or other aperture of any building, structure or other enclosure of any nature occupied or intended for occupancy as a dwelling, whether or not such building, structure or enclosure is permanently situated or transportable and whether or not such occupancy is permanent or temporary, such person shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 30-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-130. 
Sec. 58-115. - Trespass at night upon cemetery. 
    If any person, without the consent of the owner, proprietor or custodian, goes or enters in the nighttime upon the premises, property, driveways or walks of any cemetery, either public or private, for any purpose other than to visit the burial lot or grave of some member of his family, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 30-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-125. 
Sec. 58-116. - Trespass at night upon church or school property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of some person authorized to give such consent, to go or enter upon, in the nighttime, the premises or property of any church or upon any school property for any purpose other than to attend a meeting or service held or conducted in such church or school property. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 30-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-128. 
Sec. 58-117. - Entering property of another for purpose of damaging it, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the land, dwelling, outhouse or any other building of another for the purpose of damaging such property or any of the contents thereof or in any manner to interfere with the rights of the owner, user or the occupant thereof to use such property free from interference. 
(Code 1969, § 30-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-121. 
Secs. 58-118-58-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WEAPONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Control of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-29.15. 

Sec. 58-141. - Discharging firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fire any gun, pistol or other firearm in the city unless such firing is justified by law. 
(Code 1969, § 31-1) 
Charter reference- Power to regulate discharge of firearms (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-865) adopted, § 2.2. 
State Law reference- Willfully discharging firearms in public places, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-280; shooting in or along road or in street, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-286. 
Sec. 58-142. - Discharging air rifles, gravel shooters, bows, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge shots, bullets or similar pellets from an airgun, air rifle or pellet gun, or to discharge shot, gravel or similar substance from a gravel shooter, slingshot or similar implement, or to discharge arrows, bolts, nails or bullets from a bow or crossbow, within 100 yards of any residence or public street. Each act done in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 31-2) 
Sec. 58-143. - Throwing stones, etc. 
    No person shall throw stones or other like missiles. 
(Code 1969, § 31-3) 
Sec. 58-144. - Brandishing firearms, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to point or brandish any firearm, as described in subsection (c) of this section, or any object confusingly similar in appearance to a firearm, whether capable of being fired or not, in such manner as to reasonably induce fear in the mind of another. 
(b)  Any police officer, in the performance of his duty in making an arrest under the provisions of this section, shall not be civilly liable in damages for injuries or death resulting to the person being arrested if he had reason to believe that the person being arrested was pointing or brandishing a firearm, or object which was confusingly similar in appearance to a firearm, with intent to induce fear in the mind of another. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the word "firearm" shall mean any weapon in which ammunition may be used or discharged, by explosion or pneumatic pressure. The word "ammunition," as used in this section, shall mean a cartridge, pellet, ball, missile or projectile adapted for use in a firearm. 
(Code 1969, § 31-3.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-282. 
Sec. 58-145. - Carrying concealed weapons. 
(a)  If any person shall carry about his person, hidden from common observation, any pistol, dirk, bowie knife, switchblade knife, razor, slingshot, metal knucks or any weapon of like kind, he shall upon conviction thereof be fined not less than $20.00 nor more than $100.00 and, in the discretion of the court, may, in addition thereto, be committed to jail for not more than 12 months, and such pistol, dirk, bowie knife, switchblade, knife, razor, slingshot, metal knucks or weapon of like kind shall, by order of the judge of the court having jurisdiction, be forfeited to the city and may be seized by any officer as forfeited, and such weapons as may be needed for police officers and conservators of the peace shall be devoted to that purpose, and the remainder shall be destroyed by the officer having them in charge. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any police officers, sergeants, sheriffs, officers or guards of any institution or camp of the state corrections system, conservators of the peace other than notaries public, or to carriers of the United States mail in the rural districts, or to any collecting officer, while in the discharge of his official duty. No person shall be punishable under this section who has been granted permission to carry concealed weapons in accordance with state law. 
(c)  Any person may apply for a permit, pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308, as amended, to carry a concealed handgun. In order to determine the applicant's suitability for a concealed handgun permit, the applicant shall be fingerprinted. The fingerprints and descriptive information shall be forwarded through the Virginia State Police to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a national criminal history record check. All other provisions relating to an application for a concealed handgun permit shall be governed by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(Code 1969, § 31-4; Ord. of 6-23-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308. 
Sec. 58-146. - Prohibiting the selling or having in possession blackjacks, etc. 
    If any person sells or barters, or exhibits for sale or for barter, or gives or furnishes, or causes to be sold, bartered, given or furnished, or has in his possession or under his control, with the intent of selling, bartering, giving or furnishing, any blackjack, brass or metal knucks, any disc of whatever configuration having at least two points or pointed blades which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart, switchblade knife, ballistic knife, or like weapons, such person shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. The having in one's possession of any such weapon shall be prima facie evidence, except in the case of a conservator of the peace, of his intent to sell, barter, give or furnish the weapon. 
(Code 1969, § 31-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-311. 
Sec. 58-147. - Selling, etc., pistols, etc., to minors under 18 years of age. 
    No person shall sell, barter, give or furnish, or cause to be sold, bartered, given or furnished to any minor under 18 years of age, a pistol, dirk, switchblade knife or bowie knife, having good cause to believe him to be a minor under 18 years of age. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $2.50 nor more than $100.00. 
(Code 1969, § 31-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-309. 
Sec. 58-148. - Sale, etc., of toy firearms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, exchange, furnish, or dispose of by purchase, gift or in any other manner any toy gun, pistol, rifle or other toy firearm, if such toy gun, pistol, rifle or other toy firearm shall, by means of powder or other explosive, discharge blank or ball charges. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00, or confined in jail for a period of not less than 30 nor more than 90 days, or both. Each sale of any of the articles specified in this subsection to any person shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the sale of what are commonly known as cap pistols. 
(Code 1969, § 31-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-284. 
Secs. 58-149-58-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RIOTS, ROUTS, ETC.[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Riot and unlawful assembly, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-404 et seq. 

Sec. 58-171. - Riot, what constitutes; punishment. 
(a)  Any unlawful use, by three or more persons acting together, of force or violence which seriously jeopardizes the public safety, peace or order is riot. Every person convicted of participating in any riot shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  If any person carried, at the time of a riot, as described in subsection (a), any firearm or other deadly or dangerous weapon, he shall be guilty of a class 5 felony. 
(Code 1969, §§ 17-45(a), (b), 17-46) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-405. 
Sec. 58-172. - Unlawful assembly, what constitutes; punishment. 
(a)  Whenever three or more persons assembled share the common intent to advance some lawful or unlawful purpose by the commission of an act of unlawful force or violence likely to seriously jeopardize public safety, peace or order, and the assembly actually tends to inspire persons of ordinary courage with well-grounded fear of serious and immediate breaches of public safety, peace or order, then such assembly is an unlawful assembly. Every person who participates in any unlawful assembly shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  If any person carried, at the time of his participation in an unlawful assembly as described in subsection (a), any firearm or other deadly or dangerous weapon, he shall be guilty of a class 5 felony. 
(Code 1969, §§ 17-45(c), 17-47) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-406. 
Sec. 58-173. - Remaining at place of riot or unlawful assembly after warning to disperse; penalty. 
    Every person, except the owner or lessee of the premises, his family and nonrioting guests, and public officers and persons assisting them, who remains at the place of any riot or unlawful assembly after having been lawfully warned to disperse, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-48) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-407. 
Sec. 58-174. - Retiring when lawful assembly turns into riot or rout. 
    When three or more persons assemble for a lawful purpose and afterwards proceed to commit or attempt or threaten to commit an act which would amount to rout or riot if it had been the original purpose of the meeting, every person, except public officers and persons assisting them, who does not retire when the change of purpose is made known, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-49) 
Sec. 58-175. - Resisting or obstructing execution of legal process; penalty. 
    Every person acting jointly or in combination with any other person to resist or obstruct the execution of any legal process shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-50) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-409. 
Sec. 58-176. - Compliance with order of governor to execute process and preserve the peace. 
    All persons ordered or summoned by the governor of the state to execute, process and to preserve the peace, pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-410, are required to attend and act. No person shall, without lawful cause, refuse or neglect to obey the command. 
(Code 1969, § 17-51) 
Sec. 58-177. - Dispersal of unlawful or riotous assemblies; duties of officers. 
    When any number of persons, whether armed or not, are unlawfully or riotously assembled, the police officials of the city, and any assigned militia, or any of them, shall go among the persons assembled or as near to them as safety will permit and command them in the name of the state immediately to disperse. If upon such command the persons unlawfully assembled do not disperse immediately, such sheriff, officer or militia may use such force as is reasonably necessary to disperse them and to arrest those who fail or refuse to disperse. To accomplish this end, the sheriff or other law enforcement officer may request and use the assistance and services of private citizens. Every endeavor shall be used, both by such sheriff or other officers and by the officer commanding any other force, which can be made consistently with the preservation of life, to induce or force those unlawfully assembled to disperse before an attack is made upon those unlawfully assembled by which their lives may be endangered. 
(Code 1969, § 17-52) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-411. 
Sec. 58-178. - Endeavors to secure dispersement of rioters, etc.; immunity. 
(a)  Every endeavor must be used both by the police officers and by the officer commanding any other force, which can be made consistently with the preservation of life, to induce or force rioters to disperse before an attack is made upon them by which their lives may be endangered. 
(b)  No liability, criminal or civil, shall be imposed upon any person authorized to disperse or assist in dispersing a riot or unlawful assembly for any action of such person which was taken after those rioting or unlawfully assembled had been commanded to disperse, and which action was reasonably necessary under all the circumstances to disperse such riot or unlawful assembly or to arrest those who failed or refused to disperse. 
(Code 1969, § 17-53) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-412. 
Sec. 58-179. - Resistance to execution of process, etc., when city has been declared in riot; resisting force called out to quell riot. 
    Any person, who after the publication of a proclamation by the governor of the state or who after lawful notice to disperse and retire, resists or aids in resisting the execution of process in the city when declared to be in a state of riot or insurrection, or who aids or attempts the rescue or escape of another from lawful custody or confinement, or who resists or aids in resisting a force ordered out by the governor or any police officer to quell or suppress an insurrection or riot, shall be guilty of a class 4 felony, or, in the discretion of the jury or judge trying the case without a jury, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-54) 
ARTICLE VII. - ADULT BUSINESS 

Sec. 58-180. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult business means any adult bookstore, adult video store, adult model studio, adult motel, adult movie theater, adult nightclub, adult store, business providing adult entertainment, or any other establishment that regularly exploits an interest in matter relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or regularly features live entertainment intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons. 
    Adult entertainment means dancing, modeling or other live entertainment if the entertainment is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or is intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons; or the showing of films, motion pictures, videotapes, slides, photographs, CD-ROMs, DVD-ROMs, or other media that are characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult merchandise means magazines, books, other periodicals, videotapes, films, motion pictures, photographs, slides, CD-ROMS, DVD-ROMS, virtual reality devices, or other similar media that are characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; instruments, devices or paraphernalia either designed as representatives of human genital organs or female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs; or, lingerie or leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices. 
    Adult model studio means a commercial establishment, including a lingerie store or novelty store, in which a person performs or simulates specified sexual activities, exposes specified anatomical areas, or engages in other performances intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons. 
    Adult motel means a motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment that: (i) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and advertises the availability of this sexually-oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or (ii) offers a sleeping room for rent for a time period of less than ten hours; or (iii) allows a tenant or occupant to sub rent the sleeping room for a time period of less than ten hours. 
    Adult movie theater means an enclosed building regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons, excluding movies that have been rated "G," "PG," "PG-13," or "R" by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
    Adult nightclub means a restaurant, bar, club, or similar establishment that regularly features adult entertainment. 
    Adult store means an establishment having adult merchandise as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade. 
    Employee means an individual working or performing services for any adult business, including any independent contractor who provides services on behalf of any adult business to the patrons of such business, whether or not the individual receives any remuneration, gratuity, or tips of any kind, or pays the permitted or manager for the right to perform or entertain in the adult business. 
    Live entertainment means entertainment provided in person including, but not limited to, musical performances, music played by disc jockeys, public speaking, dramatic performances, dancing, modeling, or comedy performances. 
    Specified anatomical areas means less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; sexual intercourse or sodomy; or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast, including masturbation. 
(Ord. of 10-9-06(1)) 
Sec. 58-181. - Permit required from chief of police-Application; issuance; duration; renewal. 
(a)  Every person either operating or desiring to operate an adult business, in addition to obtaining any required business license from the commissioner of the revenue, shall apply to the chief of police, or his designee, for a permit to conduct such activity. Each such application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(b)  Information required on and with the permit application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, age, sex, race, weight, height, hair and eye color, permanent address, telephone number, date and place of birth and social security number. 
(2)  Names and addresses of references. 
(3)  Whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of the offense, when and where convicted and the penalty or punishment assessed. 
(4)  Whether the applicant holds or has been held, in the name of this business or any other, any other permits under this ordinance or a similar adult use ordinance from another locality within the past five years, and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses. 
(5)  Whether the applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked under any statute or ordinance requiring a permit to operate an adult business and, if so, when and where the denial or revocation occurred. 
(6)  Photograph and fingerprints of applicant. 
(7)  Name, including any fictitious names, and address of the business for which a permit is sought. 
(8)  A criminal records check of the applicant shall be provided by the applicant with the application, along with the applicant's written authorization to investigate whether the information provided by the applicant is true. 
(9)  A description of the intended business activity and, if adult entertainment is to be performed, a detailed description of such entertainment. 
(10)  Written declaration, dated and signed by the applicant, certifying that the information contained in the application is true and correct. 
(c)  For a corporation, partnership or other legal entity, "applicant" includes each officer, director, partner or principal of the entity and the managers of the business. 
(d)  The chief of police or his designee shall act on the application within 30 days of the filing of an application containing all of the information required by this section, unless information requested from other law enforcement agencies is not received within that 30-day period, in which case the chief of police or his designee shall have an additional 30 days to act on the application. Upon the expiration of the application time period, unless the applicant requests and is granted a reasonable extension of time, the applicant may, at its option, begin operating the business for which the permit is sought, unless and until the chief of police or his designee notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reasons for denial. 
(e)  The applicant shall be issued a permit unless the city's investigation or the information furnished by the applicant shows any of the following: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide information required by this article or has falsely answered a question. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony within the past five years. 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude or a crime involving the obscenity laws within the past three years. 
(4)  The applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked within the past 12 months under any statute or ordinance requiring a permit to operate an adult business. 
(5)  Failure of the applicant's business to comply with the city's business license, zoning, building, plumbing, utility, health, electric or fire prevention codes, or with any other applicable city or state laws or regulations. 
(6)  The application fee has not been paid. 
(f)  If the application is denied, the chief of police or his designee shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reasons for the denial. 
(g)  The permit shall be valid for 12 months from the date thereof and may be renewed in the same manner as it was initially obtained. The application fee for a renewal permit shall be $100.00. No permit shall be transferable. 
(h)  Any changes in the ownership or principals of the business entity to which the permit is issued or in the managers of the business will automatically make the permit void. Such changes shall be reported to the chief of police or his designee, and a new application may be submitted for review. 
(Ord. of 10-9-06(1)) 
Sec. 58-182. - Same-Grounds for revocation. 
    The chief of police or his designee may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article for the following: 
(a)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false or misleading statement contained in the application. 
(b)  Conviction of the permittee, or any of its officers, directors, partners, employees or principals, for any felony, crime involving moral turpitude, or crime involving the obscenity laws after the permit is issued. 
(c)  The permittee or an employee of the permittee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of illegal controlled substances in or on the premises. 
(d)  The permittee or an employee of the permittee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises. 
(e)  The permittee has refused to allow an inspection of the adult business premises as authorized by this article. 
(f)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, employees of the adult business at the time of the offenses committed an offense in or on the permitted premises for which a conviction has been obtained constituting: 
1.  Aiding, abetting or harboring a runaway child; 
2.  Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; 
3.  Exposing minors to harmful materials; 
4.  Dissemination of obscenity; 
5.  Sexual assault; or 
6.  Violation of section 58-191 of this Code. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the permit. 
(g)  The permittee is convicted of violations regarding any taxes or fees related to the adult business. 
(h)  The permittee has failed to operate or manage an adult business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner. 
(i)  The permittee or an employee of the permittee, except a permittee or employee of a permittee of an adult motel, has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual activity to occur in or on the permitted premises. 
(j)  The permittee has been operating an adult business not approved under the applicable permit. 
(k)  The permittee has failed to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(l)  The permittee's business fails to comply with other applicable city or state laws or regulations. 
(m)  The failure of the permittee to provide to the chief of police information regarding his/her new permanent address within 30 days of such change. 
(Ord. of 10-9-06(1)) 
Sec. 58-183. - Procedure upon denial of an application or revocation of a permit. 
(a)  If the chief of police or his designee denies an application or revokes a permit, he shall notify the applicant or permittee in writing of such action, the reasons therefor, and the right to request a hearing. To receive a hearing, the applicant or permittee must make a written hearing request which must be received by the chief of police or his designee within ten days of the date of the notice of denial or revocation. If a timely hearing request is not received by the chief of police or his designee, the decision of the chief of police or his designee shall be final. If a hearing is properly requested, it shall be held within ten days from receipt of the hearing request. The hearing shall be presided over by the chief of police or his designee. The applicant or permittee shall have the right to present evidence and argument or to have counsel do so. Within five days of the hearing, the chief of police or his designee shall render his decision which shall be final. A permittee must discontinue operation of its business when the decision to revoke the permit becomes final. 
(b)  When an imminent threat of substantial harm to public health or safety requires such action, the chief of police or his designee may immediately revoke a permit issued under this article by so stating in a written notice to the permittee. When action is taken pursuant to this subsection, the permittee shall immediately discontinue operation of its business, but shall have the right to a hearing as stated in subsection (a). 
(Ord. of 10-9-06(1)) 
Sec. 58-184. - Availability of prompt judicial review. 
    After denial of an initial or renewal application or after revocation of a permit by the chief of police or his designee, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in the circuit court of the city. Any such request for judicial review shall be filed within 30 days of when the administrative action becomes final. The city will facilitate the applicant's obtaining prompt review. 
(Ord. of 10-9-06(1)) 
Sec. 58-185. - Inspection. 
(a)  In addition to any existing legal authority, representatives of city departments shall have the authority to inspect an adult business for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to sleeping rooms of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer. 
(Ord. of 10-9-06(1)) 
Sec. 58-186. - Regulations pertaining to adult businesses providing adult entertainment. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, adult entertainment is defined as dancing, modeling or other live entertainment if the entertainment is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or is intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons. 
(b)  No person shall provide adult entertainment for patrons of an adult business except upon a stage located in an area open to all patrons of the business. The stage shall be at least 18 inches above the level of the floor and separated by a distance of at least three feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons. No patron shall be permitted within three feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. 
(c)  The adult business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for female and male entertainers which shall not be occupied or used in any way by anyone other than them. 
(d)  The adult business shall provide entertainers access between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If separate access is not physically feasible, the establishment shall provide a walk aisle at least four feet wide for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers which prevents any physical contact between patrons and entertainers. 
(e)  No entertainer shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer while in or on the premises of the adult business. 
(f)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer. A patron who wishes to pay or give a gratuity to an entertainer shall place the gratuity in a container that is at all times located separately from the entertainers for the purpose of preventing any physical contact between a patron and an entertainer. No entertainer shall solicit any gratuity from any patron. 
(g)  Patrons must be at least 18 years of age. 
(h)  No operator or manager of an adult business shall cause or allow an entertainer to contract to or engage in any entertainment such as a "couch," a "straddle," or "lap" dance with a patron while in or on the premises of an adult business. No entertainer shall contract to or engage in a "couch," "straddle," or "lap" dance with a patron while in or on the establishment premises. For purposes of this subsection, "couch," "straddle," or "lap" dance is defined as an employee of the establishment intentionally touching any patron while engaged in any specified sexual activity or other activity intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons, or the exposure of any specified anatomical area. 
(i)  This section shall not apply to an employee of an establishment who, while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or bartender, comes within three feet of a patron. No employee shall engage in any specified sexual activity or other activity intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons, or expose any specified anatomical area while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or bartender. 
(Ord. of 10-9-06(1)) 
Sec. 58-187. - Regulations pertaining to adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in section 58-180 of this Code. 
(b)  No person who is in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have an adult business permit shall rent or subrent a sleeping room to a person, and within ten hours from the time the room is rented, rent or subrent the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms rent or subrent mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. of 10-9-06(1)) 
Sec. 58-188. - Transfer of permit prohibited. 
(a)  A permittee shall not operate an adult business at any place other than at the address designated in the approved permit. 
(b)  A permittee shall not transfer its permit to another person. 
(Ord. of 10-9-06(1)) 
Sec. 58-189. - Public indecency. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit any conduct which violates section 58-191 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 10-9-06(1)) 
Sec. 58-190. - Violations. 
    Except as permitted in section 58-181(d), operation of an adult business without a permit is prohibited. Violations of this article shall be unlawful and subject to the provisions of section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 10-9-06(1)) 
Sec. 58-191. - Public indecency prohibited. 
(a)  For purposes of this section nudity shall mean: 
(1)  Having the pubic region or genitals covered less than completely and opaquely; 
(2)  Having less than the majority of each buttock completely and opaquely covered; or 
(3)  Having any portion of the nipple or areola of the female breast or that portion of the female breast distal to and below any part of the areola covered less than completely and opaquely. 
(b)  Every person who knowingly, voluntarily and intentionally appears in a state of nudity in public or in a public place or in a place open to the public or to public view, or in an establishment which offers memberships to the public, or who employs, encourages or procures another so to appear, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Every person who knowingly, voluntarily and intentionally engages in specified sexual activities in public or in a public place or in a place open to the public or to public view, or in an establishment which offers memberships to the public, or who employs, encourages or procures another so to engage, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(d)  For purposes of this section specified sexual activities shall mean: showing human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; real or simulated acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy or flagellation; fondling, caressing or other erotic touching of one's own or another's genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or showing the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to apply to the presentation of any play, ballet, drama, tableau, production or motion picture in any theater, concert hall, school, college, museum of fine arts or other similar establishment which is primarily devoted to such presentations as a form of expression of opinion, communication, speech, ideas, information, art or drama. No person shall be in violation of this section for breast feeding a child in any public place or any places where others are present. 
(Ord. of 10-9-06(1)) 
Secs. 58-192-58-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MASSAGE PARLORS 

Sec. 58-200. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning assigned below, except in those instances when the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Client means any person receiving a massage from a massage technician who has been compensated for administering the massage. 
    Erogenous area means the genitals of a person and the nipples and areolae of a female person. 
    Massage means a method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading or tapping or vibrating with the hand or any instrument. 
    Massage parlor means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person administers a physical massage of the body of another or who administers or gives a Turkish, Swedish, vapor, sweat, electric, salt, magnetic or other kind or character of massage, both alcohol rub, fomentation, manipulation of the body or other similar procedure. This definition shall not be construed to include a hospital, nursing home, medical clinic, or the office of the duly licensed physician, surgeon, physical therapist licensed by the state, chiropractor, osteopath, or a massage therapist as licensed by the Virginia Board of Nursing, a barbershop or beauty salon in which massages are administered only to the scalp, the face, the neck, or the shoulders, the Young Men's Christian Association, the Young Women's Christian Association, or an exercise club where massage is performed by a person of the same sex as the subject of the massage. 
    Massage technician means any person who administers to another person or to a client a massage, alcohol rub, bath, manipulation of the body or any similar at a massage parlor or off-premises location. This definition shall not be construed to include a massage therapist licensed by the Virginia Board of Nursing. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 58-201. - Required facilities; maintenance of facilities. 
(a)  Each massage parlor shall have and shall maintain in a clean, sanitary and workable condition: 
(1)  Equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in performing acts of massage. All such instruments and materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron. 
(2)  Hot and cold water and soap at all times. 
(3)  Closed cabinets for the use of storage of clean linen and other materials used in connection with administering massages. 
(4)  Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities for patrons. A minimum of one tub or shower, and one dressing room containing a separate locker for each patron to be served, which locker shall be capable of being locked, as well as a minimum of one toilet and one washbasin, shall be provided by every massage establishment; provided, that if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the establishment, a separate massage room, separate bathing, separate dressing and separate toilet facilities shall be provided for male and for female patrons. 
(b)  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and any other physical facilities for the establishment shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Heat, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets shall be cleaned each day the parlor is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
(c)  Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron of the parlor or each patron receiving massage services. No common patron receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. 
(d)  Either the massage parlor quarters or the floor of the building on which the quarters are located shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial services. 
(e)  All massage tubs, bathtubs, shower stalls and steam or bath areas shall have nonporous surfaces which may be readily disinfected. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 58-202. - Massage technician permit; restrictions as to serving clients with skin infections, etc. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to give a massage or come in contact with a client of any massage parlor unless such person shall have a valid massage technician permit. Any person who desires to secure a massage technician permit shall file an application with the city manager. The application shall contain the name, address, telephone number, last previous address, date of birth, place of birth, height, weight and current and last previous place of employment of the applicant. All applicants shall undergo a physical examination for contagious and communicable diseases, a chest x-ray which is to be made and interpreted by a trained radiologist acceptable to the city manager and such other laboratory tests, done in a laboratory acceptable to the city manager, as may be necessitated by the above examination, and shall furnish to the city manager a certificate based upon and issued within 30 days of such examination, signed by a physician duly licensed by the state and stating that the person examined is either free from any contagious or communicable disease or incapable of communicating any of such diseases to others. Such persons shall undergo the physical examination referred to in this section and submit to the city manager the certificate required in this section within five days of the commencement of their employment and at least once every 12 months thereafter. The city manager or his duly authorized representative, when he has cause to believe that the massage technician is capable of communicating any contagious disease to others, may at any time require an immediate physical examination of any such person. 
(b)  Upon presentation to and approval by the city manager of the certificate required in this section, the city manager shall issue a permit to the applicant, containing among other items the name of the holder, the date of expiration, and a statement that the holder has complied with the provisions of this section. The city manager shall refuse to issue such card if the applicant for a massage technician's permit has either failed to furnish the certificate required in this section or is not free from any contagious or communicable disease. 
(c)  The employer of any person seeking a massage technician's permit shall require all such persons to undergo the examination and obtain the certificates provided by this section, shall register at the place of employment the name and date of employment of each employee, and shall have the permits of all employees available for the city manager at all reasonable times. 
(d)  No massage technician shall knowingly serve any patron infected with any fungus or other skin infection, nor shall service be performed on any patron exhibiting skin inflammation or eruptions; provided, that a duly licensed physician may certify that any such patron may be safely served, prescribing the conditions thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 58-203. - Records of treatment; giving false names when seeking massage; penalty. 
(a)  Every person operating a massage parlor under a permit as provided in this article shall keep a record of the date and hour of each treatment, the name and address of each patron and the name of the technician administering such treatment. Such record shall be open to inspection by the city manager or his designee and to law enforcement officers. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while seeking massage, to give a false or fictitious name to a massage parlor operator or employee. Any person convicted of giving a false or fictitious name to a massage parlor operator or employee while seeking a massage shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 58-204. - Massages, etc. that are unlawful; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a massage technician or any other person in a massage parlor or at an off-premises location to place his or her hands upon, touch with any part of his or her body, or massage an erogenous area of any other person or client; nor shall any person cause or permit in or about his place of business or in connection with his business any agent, employee or servant or any other person under his control or supervision to place his or her hands upon, touch with any part of his or her body, or massage on erogenous area of any other person or client. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any treatment administered in good faith by a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, physical therapist licensed by the state, massage therapist licensed by the Virginia Board of Nursing or to a licensed nurse acting under direct prescription and direction of any such physician, surgeon, chiropractor, or osteopath; nor shall this section apply to barbers or beauticians who give massage to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders only. 
(c)  No massage technician or any person claiming to be a massage technician or a client in a massage parlor or at an off-premises location shall expose his or her erogenous area or any portion thereof to any person. 
(d)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall upon conviction, be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor, and each day's failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 58-205. - Responsibilities of permittee. 
    No person granted a massage parlor permit pursuant to this article shall operate under any name or at any location not specified in the permit. The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining the premises in accordance with the requirements of this article and for the conduct of all agents and employees in complying with the requirements of this article. No permittee shall permit on the premises activity or behavior prohibited by the laws of the United States, the state or the city relating to gambling, prostitution, sodomy, adultery, fornication, lewd and lascivious cohabitation or other laws relating to obscenity or moral turpitude. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 58-206. - Required permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises within the city, the business of a massage parlor, or to render or permit to be rendered massage services at a location removed from a massage establishment within the city, without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article or, a permit having been issued, when such permit shall have been suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 58-207. - Exemptions from requirement. 
    The requirements of section 58-206 shall not apply to a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, physical therapist licensed by the state, a massage therapist licensed by the Virginia Board of Nursing, or a licensed nurse acting under the direct prescription and direction of such persons. The requirements of section 58-206 shall not apply to barber shops or beauty shops in which massage is given to the scalp, face, neck, or shoulders only. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 58-208. - Application-Generally; fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit to operate a massage parlor or establishment shall make application to the city manager, who shall refer all such applications to the chief of police for investigation. An application to obtain a permit to operate a massage establishment shall be accompanied by a receipt showing payment to the director of finance of the city of the sum of $50.00, such sum to cover the costs of investigations by the chief of policy and the city manager or other departments. 
(b)  Any such application shall contain: 
(1)  The full name, age, height, weight and present address of the applicant. 
(2)  The applicant's last previous address immediately prior to the present address. 
(3)  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(4)  Previous experience of the applicant as a massage parlor operator or as a massage technician. 
(5)  All criminal convictions, other than traffic offenses, and place of conviction of the applicant. 
(6)  The location of such massage parlor and, if such premises are not fully constructed, plans for any construction to take place. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 58-209. - Referral to certain administrative officers. 
    The city manager shall refer each application for a massage parlor permit to the administrative officers of the city charged with the enforcement of the building, plumbing, electrical and fire prevention codes and to the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 58-210. - Issuance. 
    Within 14 days of the receipt of a massage parlor permit application, the city manager shall issue, or reissue in case the permit has been revoked, the permit, if he shall find that: 
(1)  The premises to be used or constructed meet the building, plumbing, electrical and fire prevention codes of the city as reported by the administrative officers of the city; 
(2)  The facilities comply with the other requirements of this article; 
(3)  The experience and knowledge of the permittee is such that the operation of the proposed massage parlor will not be detrimental to the health and safety of the patrons; and 
(4)  The information in the application is truthful. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 58-211. - Display of permit and list of employed technicians. 
    Every person to whom a permit shall have been granted shall display such permit in a conspicuous place so that the permit may be readily seen by anyone entering the premises where the massage is given. Such permittee shall also display in a conspicuous place list of all massage technicians employed in the massage parlor. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 58-212. - Revocation and suspension of permits generally. 
    The city manager may revoke or suspend for a term, as provided in this section, any permit issued pursuant to this article upon the violation of any of the rules, requirements or restrictions of this article. No permit, however, shall be revoked until after a hearing shall have been held by the city manager to determine just cause for such revocation. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given the opportunity to present evidence and arguments against revocation or suspension. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the permittee by mailing at least five days prior to such hearing a written statement setting forth the grounds of complaint, addressed to the permittee at the address of his permit. After such hearing, the city manager may: 
(1)  Suspend such permit for a term not to exceed 60 days; 
(2)  Revoke the permit; or 
(3)  Dismiss the complaint. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 58-213. - Permit nontransferable; grounds for revocation of permit. 
    The sale or transfer of the interest of the permittee in a massage parlor shall render null and void any permit issued pursuant to this article. The enlargement or alteration of the structure at which the massage parlor is operated shall be deemed to revoke such permit, ipso facto, unless prior approval shall have been obtained from the city manager. The hiring and use of massage technicians not listed with the city manager shall be deemed to revoke such permit, ipso facto, unless the information required by section 58-202 shall have been first filed with the city manager. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2017(1)) 
Chapter 62 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; signs, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 90; zoning, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Planning, subdivision of land and zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-427 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Adoption of major streets plan. 
    In accordance with the applicable provisions of the Code of Virginia, the major streets plan portion of the comprehensive plan for the municipality is hereby adopted as set out and described in a certain map entitled "Major Streets Plan," dated June 26, 1961, which accompanies and is hereby declared to be a part of this section. Such map and all notations, references and designations shown thereon shall be as much a part of this section as if the map and all notations, references and designations were all fully set out in this section. 
(Code 1969, § 18-7) 
Editor's note- The map referred to in the above section is available for inspection in the office of the clerk of council. 
State Law reference- Comprehensive plan, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2223. 
Secs. 62-2-62-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 62-36. - Creation. 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred under the applicable sections of state law, there is hereby created a city planning commission for the purposes and with the functions, powers and duties prescribed by law for such city planning commissions. 
(Code 1969, § 18-1) 
State Law reference- Planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2210. 
Sec. 62-37. - Composition; appointment and term of members. 
    The planning commission shall be composed of not less than five nor more than seven members, who shall be appointed by the city council. All of such members shall be residents of the city and freeholders qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions of community growth and development. The members of the commission shall serve for staggered terms of four years each. 
(Code 1969, § 18-2) 
Sec. 62-38. - Filling of vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the planning commission, however caused, shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term only. 
(Code 1969, § 18-3) 
Sec. 62-39. - Compensation of members. 
    All members of the planning commission shall be compensated as determined from time to time by city council and shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred. 
(Code 1969, § 18-5; Ord. of 7-23-01(1)) 
Sec. 62-40. - Powers, duties and functions. 
    The planning commission shall have and exercise all such powers and shall discharge all such duties and functions as are provided for in the applicable laws of the state. 
(Code 1969, § 18-6) 
Sec. 62-41. - Removal of members. 
    Any member of the planning commission may be removed from office for malfeasance in office. 
(Code 1969, § 18-4) 
Chapter 66 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 2-13-2017(2) repealed the former Ch. 66 and enacted a new Ch. 66 as set out herein. The section numbering has been maintained per said ordinance. The former chapter pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1969, §§ 24A-2-24A-7, 24A-9-24A-32, 24A-34-24A-66; Ord. of 6-27-2005; and Ord. of 5-28-2013. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis. 
Charter reference- Powers of city generally, § 2.1 et seq.; city manager, § 5.1 et seq.; city officers and employees, § 6.1 et seq.; revocability of ordinance variation permits, § 12.3. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; signs designating city as bird sanctuary, § 14-57; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; planning, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; city electric system, § 90-26 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Outdoor advertising in sight of public highways, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-351 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Statement of purpose. 
    Signs perform an important function in identifying and promoting properties, businesses, services, residences, events, and other matters of interest to the public. However, signs also obstruct views, distract motorists, displace alternative uses for land, and pose other problems that legitimately call for regulation. The intent of this chapter is to regulate all signs within the City of Salem to ensure the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community, protect against destruction of or encroachment upon historic areas, to safeguard that signs are appropriate for their respective uses, in keeping with the appearance of the affected property and surrounding environment, and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by: 
(1)  Promoting the safety of the traveling public and pedestrians by assuring quality construction and maintenance of signs, providing for appropriate sign location relative to rights-of-way and other structures in order to maintain safe sight distances and access; minimizing distractions for motorists; preventing traffic signs and signals from becoming obscure; improving motorists' ability to quickly identify roadside destinations; and maintaining appropriate sign standards that support police surveillance activities. 
(2)  Prohibiting the construction of signs in such numbers, sizes, designs, illumination, and locations as may create a hazard to pedestrians and motorists. 
(3)  Enhancing the visual appearance of the city, with particular emphasis on protecting views of its significant surrounding natural features, including the Blue Ridge and Allegheny Mountains, and with emphasis on improving the visual quality of the built environment and creating a convenient, attractive and harmonious community, protection against destruction of or encroachment upon historic areas. 
(4)  Ensuring sign design in the downtown, building on the traditional image and visual environment the City of Salem seeks to promote. 
(5)  Protecting property values by improving the quality of the built environment and eliminating nuisances to the use of other properties due to sign brightness, size, height or movement. 
(6)  Promoting orderly development in all zones within the city. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 66-2. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-3. - Inspections. 
    The city manager or his designee shall inspect annually, or at such other times as he deems necessary, each sign regulated by this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether such sign is secure or insecure, and whether it is in need of repair or removal, and if it conforms to all the requirements herein. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 66-4. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-5. - Unsafe signs and signs maintained in violation of chapter. 
A.  Unsafe signs. If the city manager or his designee shall find that any sign regulated under this chapter is unsafe or insecure, or is a hazard to the public, he shall give written notice to the permittee, lessee, operator or owner thereof. If the permittee, lessee, operator or owner fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply within 15 days after such notice, such sign may be removed or altered by the city manager or his designee at the expense of the permittee, lessee, operator or owner of the property upon which it is located, so as to comply. The city manager or his designee shall refuse to issue any other or further permit to any permittee, lessee, operator or owner who refuses to pay costs so assessed. The city manager or his designee may cause any sign which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice. Any sign which constitutes a nuisance may be abated by the city under the requirements of the Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-900, 15.2-906, and/or 15.2-1115. 
B.  Signs in violation of this chapter-Penalty and enforcement. 
1.  Any violation of the requirements of this chapter shall be unlawful and any person convicted of such violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
2.  In lieu of criminal prosecution for violations of any provision of this chapter, the city may impose a civil penalty against any person who violates any provision of this chapter as follows: 
a.  For the first offense, violators shall receive a written warning by the city manager or his designee. 
b.  For the second offense, the violators shall be fined $50.00, by written notice. 
c.  For the third and each subsequent offense, violators shall be fined $100.00 per sign per day the violation remains, the fine to be imposed by written notice and the sign may be removed by the city manager or his designee. 
d.  Fines shall be chargeable to the owner of the sign or premises and may be collected as taxes and levies are collected. 
e.  Should the city have cause to remove the sign all costs incurred shall be chargeable to the owner of the sign or premises and may be collected as taxes and levies are collected. 
f.  Every cost authorized by this section with which the owner of the premises shall have been assessed shall constitute a lien against the property from which the sign was removed, the lien to continue until actual payment of such cost shall have been made. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2); Ord. of 4-9-2018(2)) 
Sec. 66-6. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-7. - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Signs legally in existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter, which do not conform to the requirements of this chapter, shall be considered nonconforming signs. 
1.  Electronic sign settings not meeting the regulations herein shall not be considered nonconforming since the settings may be easily altered. 
2.  The burden of establishing nonconforming status of signs and of the physical characteristics/location of such signs shall be that of the owner of the property. Upon notice from the city manager, or his designee, a property owner shall submit verification that sign(s) were lawfully existing at time of construction. Failure to provide such verification shall be cause for order to remove sign(s) or bring sign(s) into compliance with the current ordinance. 
3.  To determine the legal status of existing signs in each of the cases listed in section 66-7(B), the applicant shall submit the following information to the city manager or his designee: 
a.  Type(s) of existing sign(s) located on the property. 
b.  The area and height of all signs. 
c.  For freestanding signs, the distance between the curbline or shoulder and the nearest portion of the sign. A certified plat may be required. 
d.  Type of sign illumination. 
e.  The electronic capabilities of the sign. 
f.  The material of which the sign is constructed. 
g.  The building frontage. 
h.  The control method for glare and brightness. 
B.  All permanent signs and sign structures shall be brought into conformance with the sign regulations when and if the following occurs: 
1.  The sign is removed, relocated, or significantly altered. Significant alterations include changes in the height, size or dimension of the sign. Changes to the sign copy or the replacement of a sign face on a nonconforming sign shall not be considered a significant alteration. Moving a window sign to another location within or to another window shall be considered a relocated sign. 
2.  If less than 50 percent of the sign area is destroyed or damaged, it may be restored within two years after such destruction or damage but shall not be enlarged in any manner. 
3.  If more than 50 percent of the sign area is destroyed or damaged, it shall not be reconstructed but may be replaced with a sign that is in full accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
4.  An alteration in the structure of a sign support. 
5.  A change in the mechanical facilities or type of illumination. 
6.  A change in the material of the sign face. 
7.  The property on which the nonconforming sign is located submits a subdivision or land development application or site plan requiring city review and approval. 
8.  The property on which the nonconforming sign is located submits an application for an amendment to the zoning ordinance requiring the review and approval of city council. 
9.  Discontinued use. If any nonconforming sign or any use to which such a sign applies is discontinued for a period exceeding two years, it shall then be made to conform with the requirements of this chapter or removed. In addition, a nonconforming sign structure shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the property. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign structure, the city manager, or his designee, shall give the owner 15 days' written notice to remove it. Upon failure to comply with this notice, the city manager, or his designee, may enter the property upon which the sign is located and remove any such sign or may initiate such action as may be necessary to gain compliance with this provision. The cost of such removal shall be chargeable to the property owner and may be collected as taxes and levies. 
10.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent keeping in good repair a nonconforming sign. Nonconforming signs shall not be extended or structurally reconstructured or altered in any manner, except a sign face may be changed so long as the new face is equal to or reduced in height and/or sign area. The material of the sign face shall not be changed. 
C.  Prior to the events listed in section 66-7(B), nonconforming signs may be repainted or repaired up to 50 percent of the replacement cost of the sign, the sign copy may be changed, and sign faces may be replaced provided that these actions do not increase the dimensions of the existing sign, and do not in any way increase the extent of the sign's nonconformity. 
D.  Nonconforming signs shall be exempt from the provisions of section 66-7, if the nonconforming sign possesses documented historic value, and has met the requirements and has been approved in accordance with section 66-13. 
E.  All electronic signs must be programmed so as to conform to the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2); Ord. of 4-9-2018(2)) 
Sec. 66-8. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-9. - Removal of sign no longer advertising existing bona fide business. 
    Whenever any sign no longer advertises an existing bona fide business, service or product manufactured on a premises, and such business, service or product has not been located or been available on the premises for more than two years, such sign shall be taken down and removed within 30 days, after written notification from the city manager or his designee, by the permittee, lessee or operator or owner of the building or structure upon which such sign may be found. Upon failure of the recipient of such notice to comply therewith within the time specified therein, the city manager or his designee may cause removal of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building or structure to which such sign is attached. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring the removal of any sign owned by a person licensed to engage in the business of outdoor advertising in the state; provided the sign in question is kept and maintained in a proper condition. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 66-10. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-11. - Application of chapter to certain types of signs. 
    Subject to the provisions of section 66-5, the following signs may be allowed without a sign permit and may not be included in the determination of the type, number, or area of permanent signs allowed within a zoning district, provided such signs comply with the regulations in this section, if any. 
A.  Official traffic signs. 
B.  Signs erected by the city including regulatory signs. 
C.  Public signs: Signs required by the city for utilities, including traffic, utility, safety, railroad crossing, and identification signs for public facilities. 
D.  Legal notices. 
E.  Real estate signs which advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon which such signs are located only, not exceeding six square feet in area in residential districts and not exceeding 32 square feet in area in any other district. 
F.  Temporary signs, as approved as a grand opening event by the city manager, or his designee, in accordance with section 66-105, permitted signs (temporary signs). 
G.  Non-illuminated incidental signs, including incidental window signs, not exceeding two square feet. "Open" signs may be illuminated. 
H.  Minor signs: Minor signs shall not be electronic nor illuminated. No minor sign may include commercial messaging. No minor sign shall be located on public property or in the right-of-way. Minor signs shall not exceed 24 square feet. Minor signs shall include: 
1.  Political campaign signs. 
2.  Temporary directional signs. 
3.  Signs inside a building, or other enclosed facility, which are not meant to be viewed from the outside, and are located greater than three feet from the window. 
4.  Holiday and other temporary seasonal decorations. 
5.  Personal expression and ideological signs. 
6.  Address signs: Stating address, number and/or name of occupants of the premises. 
7.  Security and warning signs: These limitations shall not apply to the posting of conventional "no trespassing" signs in accordance with state law. 
8.  Private drive signs. 
9.  Signs denoting the architect, engineer or contractor, when placed upon work under construction. 
I.  Flags: Non-commercial flags, flags of any nation, state, local, or other geopolitical entity, or flags not related to or used to draw attention to a commercial business, product, or service. 
1.  Flags and flagpoles shall not be located within any right-of-way, unless meets the requirements of allowed encroachments as prescribed by the Handbook to Downtown Salem. 
2.  Flags, containing commercial messaging, shall be considered temporary signs. See section 66-105(A). 
J.  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of construction when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials. 
K.  Signs which are a permanent architectural feature of a building or structure, existing at the time of adoption of this chapter. 
L.  Art and murals, provided such signs do not contain any commercial messaging. 
M.  Vehicular signs that meet the following conditions: 
1.  The primary purpose of such a vehicle or trailer is not the display of signs. 
2.  The signs are magnetic, decals or painted upon an integral part of the vehicle or equipment as originally designed by the manufacturer, and do not break the silhouette of the vehicle. 
3.  The vehicle is in operating condition, currently registered and licensed to operate on public streets when applicable, and actively used in the daily function of the business to which such signs relate. 
4.  The vehicle is not parked within 20 feet of the right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 66-12. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-13. - Landmark signs. 
    Signs that do not advertise an existing bona fide business, service or product manufactured on a premises but which may be of significant civic, historic, architectural, or cultural interest may be declared a landmark sign and deemed to be in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and subject to the following: 
A.  An application shall be made to the planning commission. 
B.  Applicants shall provide at the time of application, a written history of the existing sign, noting any and all physical changes or modifications, and/or a written account of the nature of the significance to the community. 
C.  Applicants shall provide photographs of the sign, preferably at various times throughout its history, and from as many different views as possible, or plans or drawings of the proposed sign from different views, along with a certified plat determining location, and photos of the existing property on which the sign will reside. 
D.  Applicants shall provide a maintenance plan as to how the sign will be maintained in its current form or a restoration plan to include maintenance to restore the sign to its original form. 
E.  The commission shall hold a public hearing and review the application before making a determination as to the declaration. 
F.  Any alterations to any landmark sign must be approved through this process. 
G.  The commission may remove such landmark designation and require the sign to be removed if it is altered, in disrepair, misused, or any other reason deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 66-14. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-15. - Severability 
    If any clause, sentence, paragraph, or part of this chapter should for any reason be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or part directly involved in its controversy in which the judgment shall have been rendered. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Secs. 66-16-66-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-37. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, alter, repair, or relocate any sign within the city without first obtaining a sign permit, unless the sign is specifically exempt from the permit requirements as outlined in section 6-11, application of chapter to certain types. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 66-38. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-39. - Filing and contents of application. 
A.  In order to apply for a sign permit, the applicant must provide the following information, in writing, to the city manager or his designee, City of Salem: 
1.  Business name and address of sign location. 
2.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
3.  Name, address, and telephone number of the property owner, and the signature of the property owner or duly authorized agent for the owner. 
4.  The current business license number or machinery and tools tax number of the applicant from the commissioner of the revenue. 
5.  Description of the activities occurring on the site where the sign will be installed. 
6.  Description of any existing signage that will remain on the site. 
7.  Identification of the type of sign(s) to be erected by the applicant. 
8.  Concept plan depicting the locations of proposed signage and existing remaining signage. 
9.  Two copies of a plan drawn to scale depicting: 
a.  Lot dimensions, building frontage, and existing rights-of-way and driveways. 
b.  The design of each sign face and sign structure, including dimensions, total area, sign height, depth, color scheme, structural details, materials, lighting scheme with brightness and glare control details, dimming technology, and proposed location. 
c.  Building elevations, existing and proposed facades, parapet walls, eaveline and the location and size of all proposed and existing permanent signage. 
d.  Current photographs showing existing signs on the premises and certifying the date on which photographs were taken. 
e.  Copy of stress sheets and calculations, when deemed necessary by the city manager or his designee, showing the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required. 
10.  A permit fee, to be established by city council as shown in the book of rates, shall be paid. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, change, relocate or remove within the city any sign without first making payment of the requisite permit fee. 
11.  Any such other information as the city manager or his designee shall require to show full compliance with the chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the city. 
B.  In the instance that substantial repair or replacement becomes necessary (i.e., repairs that cost more than 50 percent of the replacement cost of the damaged sign); the organization must apply for a new sign permit, and pay an additional permit fee. 
C.  The city reserves the right to assess the brightness of any sign at any time. 
D.  It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee, upon the filing of an application as provided in this section, to review and inspect the plans and specifications and other data in question and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign. If it shall appear that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the city, he shall then issue the permit applied for within 20 business days after receipt; provided, however, that in those cases where, in the opinion of the city manager or his designee, the issuance of a permit for a sign, or the lighting or placing thereof, would materially damage adjacent property, or create a resulting nuisance, then such application shall be, by the city manager or his designee, referred to city council for a determination as to whether such permit should or should not under the existing circumstances be issued. 
E.  The city manager or his designee may revoke any permit issued under this article upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with any provision of this chapter. 
F.  All rights and privileges acquired under any permit issued under this article are mere licenses revocable at any time by the city manager or his designee, for just cause, and all such permits shall contain this provision. 
G.  If the work authorized under a permit issued under this article has not been completed within six months after date of issue, such permit shall become null and void. 
H.  Any person holding a permit revoked under this section 66-39 may appeal such revocation to city council for final disposition thereof, if, in such person's opinion, such revocation is unjustly imposed. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 66-40. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-41. - Duty of electrical inspector with reference to application, for sign with electrical wiring, etc. 
A.  An application for a permit for the construction of a sign in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall be submitted to the electrical inspector or, in lieu thereof, such sign shall bear the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., seal of approval or any other standard related to electrical equipment referenced in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
B.  All work shall be completed in full compliance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
C.  The electrical supply to all exterior signs, whether to the sign itself or to lighting fixtures positioned to illuminate the sign, shall be provided by means of concealed electrical cables. Electrical supply to freestanding signs shall be provided by means of underground cables. 
D.  If the work authorized under a permit issued under this article has not been completed within six months after date of issue, such permit shall become null and void. 
E.  Any person holding a permit revoked under section 66-39 may appeal such revocation to city council for final disposition thereof, if, in such person's opinion, such revocation is unjustly imposed. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Secs. 66-42-66-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION; LOCATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-71. - Sign location. 
1.  No sign shall be placed in such a position as to endanger pedestrians, bicyclists, or traffic on a street by obscuring the view or by interfering with official street signs or signals by virtue of position or color. 
2.  To promote visibility for pedestrians and the operators of motor vehicles, a clear sight triangle shall be established at the intersecting rights-of-way of any two public streets. No sign may occupy a sight triangle. The legs of this sight triangle shall be 25 feet in length. They shall begin at the point of intersection of the two street rights-of-way, and shall extend 25 feet along each right-of-way line. The triangle shall be formed by connecting the endpoints of these two lines. 
3.  No sign shall be located closer to the street right-of-way than ten feet. However, no permanently affixed sign shall be required to be set back from the street right-of-way a distance which is greater than the setback line observed by any building on an immediately adjoining lot along the same street frontage, provided such building does not exceed the setback building line established by law, and further provided that such setback would not place the sign within any visibility triangle. This regulation may not apply to signs that meet the requirements of the Handbook to Downtown Salem. 
4.  Signs and their supporting structures shall maintain clearance and noninterference with all surface and underground utility and communications lines or equipment. 
5.  No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 66-72. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-73. - Sign materials and construction. 
    Every sign shall be constructed of durable materials, using non-corrosive fastenings; shall be structurally safe and erected or installed in strict accordance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code; and shall be maintained in safe condition and good repair at all times so that all sign information is clearly legible. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 66-74. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-75. - Sign area. 
A.  The area of a sign shall mean the area of all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs, logos, symbols, and color schemes. The area of a sign shall not include any supporting framework, bracing or trim which is incidental to the display, provided such frames or structural elements are clearly structural and are not principally meant to draw attention to the sign. 
1.  Freestanding signs. For freestanding signs, sign area shall include the sum total of the sign's largest silhouette, including those areas where the silhouette is open but also enclosed by a portion of the sign surface or enclosed by any imaginary regular geometric shape that would encompass all the letters, symbols, shapes, designs, decorations, or color schemes. 
2.  Skeleton signs. For skeleton signs consisting of individual letters and shapes attached to a building, canopy, awning, mansard roof or other structure, sign area shall be defined and computed as including the entire area within any imaginary regular geometric figure which would enclose all of the lettering, wording and accompanying shapes, designs or symbols. 
3.  Wall, other signs. For wall signs, mansard signs, attached signs, projecting signs, roof signs and other similar signs, sign area shall include the total area of the hung, attached, mounted or affixed surface. 
B.  Signs may be double-sided. 
C.  Sign face: 
1.  Only one side shall be considered when determining the sign area, provided that the faces are equal in size, the interior angle formed by the faces is less than 45 degrees, and the two faces are not more than 18 inches apart. 
2.  Where the faces are not equal in size, but the interior angle formed by the faces is less than 45 degrees and the two faces are not more than 18 inches apart, the larger sign face shall be used as the basis for calculating sign area. 
3.  When the interior angle formed by the faces is greater than 45 degrees, or the faces are greater than 18 inches apart, all sides of such sign shall be considered in calculating the sign area. 
D.  Signs that consist of, or have attached to them, one or more three-dimensional or irregularly-shaped objects, shall be determined by computing the entire area within a single, continuous three- or four-sided geometric form that encloses the limits of the objects. 
E.  If elements of a sign are movable or flexible, such as a flag or banner, the measurement is taken when the elements are fully extended and parallel to the plane of view. 
F.  The permitted maximum area for all signs is determined by the sign type and the zoning district in which the sign is located (see section 66-103). 
G.  Exclusions. Sign area shall not include frames or structural elements, provided such frames or structural elements are clearly structural and are not principally meant to draw attention to the sign. Further, sign area shall not include the opposite face of any double-faced sign, provided such faces are parallel or are at no more than a 45-degree angle with the obverse face. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 66-76. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-77. - Sign height. 
A.  Sign height shall be measured as the distance from the highest portion of the sign to the mean finished grade at the base of the sign. 
B.  Clearance for freestanding and projecting signs shall be measured as the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the lowest point of the sign, including any framework or other structural elements. 
C.  The permitted maximum height for all signs is determined by the sign type and the zoning district in which the sign is located (see section 66-105). 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 66-78. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-79. - Sign spacing. 
    The spacing between sign structures shall be measured as a straight-line distance between the closest edges of each sign. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 66-80. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-81. - Electronic conversion. 
A.  Conversion of a permitted non-electronic sign to an electronic sign requires the issuance of a permit pursuant to section 66-39. See section 66-105, permitted signs for electronic signs. 
B.  The addition of any electronic display to a nonconforming sign is prohibited. 
C.  No existing grandfathered off-premise sign shall be converted to an electronic sign, billboard, or multi-vision board. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 66-82. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-83. - Glare control. 
    Glare control shall be achieved primarily through the use of such means as dimming technology, cutoff fixtures, shields, and baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage, aiming angle, and fixture placement. Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary means for controlling glare. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 66-84. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-85. - Brightness. 
A.  The light from any illuminated, including electronic, sign shall be so shaded, shielded or directed that the light intensity or brightness will not be objectionable to surrounding areas or to operators of motor vehicles on public thoroughfares. 
B.  During daylight hours between sunrise and sunset, luminance shall be no greater than 4,000 nits. 
C.  At all other times, luminance shall be no greater than 250 nits. 
D.  Each electronic sign shall have a light sensing device that will automatically adjust the brightness of the display as the natural ambient light conditions change to comply with the limits set here within. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Secs. 66-86-66-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERMITTED SIGNS BY USE AND DISTRICT 

Sec. 66-101. - General requirements. 
    Signs shall be permitted which are in accordance with (i) the provisions of this chapter; (ii) the sign regulations of this article which pertain to the district in which such sign is located; and (iii) all other applicable provisions, including the building code and all amendments thereto. In the event of any conflict among these regulations, the more restrictive regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Sec. 66-102. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-103. - Total allowable signage for all signs. 
A.  Districts. The following table depicts the total allowable area of signs per district. The districts are as follows: 
Abbreviation Description Abbreviation Description AG Agriculture District CUD College and University District RSF Residential Single Family District DBD Downtown Business District COL Cluster Overlay District CBD Community Business District RMF Residential Multi-Family District HBD Highway Business District RB Residential Business District BCD Business Commerce District PUD Planned Unit District LM Light Manufacturing District MHP Manufactured Home Park District HM Heavy Manufacturing District TBD Transitional Business District  
B.  For purposes of this section, "principal street frontage" shall be based upon the street toward which the building faces. Where a building faces more than one street or does not clearly face any street, principal street frontage shall be that frontage along the street which provides major access to the business or the frontage to which the main entrance faces. For corner lots, half the distance of the curve, measured from the point of curvature to the midpoint, shall be added to each frontage. 
AG RSF & COL RMF, RB, & PUD MHP Total area maximum of 24 square feet Total area maximum of 48 square feet Total area maximum of 78 square feet. Limit of one sign per business. Total area maximum of 17 square feet  
TBD, DBD*, CUD, CBD, HBD, BCD, LM & HMFor lots or parcels with a combined width of 33 feet or less along their principal street frontage. For lots or parcels with a combined width of more than 33 feet along their principal street frontage. For lots or parcels that front on more than one street. Total area maximum of 50 
square feet Total area maximum shall not exceed 1.5 square feet for each linear foot of street frontage or building frontage, whichever 
is greater. 
*See Sec. 66-105(C) Additional Standards Total additional area maximum shall not exceed one square foot per one linear foot of secondary frontage. Total area maximums cannot be combined. The total sign area facing or oriented toward any one frontage shall not exceed the total area maximum allowed for that frontage.  
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2); Ord. of 4-9-2018(2)) 
Sec. 66-104. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-105. - Permitted signs. 
A.  Permitted signs by type. 
Awning Sign: 
All awning frames and supports shall be of metal. All awnings shall be constructed and erected so that the lowest portion thereof shall be not less than eight feet above the level of the sidewalk or established street grade. AG, RSF, RMF, MHP, COL RB, CUD, TBD, DBD*, CBD, HBD, BCD, LM, HM, PUD Not allowed 12 square feet 
*See Sec. 66-105(C) Additional Standards  
  
Canopy Sign: 
All canopy frames and supports shall be of metal. All canopies shall be constructed and erected so that the lowest portion thereof shall be not less than eight feet above the level of the sidewalk or established street grade. AG, RSF, RMF, MHP, COL RB, CUD, TBD, DBD*, CBD, HBD, BCD, LM, HM, PUD Not allowed 12 square feet 
*See Sec. 66-105(C) Additional Standards  
  
Drone Sign: Not allowed in any district  
  
Electronic Sign: 
No more than one electronic sign shall be allowed per business. All electronic signs shall be freestanding. All electronic signs must utilize a header cabinet. All electronic signs shall be required to hold a static image for a minimum duration of eight seconds. Faster rates are prohibited. Transition times shall be no more than one second facing the same travelled way. All electronic signs shall have an automatic light adjustment feature to regulate brightness. Any electronic sign shall be oriented away from residential properties so as to avoid light trespass. Video, flashing, strobe effects, "storybook" advertising, consecutive messages, or similar effects are prohibited. Electronic signs may not be used as off-premises, temporary, or portable signs. Electronic signs displaying the current time or date shall be kept accurate. If this requirement is not complied with, the sign in question shall be promptly repaired or removed. AG, RSF, RMF, MHP, RB, 
DBD, TBD, COL, PUD, CBD CUD HBD, BCD, LM, HM Not allowed Freestanding only. Maximum height of 8 feet. Maximum total area of 24 square feet. Must be placed a minimum of 150 feet from any residential district. Freestanding only. For lots or parcels with less than 75 feet along their principal street frontage maximum of 24 square feet. For all others maximum of 60 square feet.  
Freestanding Sign, Pole Sign: 
All letters, figures, characters or representations in cutout or irregular form maintained in conjunction with, attached to or superimposed upon any freestanding sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure and shall comply with all requirements in section 66-71. No freestanding sign shall be nearer than two feet to any other sign, building or structure, except those freestanding signs parallel to and adjacent to a wall or structure. For monument or ground signs see monument section below. AG RSF & COL RMF, RB, 
PUD MHP CUD, CBD, HBD, 
BCD, LM, HM TBD, DBD* Maximum total area of 24 square feet not to exceed 8 feet in height. One sign allowed for religious, charitable, institutional, recreational and other public and semipublic uses: Maximum total area of 24 square feet not to exceed 8 feet in height. May have second sign on secondary street frontage if 100 feet from first sign and both signs are not visible from same point along same street. One sign allowed. Maximum area 24 square feet not to exceed 10 feet in height. One allowed, maximum of 15 square feet and shall not exceed 15 feet in height. For commercial or industrial uses one freestanding sign placed 100 feet apart and not visible from the same point along the same street. Additional frontage may have additional signage. If frontage is less than 75 feet sign shall not exceed 24 square feet. Frontage 75 to less than 150 feet sign shall not exceed 100 square feet. Frontage 150 feet or greater sign shall not exceed 150 square feet. May contain more than one sign not to exceed the max. allowable size. No sign shall exceed 25 feet in height. Maximum area of 24 square feet and shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
*See Sec. 66-105(C) Additional Standards  
  
Location Sign: AG, RSF, RMF, 
MHP, COL, RB, PUD TBD, DBD*, CUD, CBD, HBD, BCD, LM, HM Not allowed Location signs up to 24 square feet in total sign area, provided such sign may be erected only for a business which does not have frontage on an urban primary arterial, urban minor arterial or urban collector as designated by the state department of transportation, provided such sign shall not exceed 25 feet in height, and provided such sign is at least 400 feet from any other sign which refers to the same establishment or premises and 100 feet from any other freestanding sign on the same property. 
*See Sec. 66-105(C) Additional Standards  
Manual Changeable Copy Sign: Permitted only when integrated into a freestanding, marquee, wall, or portable sign. 
All manual changeable copy signs must utilize header space except portable signs.  
  
Marquee Sign: 
Such signs shall be located only above the principal public entrance of a building facing a public street or parking lot. No marquee shall be wider than the entrance it serves, plus two feet on each side thereof. Sign height: No portion of a marquee sign shall extend vertically above the eaveline. The lowest edge of the marquee sign shall be at least eight feet above the finished grade. AG, RSF, RMF, MHP, RB, CUD, 
COL, PUD, CBD, LM, HM HBD, BCD TBD, DBD* Not allowed Per sign face: Frontage less than 75 feet sign shall not exceed 24 square feet. Frontage 75 feet to less than 150 feet sign shall not exceed 100 square feet. Frontage 150 feet or greater sign shall not exceed 150 square feet. Sign may contain more than one sign not to exceed the maximum allowable size. No sign shall exceed 25 feet in height. Maximum area of 24 square 
feet per sign face. 
*See Sec. 66-105(C) Additional Standards  
  
Mechanical Movement & Revolving Sign: 
Mechanical movement and revolving signs may not be used as off-premises, 
temporary, or portable signs. AG, RSF, RMF, MHP, CUD, LM, HM, COL, PUD RB, TBD, DBD*, CBD, HBD, BCD Not allowed Barber pole style only, maximum six square feet. 
*See Sec. 66-105(C) Additional Standards  
  
Menu Sign: AG, RSF, RMF, 
MHP, RB CBD, HBD TBD, DBD, CUD, BCD, LM, HM, COL, PUD Not allowed Two up to 36 square feet each and 75 feet 
from a residential district. Not allowed  
Monument Sign: 
Shall be supported and permanently placed by embedding, anchoring, or connecting the sign 
in such a manner as to incorporate it into the landscape or architectural design scheme. So long as the supporting structure does not contain any messaging or is a continuation of the color scheme of the sign it will not be counted as part of the sign area. All letters, figures, characters or representations in cutout or irregular form maintained in conjunction with, attached to or superimposed upon any monument sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure and shall comply with all requirements in section 66-73. No monument sign shall be nearer than two feet to any other sign, building or structure, except those signs parallel to and adjacent to a wall or structure. The maximum height shall be eight feet from the ground, the maximum length shall be 15 feet, and the maximum thickness shall be three feet. The maximum sign face area shall cover no more than 75% of the sign. AG RSF & COL RMF, RB, 
PUD, MHP CUD, CBD, HBD, 
BCD, LM, HM TBD, DBD* Maximum total area of 24 square feet not to exceed 4 feet in height. One allowed for religious, charitable, institutional, recreational and other public and semipublic uses: Maximum total area of 24 square feet not to exceed 4 feet in height. May have second sign on secondary street frontage if 100 feet from first sign and both signs are not visible from same point along same street. Maximum total area of 24 square feet not to exceed 6 feet in height. One monument sign placed 100 feet apart and not visible from the same point along the same street. Sign may contain more than one sign not to exceed the maximum allowable size. Maximum total area of 120 square feet. No sign shall exceed 8 feet in height. Maximum total area of 24 square feet not to exceed 4 feet in height. May have second sign on secondary street frontage if 100 feet from first sign and both signs are not visible from same point along same street. 
*See Sec. 66-105(C) Additional Standards  
  
Multi-Tenant Sign: AG, RSF & COL, 
RMF, MHP, PUD CUD, CBD, HBD, BCD, LM, HM RB, TBD, DBD* Not allowed Maximum of 150 square feet based on building frontage. For commercial or industrial uses one freestanding sign placed 100 feet apart and not visible from the same point along the same street. Sign may contain more than one sign not to exceed the maximum allowable size. No sign shall exceed 25 feet in height. Allowed as wall signs only. Maximum of 12 square feet. Sign may contain more than one sign not to exceed the maximum allowable size. 
*See Sec. 66-105(C) Additional Standards  
Mural Sign: AG, RSF, RMF, MHP, RB, CUD, CBD, 
HBD, BCD, COL, PUD TBD, DBD*, LM, HM Not allowed Any mural sign shall comply with the 
regulations of wall signs. 
*See Sec. 66-105(C) Additional Standards  
  
Off-Premise Signs: Not allowed in any district  
  
Portable Sign, A-Frame or Sandwich Board Sign, Pedestal Sign: 
Cannot be electronic nor have mechanical movement. AG, RSF, RMF, MHP, 
RB, COL, PUD CUD, TBD, DBD*, CBD, HBD, BCD, LM, HM Not allowed Maximum area of 12 square feet. Shall comply with the regulations of temporary signs. 
*See Sec. 66-105(C) Additional Standards  
  
Projecting Sign: 
Shall project no more than four feet from the face of the building and no closer than four feet from the curbline of a public street. Lowest edge shall be at least eight feet about the finished grade. AG, RSF, RMF, MHP, RB, CUD, CBD, 
HBD, BCD, LM, HM, COL, PUD TBD, DBD* Not allowed *See Sec. 66-105(C) Additional Standards  
  
Roof Sign: Not allowed in any district  
  
Snipe Sign: Not allowed in any district  
Street Clock: 
This section shall not apply to signs which display lighted messages and animation, such 
as those which display time, temperature and other information. No person shall erect more than one street clock for any place of business at any one location. Street clocks, including the frames, braces and supports thereof, shall be constructed of incombustible material. The dial of a street clock shall be not less than 30 inches nor more than 40 inches in diameter. Any glass forming a part of a street clock or the sign thereon shall be safety glass or plate glass at least one-quarter-inch thick, and in case any single piece or pane of glass has an area exceeding three square feet, it shall be constructed of wired glass, securely held in place. Any movable part of a street clock, such as the cover or service opening, shall be securely fastened by metal hinges. Street clocks supported on the corner of any building or structure at the intersection of two streets, or within six feet of the corner, shall not be less than 12 feet nor more than 20 feet above the sidewalk and shall not project from the face or wall of the building or structure in any direction more than six feet. All clocks erected on the exterior of any building or structure shall comply with the requirements set forth in this article, regulating the sign type, in all respects, whichever applies. Each street clock shall keep accurate time and, if this requirement is not complied with, the street clock in question shall be promptly repaired or removed. AG, RSF, RMF, MHP, RB, CBD, HBD, BCD, LM, HM, COL, PUD TBD, DBD* & CUD Not allowed See corresponding sign types for regulations. 
*See Sec. 66-105(C) Additional Standards  
  
Temporary Sign, Balloons, Balloon Sign, Banner, Flag, Inflatable Sign,
Pennants, Streamers: 
No temporary sign shall exceed 24 square feet in area. Every temporary sign shall be attached with adequate supports in accordance with good engineering practice. The advertisement contained on any temporary sign shall pertain only to the business, industry or pursuit conducted on or within the premises on which such sign is erected or maintained. A string of pennants or row of streamers shall be considered one sign. Up to four temporary signs may be displayed for a grand opening event with the prior approval of the city manager or his designee, and may not require a permit. Temporary signs for a grand opening event may be displayed two weeks prior to the event and 
shall be removed within two weeks after the event. AG, RSF, RMF, MHP, COL, PUD TBD, DBD* RB, CUD, CBD, HBD, 
BCD, LM, HM Not allowed One sign per parcel no more than 30 consecutive days during a 3-month period. 30 days begins the day the permit is issued. Must be removed within 5 days of permit expiration. 
*See Sec. 66-105(C)
Additional Standards One sign per parcel no more than 30 consecutive days during a 3-month period. 30 days begins the day the permit is issued. Must be removed within 5 days of permit expiration.  
Wall Sign, Gas Station Canopy Sign, Mansard Sign, Skeleton Sign, Channel Letter Sign: 
No wall sign, skeleton sign or mansard sign shall cover wholly or partially any opening nor project beyond the ends of the structure to which it is attached. No wall sign or skeleton sign shall project above the wall to which it is attached. No mansard sign or skeleton sign shall project above the ridge line of the immediate mansard roof plane to which it is attached. No wall sign, skeleton sign or mansard sign shall extend more than 18 inches beyond the building line and shall not be attached to a structure at a height of less than nine feet above the sidewalk or ground. AG RSF, COL RMF, RB, PUD MHP TBD, DBD* CUD, CBD, 
HBD, BCD, 
LM, HM Maximum 24 square feet Religious, charitable, institutional, recreational, and other public/ 
semipublic uses up to 24 square feet One per business. Maximum of six square feet per frontage. Religious, charitable, institutional, recreational, and other public/ 
semipublic uses up to 24 square feet Maximum 15 square feet For commercial or industrial uses one sign allowed. Additional frontage may have additional signage. If frontage is less than 75 feet, sign shall not exceed 24 square feet. Frontage 75 to less than 150 feet, sign shall not exceed 100 square feet. Frontage 150 feet or greater, sign shall not exceed 150 square feet. Sign may contain more than one sign not to exceed the maximum allowable size. 
*See § 106-105 (C) Additional Standards For commercial or industrial uses one sign allowed. Additional frontage may have additional signage. If frontage is less than 75 feet, sign shall not exceed 24 square feet. Frontage 75 to less than 150 feet, sign shall not exceed 100 square feet. Frontage 150 feet or greater, sign shall not exceed 150 square feet. Sign may contain more than one sign not to exceed the maximum allowable size. For multi-unit buildings: wall signs shall be based on unit frontage at a one square foot per one linear foot ratio  
Window Sign: AG, RSF, RMF, MHP, COL, PUD RB, CUD, TBD, DBD, CBD, HBD, BCD, LM, HM Not allowed Area: A maximum of 25% of each window area of any single building frontage may be used for signs. These signs shall be non-illuminated nor electronic.  
  
Vehicular Sign: Not allowed in any district except as prescribed in section 66-11.  
B.  Permitted illumination: 
Illumination Types: 
There shall be no light trespass into any residential district. AG, RSF, RMF, MHP, COL PUD, RB, CUD TBD & DBD CBD, HBD, BCD, LM, HM No illumination External 
illumination only External, halo, or neon 
illumination only Internal, external, or halo illumination only  
C.  Additional standards: 
Signs located in the downtown business districts may have additional standards and/or differing regulations as set forth in the Handbook to Downtown Salem. 
D.  Signs located along the Roanoke Valley Greenway system: 
1.  Signs shall observe an appropriate clear zone from the trail. 
2.  Signs shall not be illuminated. 
3.  Signs shall have a maximum area of two square feet. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2); Ord. of 4-9-2018(2)) 
Sec. 66-106. - Reserved. 
Sec. 66-107. - Prohibited signs. 
A.  No sign shall have flashing, intermittent or animated illumination or lights of changing degrees of intensity, unless each interval in the cycle is a minimum of eight seconds and the sign does not constitute a traffic hazard. This section shall not be construed to prohibit signs which display time, temperature and other information, provided all other requirements of this chapter are met. 
B.  The following devices and locations shall be specifically prohibited: 
1.  Signs located in such a manner as to obstruct or otherwise interfere with an official traffic sign, signal or device, or obstruct or interfere with a driver's view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic. 
2.  Except as provided for elsewhere in this Code, signs encroaching upon or overhanging public right-of-way. No sign shall be attached to any utility pole, light standard, street tree or any other public facility located within the public right-of-way. 
3.  Signs which blink, flash or are animated by lighting in any fashion that would cause such signs to have the appearance of traffic safety signs and lights, or municipal vehicle warnings from a distance. 
4.  Portable signs except as provided in section 66-105 (portable signs). 
5.  Vehicular signs except as provided in section 66-11. 
6.  Balloons, streamers, inflatables, pennant strings, flags (except as allowed in section 66-11), pinwheels, and like displays, except as provided in section 66-105 (temporary signs). 
7.  No off-premise sign shall be located within the corporate limits of the city. 
8.  No existing off-premise sign shall be converted to an electronic sign, billboard or multi-vision board. 
9.  Abandoned signs. 
10.  Snipe signs. Signs shall only be attached to utility poles in conformance with state and utility regulations and the requirements of this chapter. 
11.  Signs which prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, fire escape, or that prevent free access from one part of a roof to any other part. No sign other than a safety sign shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
12.  Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors, particulate matter, sound, odor or contain open flames. 
13.  Reflective signs or signs containing mirrors. 
14.  Vehicular interactive signs. 
15.  Signs incorporating beacon lighting. 
16.  Any banner or sign of any type suspended across a public street, without the permission of the owner of the property and the city. 
17.  Roof signs. 
18.  Signs for any home occupation. 
19.  Signs erected without the permission of the property owner, with the exception of those authorized or required by local, state, or federal government. 
20.  Any sign containing information which states or implies that a property may be used for any purpose not permitted under the provisions of the city zoning ordinance. 
21.  Signs that exhibit statements, words, or pictures of obscene or pornographic subjects. 
22.  Any sign that promotes illegal activity. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Secs. 66-108-66-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 66-151. - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned sign: A sign which has not identified or advertised a current business, service, owner, product, or activity for a period of at least 180 days, in the case of off-premises signs, or at least 360 days in the case of on-premises signs. 
    Address sign: A sign that designates the street number and/or street name for identification purposes, as designated by the city. (Also known as: nameplate sign .) 
    Awning: A cloth, plastic, or other nonstructural covering that projects from a wall for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window. An awning is either permanently attached to a building or can be raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use. 
    Awning sign: Any sign painted on, or applied to, an awning. 
    Balloon sign: A lighter-than-air, gas-filled balloon, tethered in a fixed location, which contains an advertisement message on its surface or attached to the balloon in any manner. 
    Banner: Any cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar non-rigid material attached to any structure, staff, pole, rope, wire, or framing which is anchored on two or more edges or at all four corners. Banners are temporary in nature and do not include flags. 
    Building frontage: The maximum linear width of a building measured in a single straight line parallel, or essentially parallel, with the abutting public street or parking lot. 
    Canopy: A structure other than an awning made of fabric, metal, or other material that is supported by columns or posts affixed to the ground and may also be connected to a building. 
    Canopy sign: Any sign that is part of, or attached to a canopy. 
    Clearance: The distance above the walkway, or other surface if specified, to the bottom edge of a sign. This term can also refer to a horizontal distance between two objects. 
    Drone: An unmanned aircraft or ship, weighing less than 55 pounds, that can navigate autonomously, with or without human control or beyond line of sight. 
    Drone sign: Any sign that is part of, or attached to a drone. 
    Electronic sign: An electrically activated changeable sign whose variable content capability can be electronically programmed or controlled. 
    Flag: Any sign printed or painted on cloth, plastic, canvas, or other like material with distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols attached to a pole or staff and anchored along only one edge or supported or anchored at only two corners. 
    Freestanding sign: A sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground; and that is independent and detached from any building or other structure. The following are subtypes of freestanding signs: 
Monument sign: A freestanding sign, generally having a low profile where the base of the sign structure is on the ground or a maximum of 12 inches above the lowest point of the ground adjacent to the sign such that the sign has the appearance of a solid base. (Also known as ground sign .) 
Pole sign: A freestanding sign that is permanently supported in a fixed location by a structure of one or more poles, posts, uprights, or braces from the ground and not supported by a building or a base structure. 
    Gas station canopy: A freestanding, open-air structure constructed for the purpose of shielding service station islands from the elements. 
    Gas station canopy sign: Any sign that is part of, or attached to, the vertical sides of the gas station canopy roof structure. For the purposes of this chapter, gas station canopy signs shall be considered wall signs. 
    Ghost sign: An old hand-painted advertising sign that has been preserved on a building for an extended period of time. The sign may be kept for its nostalgic appeal, or simply indifference by the owner. May be approved by planning commission as a landmark sign. 
    Government/regulatory sign: Any sign for the control of traffic or for identification purposes, street signs, warning signs, railroad crossing signs, and signs of public service companies indicating danger or construction, which are erected by or at the order of a public officer, employee or agent thereof, in the discharge of official duties. 
    Historic district: A district or zone designated by a local, state, or federal government, within which buildings, structures, and/or appurtenances are deemed important because of their association with history, or because of their unique architectural style and scale. 
    Holiday decorations: Signs or displays including lighting which are a non-permanent installation celebrating national, state, and local holidays, religious or cultural holidays, or other holiday seasons. (Also known as seasonal decorations .) 
    Illuminated sign: A sign with electrical equipment installed for illumination, either internally illuminated through its sign face by a light source contained inside the sign, externally illuminated by a light source aimed at its surface, or contains luminous tubes as part of the sign proper. 
    Illumination: A source of any artificial or reflected light, either directly from a source of light incorporated in, or indirectly from an artificial source. 
External illumination: Artificial light, located away from the sign, which lights the sign, the source of which may or may not be visible to persons viewing the sign from any street, sidewalk, or adjacent property. 
Halo illumination: A sign using a three-dimensional message, logo, etc., which is lit in such a way as to produce a halo effect. (Also known as back-lit illumination .) 
Internal illumination: A light source that is concealed or contained within the sign and becomes visible in darkness through a translucent surface. Message center signs, digital displays, and signs incorporating neon lighting shall not be considered internal illumination for the purposes of this chapter. 
Neon illumination: A sign using a neon tube, or other visible light-emanating gas tube, that can bend to form letters, symbols, or other graphics. 
    Incidental sign: A sign that displays general site information, instructions, directives, or restrictions that are primarily oriented to pedestrians and motor vehicle operators who have entered a property from a public street. These signs shall not contain any commercial advertising. 
    Incidental window sign: Signs displayed in the window displaying information such as the business' hours of operation, credit institutions accepted, commercial and civic affiliations, and similar information. These signs shall be informational only and shall not contain a commercial message. 
    Inflatable sign: A sign that is an air-inflated object, which may be of various shapes, made of flexible fabric, resting on the ground or structure and equipped with a portable blower motor that provides a flow of air into the device. 
    Interactive sign: An electronic or animated sign that reacts to a person's behavior or electronic signals of motor vehicle drivers. 
    Light trespass: Light emitted by a lighting installation, which extends beyond the boundaries of the property on which the installation is sited. 
    Location sign: A sign which directs attention to the approximate location of an establishment from which the advertised product or service may be obtained. 
    Luminance: An objective measurement of the brightness of illumination, including illumination emitted by an electronic sign. 
    Mansard sign: Any sign attached to a mansard roof. 
    Manual changeable copy sign: A sign or portion thereof on which the copy or symbols are changed manually through placement or drawing of letters or symbols on a sign face. 
    Marquee: A permanent structure, other than a roof or canopy, attached to, supported by, and projecting from a building and providing protection from the elements. 
    Marquee sign: Any sign attached to a marquee for the purpose of identifying a use or product. If attached to a theater, performing arts center, cinema, or other similar use, it may also advertise films or productions. 
    Mechanical movement sign: A sign having parts that physically move rather than merely appear to move as might be found in a digital display. The physical movement may be activated electronically or by another means, but shall not include wind-activated movement such as used for banners or flags. Mechanical movement signs do not include digital signs that have changeable, programmable displays. 
    Memorial sign: A memorial plaque or tablet, including grave markers or other remembrances of persons or events, which is not used for a commercial message. 
    Menu sign: A permanent sign for displaying the bill of fare available at a restaurant, or other use serving food, or beverages. Portable A-frame style signs shall be considered portable signs and not menu signs. 
    Minor sign: A non-illuminated, non-electronic, non-commercial sign not exceeding 24 square feet in area. 
    Multi-tenant sign: A freestanding or wall sign used to advertise businesses that occupy a shopping center or complex with multiple tenants. 
    Multi-vision board: An outdoor unit with a slatted face that allows many different copy messages to revolve at intermittent intervals. 
    Mural: A large picture/image (including but not limited to painted art) which is painted, constructed, or affixed directly onto a vertical building wall, which may or may not contain text, logos, and/or symbols. 
    Mural sign: Any sign painted on, or applied to, a mural. 
    Nit: A photometric unit of measurement referring to brightness. One nit is equal to one cd/m 2 . 
    Nonconforming sign: A sign that was legally erected and maintained at the effective date of this chapter, or amendment thereto, that does not currently comply with sign regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Official traffic sign: Official highway route number signs, street name signs, and other traffic signs erected and maintained on public highways and roads in the interest of public safety or for the regulation of traffic. 
    Off-premises sign: An outdoor sign whose message directs attention to a specific business, product, service, or other commercial activity not contained on the premises upon which the sign is located or is attached to a mode of transportation, including pedestrians. (Also known as a third-party sign , billboard, outdoor advertising, general advertising sign, promobikes, trailer sign, and mobile billboard. For regulations for decal space and wrap advertising on vehicles see section 66-11.) 
    On-premises sign: A sign whose message and design relate to an individual business, profession, product, service, event, point of view, or other commercial or non-commercial activity sold, offered, or conducted on the same property where the sign is located. 
    Pennant: A triangular or irregular piece of fabric or other material, commonly attached in strings or strands, or supported on small poles intended to flap in the wind. 
    Permanent sign: A sign attached or affixed to a building, window, or structure, or to the ground in a manner that enables the sign to resist environmental loads, such as wind, and that precludes ready removal or movement of the sign and whose intended use appears to be indefinite. 
    Personal expression sign: An on-premises sign that expresses an opinion, interest, position, or other non-commercial message. 
    Portable sign: A sign designed to be transported or moved and not permanently attached to the ground, a building, or other structure, not to include temporary signs. 
Sandwich board sign: A type of freestanding, portable, temporary sign consisting of two faces connected and hinged at the top and whose message is targeted to pedestrians (Also known as A-frame sign .) 
    Private drive sign: A sign indicating a street or drive which is not publicly owned and maintained and used only for access by the occupants of the development and their guests. 
    Projecting sign: A building-mounted, double-sided sign with the two faces generally perpendicular to the building wall, not to include signs located on a canopy, awning, or marquee. (Also known as blade sign .) 
    Public art: Items expressing creative skill or imagination in a visual form, such as painting or sculpture, which are intended to beautify or provide aesthetic influences to public areas or areas which are visible from the public realm. 
    Public sign: A sign erected or required by government agencies or utilities, including traffic, utility, safety, railroad crossing, and identification signs for public facilities. 
    Reflective sign: A sign containing any material or device which has the effect of intensifying reflected light. 
    Revolving sign: A sign which revolves in a circular motion; rather than remaining stationary on its supporting structure. 
    Roof sign: A building-mounted sign erected upon, against, or over the roof of a building, other than a mansard sign. 
    Scoreboard: A sign contained within an athletic venue and intended solely to provide information to the attendees of an athletic event. 
    Security sign: An on-premises sign regulating the use of the premises, such as a "no trespassing," "no hunting," or "no soliciting" sign. (Also known as warning sign .) 
    Sign: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, visible from a public place, a public right-of-way, any parking area or right-of-way open to use by the general public, which is designed and used to attract attention to an institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location, and shall include any announcement, declaration, demonstration display, illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person when the sign is placed out-of-doors in view of the general public, by any means involving words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, logos, colors, illumination, or projected images. The term does not include public art, architectural elements incorporated into the style or function of a building, or flags of any nation, state, or other geopolitical entity not related to a commercial business, product or service. The term "sign" also does not include the display of merchandise for sale on the site of the display. Sign includes the sign faces as well as any sign supporting structure. 
    Sign area: The total dimensions of a sign surface used to display information, messages, advertising, logos, or symbols. See section 66-75 for standards for measuring sign area. Exclusions: Sign area shall not include frames or structural elements, provided such frames or structural elements are clearly structural and are not principally meant to draw attention to the sign. Further, sign area shall not include the opposite face of any double-faced sign, provided such faces are parallel or are at no more than a 45-degree angle with the obverse face. 
    Sign face: The part of the sign that is or can be used for the sign area. The sign area could be smaller than the sign face. 
    Sign height: The vertical dimension of a sign as measured using the standards in section 66-77. 
    Sign supporting structure: Poles, posts, walls, frames, brackets, or other supports holding a sign in place. 
    Snipe sign: A sign tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, public benches, streetlights, or other objects, or placed on any public property or in the public right-of-way or on any private property without the permission of the property owner. (Also known as bandit sign .) 
    Streamers: A display made of lightweight, flexible materials, consisting of long, narrow, wavy strips hung individually or in a series, with or without a logo or advertising message printed or painted on them and typically designed to move in the wind. 
    Street clock: Any timepiece erected on the exterior of any building or structure and extending more than 18 inches over the street right-of-way and primarily for the convenience of the public, and shall be substantially a clock and not for advertising matter. 
    Street frontage: The side or sides of a lot abutting on a public street or right-of-way. 
    Structural trim: The molding, battens, capping, nailing strips, latticing, aprons and platforms which are attached to the sign structure. 
    Temporary sign: A sign constructed of cloth, canvas, vinyl, plywood, fabric, or other lightweight material not well suited to provide a durable substrate or, if made of some other material, is neither permanently installed in the ground nor permanently affixed to a building or structure which is permanently installed in the ground. A temporary sign can be displayed for no more than 30 consecutive days at one time. However, "temporary sign" shall not include any sign displaying price information for gasoline, diesel fuel or other products sold on the premises, nor shall it include portable signs. 
    Vehicular sign: Any sign attached to or displayed on a vehicle. Any such vehicle shall, without limitation, be considered to be used for the primary purpose of advertising if it fails to display current license plates, up to date inspection sticker, if the vehicle is inoperable, if evidence of paid-to-date personal property taxes cannot be made available, if the sign alters the standard design of such vehicle, or if the vehicle is parked within 20 feet of the right-of-way. (Also known as: wrap advertising .) For promobikes, mobile billboards trailer signs and vehicle decal space, see off-premise signs. 
    Wall sign: A building-mounted sign which is either attached to, displayed on, or painted on an exterior wall in a manner parallel with the wall surface. A sign installed on a false or mansard roof is also considered a wall sign. (Also known as: fascia sign , parallel wall sign , or band sign .) 
Channel letter sign: A sign consisting of fabricated or formed three-dimensional letters, individually applied to a wall, which may accommodate a light source. 
Skeleton sign: Individual letters, symbols, logos and other designs mounted on a parapet wall, building or other structure. 
    Window sign: Any sign that is applied, painted, or affixed to a window, or placed inside a window, within three feet of the glass, facing the outside of the building, and easily seen from the outside. Customary displays of merchandise or objects and material without lettering behind a store window are not considered signs. Incidental window signs shall not be considered a window sign. 
B.  Sign type examples: 
1.  Downtown scenario. 

2.  General commercial scenario. 

(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2)) 
Chapter 70 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Powers as to garbage and refuse disposal (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-857) adopted, § 2.2. See Code of Virginia, § 15.2-927. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; environment, ch. 30; removal of trash, garbage, etc., from premises, § 30-4; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; receptacles for garbage, refuse, etc., in mobile home parks, § 54-43; service charge on certain dwellings for police and fire protection and for collection and disposal of refuse, § 82-7; utilities, ch. 90; vegetation, ch. 94. 
State Law reference- Local contracts for the supply of solid waste to resource recovery facilities, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1412; removal of trash, garbage, weeds, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-901; solid waste management facility siting approval, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-929; separation of solid waste, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-937; prohibiting placement of leaves or grass clippings in landfills, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-935; ordinances requiring recycling reports, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-939; local recycling and waste disposal, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-928; regulation of garbage and refuse pickup and disposal services, certain local contracts for such services, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-930 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - City dump or place of disposal of refuse. 
(a)  No person shall use or be permitted to use any dump or place of disposal of refuse except a dump or place of disposal of refuse established and owned by the city. 
(b)  A dump or place of disposal of refuse owned by the city may be used only by a person holding a permit therefor from the city manager and such use shall be in compliance with such rules and regulations in regard to such use as may be adopted by the city manager and approved by the council. It shall be unlawful for any person using such dump or place of disposal of refuse to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such rules and regulations. 
(Code 1969, § 24-1) 
Sec. 70-2. - Throwing or depositing refuse, trash, etc., upon streets and public or private property, etc. 
(a)  No person shall himself or cause another person to throw, leave, deposit, or cause to be deposited any paper, metal, glass, rubbish, trash or material of any kind upon any street, sidewalk or in any public place within the city, or upon any property not owned or legally within his control, save only on designated places where such material is picked up and disposed of by the city's street department. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 24-2) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Dumping trash, etc., on highway, right-of-way or private property, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-346. 
Sec. 70-3. - Distributing or attaching advertising matter on or in vehicle of another. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place in or attach to or on, or cause to be placed in or attached to or on any motor vehicle, any handbill or other advertising matter without the consent of the owner of such vehicle. A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 24-2.1) 
Sec. 70-4. - Throwing or depositing glass, nails, etc., on street; removal of glass, etc., from street. 
    No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be deposited upon any street any glass bottle, glass, nail, tack, wire, can or any other substance likely to injure any person or animal or damage any vehicle upon such street, nor shall any person throw or deposit or cause to be deposited upon any street any soil, sand, mud, gravel or other substances so as to create a hazard to the traveling public. Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street any destructive, hazardous or injurious material shall immediately remove such material or cause it to be removed. Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street from such vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 24-3) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; temporary removal and disposition of vehicles involved in accidents, § 86-375. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-324. 
Sec. 70-5. - Duty of person occupying store or premises to keep sidewalk clean, etc. 
(a)  Persons occupying stores or premises fronting on any street shall keep the sidewalk immediately in front thereof clean and clear of rubbish, trash, wastepaper, filth and like material and place such rubbish, trash, wastepaper, filth and like material in proper containers for removal as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  For office buildings, apartment houses or other buildings occupied by three or more tenants, the duty to keep the sidewalk in front thereof clear of rubbish, trash, wastepaper, filth and like material shall be upon the owner thereof, or the person in charge of the entire building. Where the first floor is occupied as a store or mercantile establishment, the duty of keeping the sidewalk in front thereof clean is imposed upon the occupant of such store or proprietor of the mercantile business conducted therein. 
(c)  During dry weather, sidewalks shall be sprinkled with water before sweeping so as to allay the dust and prevent it from flying into the faces of pedestrians. 
(Code 1969, § 24-4) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
Sec. 70-6. - Sweeping dirt or trash from interior of store or premises onto sidewalk, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep dirt or trash, or permit dirt or trash to be swept, or otherwise to be conveyed, from the interior of the store or premises occupied by him to or upon the sidewalk or any public place, but such dirt or trash shall be taken up and put in proper containers for removal as provided for in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 24-5) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
Secs. 70-7-70-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSITION OF REFUSE BY CITY 

Sec. 70-36. - Fees. 
(a)  The council shall, by resolution, establish fees for the collection and/or disposition of refuse and such regulations as may be necessary to assure the orderly collection and/or disposition of refuse. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall be empowered and charged with the duty of collecting any fees imposed by resolution of council for collection and/or disposition of refuse and shall cause such fees to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(c)  Any person failing, refusing or neglecting to pay any fees imposed by this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Such conviction shall not relieve any such person from the payment of the fees. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 24-6) 
Sec. 70-37. - Disposition of rejected building materials, etc. 
    City employees shall not collect and dispose of any rejected building materials, factory cuttings or trade waste, except at the expense of the owner thereof and with the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 24-12) 
Sec. 70-38. - Location of containers set out for collection. 
    Containers for refuse and other waste matter set out for collection and disposition by the city employees shall be placed so as not to hinder, block, retard or endanger those using the streets, alleys or walkways of the city and so as to be reasonably accessible to the employees of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 24-13) 
Sec. 70-39. - Interfering with refuse, etc. 
    No person shall molest or interfere with any refuse so that such refuse might likely become scattered in the streets, nor shall anyone not in charge thereof interfere with the contents of any container containing refuse. 
(Code 1969, § 24-14) 
Sec. 70-40. - Mobile toters provided by city; maintenance. 
(a)  Mobile toters shall be required for curb or alley side collection services. The responsibility for obtaining such mobile toter shall be upon the owner or occupant of the premises desiring and otherwise eligible, by the terms of this chapter, for curb or alley side collection services. Additional mobile toters may be purchased from the city by the owner or occupant and will be serviced according to the provisions of this article subject to the following. The following limit is imposed upon the number of mobile toters that will be serviced by the city: 
(1)  Residences: Two mobile toters. 
(2)  Commercial establishments (using mobile toters): Four mobile toters. 
(3)  Multiple housing units with five or more units: May be required to utilize dumpsters, in the discretion of the city manager. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of the premises to maintain all mobile toters in his possession in clean condition and good repair. Each mobile toter shall be equipped with a proper fitting lid. 
(Code 1969, § 24-15) 
Sec. 70-41. - Mobile home courts. 
    In the case of mobile home courts, two alternative methods of collection are provided, mobile toters or dumpster boxes. 
(1)  Mobile toters. In the case of mobile toter selection, the city manager shall review the mobile home court and determine whether or not the refuse vehicles can reasonably obtain access to the toters. If access by the city's usual collection equipment is reasonable, then the city shall not be responsible for any damage to the private roadway on property included in the mobile home court. 
(2)  Dumpster boxes. If the dumpster box method is selected, residents will be responsible for placing their garbage, trash and refuse in the dumpster boxes. Such dumpster boxes shall be placed in a location approved by the director of streets and sanitation, who shall also determine the number of dumpsters needed. 
(Code 1969, § 24-16) 
Sec. 70-42. - Placing of mobile toters for collection; time of placement for collection. 
(a)  All garbage shall be placed in the mobile toter for collection. The mobile toter shall be placed within ten feet of the paved portion of the street for collection purposes. Mobile toters that are collected from an alley may be stored, between collection times, at the property line adjacent to the alley. The collection schedule shall be determined by the sanitation department. If the mobile toter is not near the street or alley at collection time, this will indicate that no service is needed. 
(b)  Mobile toters shall be accessible for collection no later than 5:30 a.m. on the day of collection. Mobile toters, other garbage containers, or any other items for garbage collection shall be stored, between the dates of collection, in a location no closer to the street or alley than the principal building. Where placement of a mobile toter in a location no closer to the street than the principal building is impractical or not feasible, the city manager may designate an alternative location. 
(Code 1969, § 24-17; Ord. of 2-11-02) 
Sec. 70-43. - Non-street-side collection. 
    Any person so physically incapacitated as to prevent such person from placing the mobile toter at the street or alley side for collection purposes may obtain non-street-side collection by presenting the director of streets and sanitation with a certificate of disability from any practicing medical physician; or those individuals 70 years of age and older who make written request to the director of streets and sanitation will also obtain non-street-side collection. 
(Code 1969, § 24-18) 
Sec. 70-44. - Origins of collection; certain materials not collected by city. 
(a)  Refuse for collection must originate from the property where it is collected. 
(b)  Poisons, acids, caustics, explosives, paints, other dangerous materials or substances, building materials or furniture shall not be placed in the mobile toter. 
(Code 1969, § 24-19; Ord. of 2-11-02) 
Sec. 70-45. - Placement of extra trash and garbage in disposable bags or bundles; leaf collection; bulk collection. 
    The mobile toter shall not be filled to overflowing. 
(1)  Extra trash collection. When the mobile toter is fully loaded, extra trash, garbage, refuse or leaves may be placed in disposable plastic bags or containers and placed on top of or next to the mobile toter for collection. Not more than 200 pounds shall be placed inside a mobile toter at any one time. Tree limbs, branches, tree cuttings and vines shall be placed beside the mobile toter for collection. Such tree limbs, branches, tree cuttings and vines shall be no longer than fifteen feet nor more than six inches in diameter and each bundle shall not exceed 75 pounds. All extra trash shall be placed in accordance with section 70-42. 
(2)  Leaf collection. Leaves or grass clippings will be picked up by city crews only when placed within ten feet of the paved portion of the street and not obstructing a sidewalk, street or curb, between October 15 and December 1 of each year. Leaf and grass clippings will be collected during other times of the year only when placed in disposable boxes or bags and placed within ten feet of the curb or edge of the pavement. 
(3)  Bulk collection. Bulk collection items shall include appliances, residential yard waste, and other debris not normally collected with garbage collection. These items shall be placed within ten feet of the paved portion of the street and shall be placed in a position that is clear of any overhead utility lines or other obstructions. 
(Code 1969, § 24-20; Ord. of 2-11-02) 
Sec. 70-46. - Ashes in cardboard, etc., containers. 
    Ashes to be collected and disposed of by city employees shall not be put out for collection in cardboard boxes or other flammable containers. 
(Code 1969, § 24-21) 
Sec. 70-47. - Materials not collected from certain premises. 
    All residential collections shall be made from the street side or alley where applicable. Collections will not be made from premises situated on streets which are not passable for collection trucks, nor shall any collection be made from basements, garages or enclosed porches or from the interior, except as provided in this article. If collection is made along a private street or road, the city shall not be responsible for maintenance of the private street or road. 
(Code 1969, § 24-22) 
Sec. 70-48. - Frequency of collection. 
    The sanitation department shall on a once-a-week basis collect mobile toters placed within ten feet of the paved portion of the street or alley. Such mobile toters shall be so placed no earlier than 3:00 p.m. on the day prior to collection and shall be so removed from the curb by 7:00 a.m. on the day following collection. 
(Code 1969, § 24-23; Ord. of 2-11-02) 
Sec. 70-49. - Replacement of mobile toter. 
(a)  The sanitation department shall have the authority to require the replacement of any mobile toter that is so worn or damaged as to hinder the effective street-side collection process. 
(b)  Any mobile toter that is damaged or destroyed through the negligence or misuse by the city shall be replaced at the expense of the city. The sanitation department shall have the authority to determine in each case of damage whether the damage is sufficient to require replacement. 
(Code 1969, § 24-24) 
Sec. 70-50. - Issuance of mobile toters to residences. 
    All residences shall be issued a mobile toter of 85-gallon capacity. Should the resident desire an additional toter, it may be purchased from the sanitation department of the city at the city's then-current cost. Should a resident move from the premises, the mobile toter originally issued by the city will be reclaimed by the sanitation department; otherwise the resident becomes liable for any charges connected with replacement of the mobile toter. 
(Code 1969, § 24-25) 
Sec. 70-51. - Responsibility for maintaining mobile toter. 
    It shall be the responsibility of each person issued a mobile toter to keep such toter securely on his premises in such a manner as to protect it from being stolen or destroyed, and, if the toter is stolen or destroyed, the city will replace the first toter at no charge; the second toter so stolen or destroyed shall be replaced by the resident at one-half of the city's then-current replacement cost; and the third toter so stolen or destroyed shall be replaced by the resident at the full then-current replacement cost to the city. 
(Code 1969, § 24-26) 
Sec. 70-52. - Enforcement of sections 70-40 through 70-51. 
    Any violation of sections 70-40 through 70-51 will be a class 4 misdemeanor and so punishable. 
(Code 1969, § 24-27) 
Chapter 74 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Powers as to streets, alleys and other public ways, places and property (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-888 et seq.) adopted, § 2.2. See Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2000 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; gutters, etc., when eaves project over sidewalk, downspouts from gutters, § 18-3; use of covered drain when water flows across street upon erection of building, etc., or grading of lot, § 18-4; air pollution, § 30-41 et seq.; filling station storage tanks, pumps, etc., on or under street or sidewalk, § 34-113; allowing filling station containers or equipment to stand or remain on street or sidewalk, § 34-114; health and sanitation, ch. 38; display of foods for human consumption upon sidewalks, § 38-36; work force, § 46-56 et seq.; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; planning, ch. 62; signs, ch. 66; throwing or depositing refuse, trash, etc., upon streets or sidewalks, § 70-2; throwing or depositing glass, nails, etc., on street, § 70-4; duty of person occupying store or premises to keep sidewalk clean, § 70-5; sweeping dirt or trash from interior of store or premises onto sidewalk or public place, § 70-6; subdivisions, ch. 78; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; permit for funeral, procession or parade in street, § 86-8; railroad cars obstructing street or road, § 86-453; utilities, ch. 90; vegetation, ch. 94; vehicles for hire, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Streets, alleys, sidewalks, etc., generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2000; limited access streets in cities and towns, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2026; official map, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2233 et seq.; local authority over highways, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-224 et seq.; pipelines and other works in streets, alleys, etc., Code of Virginia, § 56-257 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Responsibilities of city manager. 
    The city manager shall have the general supervision of the streets and alleys of the city and shall recommend to the council such repairs and improvements as he may deem necessary. All questions pertaining to repairs or improvements to streets or alleys shall be referred to the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 25-1) 
Sec. 74-2. - Official street lines, grades, etc. 
    When a street line, grade of a centerline or a curbline of any street or alley shall have been established and approved by the city manager, under proper authority of the council, such street lines, grades or curbs shall become official. 
(Code 1969, § 25-2) 
Sec. 74-3. - Changing grade of street. 
    No person shall change or cause to be changed the alignment or grade of any street or alley except under the supervision and direction of the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 25-3) 
Sec. 74-4. - Width and grade of pavements and sidewalks. 
    No pavement or sidewalk shall be made less in width than the city manager shall deem proper or greater in grade than the city manager shall deem proper. 
(Code 1969, § 25-4) 
Sec. 74-5. - Situation, height, etc., of pavements and sidewalks. 
    The situation, range, height, width and pitch of the curbs, pavements and sidewalks to be built in the city shall be established and approved by the city manager, taking care not to interfere with existing curbing, pavements and sidewalks when the same can be avoided, with regard to uniformity and the specifications adopted by the council governing sidewalks, which specifications shall be on file in the office of the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 25-5) 
Sec. 74-6. - Obstruction generally of streets, etc. 
    No person shall obstruct or block any street, sidewalk, walkway or alley unless permitted so to do by this Code or other ordinance of the city or unless a written permit so to do is first obtained from the city manager. If any person shall unlawfully obstruct or block any street, sidewalk, walkway or alley and fail to remove such obstruction at once after having been notified by the city manager or any officer of the city, the city manager shall cause the obstruction in question to be removed at the expense of the person causing such obstruction and the claim for the expenses shall be collected as other claims due the city are collected. 
(Code 1969, § 25-6) 
Sec. 74-7. - Obstructing or impeding flow of water in street, etc. 
    No person shall obstruct or impede the flow of water in any street, gutter, alley or drain. 
(Code 1969, § 25-7) 
Sec. 74-8. - Removal of snow, etc., from sidewalks; procedure with reference to ice, etc. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the occupant of every house or lot which has a sidewalk or footway of permanent material adjoining or touching upon the sidewalk or footway, either in front, in the rear or on either side, to have all snow removed from such sidewalk or foot pavement within six hours after the snow shall have ceased falling, unless the snow in question shall have fallen during the night, in which case it shall be removed by 11:00 a.m. the next morning. The same requirements shall exist with respect to ice, sleet or mud on the sidewalks or footways, except that such ice, sleet or mud, when it cannot be removed without injury to the sidewalk, shall be covered within the same period of time with sawdust, ashes or other material which would render it safe for travel. When there is no tenement on such lot, or any occupant of any tenement thereon, it shall be the duty of the owner of such lot or tenement to have the snow removed, or the ice removed or covered, or the mud cleaned off from his sidewalk or footway as required by this section of occupants of houses. 
(b)  Each violation of this section shall be a class 4 misdemeanor, and each and every six hours that such snow, ice, sleet or mud is allowed to remain in violation of this section shall be considered as a separate offense. If there is no occupant of the premises and the owner or agent cannot be found, then the city manager shall have the sidewalk cleaned or covered at the expense of the owner. 
(Code 1969, § 25-8) 
Charter reference- Power to compel removal of snow from sidewalks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-867. 
Sec. 74-9. - Fires on composition street or street containing bitumen, asphalt, etc. 
    No person shall build a fire on any composition street in the city or on a street containing bitumen, tar, asphalt or other flammable substance. 
(Code 1969, § 25-9) 
Charter reference- Power to regulate or prohibit the making of fires (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-872) adopted, § 2.2. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention, § 34-36 et seq. 
Sec. 74-10. - Construction, etc., of barbed-wire fences. 
    No person shall construct or maintain a barbed-wire fence upon any public street or sidewalk line within the city. 
(Code 1969, § 25-10) 
Secs. 74-11-74-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 74-36. - Placing of barriers, notices, lights, etc. 
    While any of the streets or alleys of the city or portion thereof is in the process of construction, maintenance or repair, the city manager may erect, or cause to be erected, suitable barriers or obstructions thereon and may post, or cause to be posted, conspicuous notices to the effect that the street or alley, or portion thereof, is closed, and may place warning signs, lights and lanterns on such street or alley, or portions thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 25-11) 
Sec. 74-37. - Driving into or upon construction or maintenance. 
    No person shall willfully drive a vehicle into or upon new construction or maintenance or repair work upon any street or alley closed to the public or in the process of construction or maintenance, as provided in section 74-36. 
(Code 1969, § 25-12) 
Cross reference- Operation of vehicles, § 86-86 et seq. 
Sec. 74-38. - Removing, etc., barriers, notices, etc. 
    No person shall remove, injure, tear down or destroy any barrier or obstruction, notice, light or lantern placed pursuant to section 74-36. 
(Code 1969, § 25-13) 
Sec. 74-39. - Crossovers. 
    Whenever, in order to enter a garage, filling station, stable or private alley or driveway, it is necessary to cross the pavement or sidewalk, such crossover shall be located, constructed and paved in accordance with city plans and specifications, which city plans and specifications shall be on file in the office of the city manager or be constructed by the city. The cost of such crossover, above the usual cost of the sidewalk, shall be paid by the property owner. The city manager shall locate such crossovers and specify the dimensions, alignment and grade therefor. 
(Code 1969, § 25-14) 
Secs. 74-40-74-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 74-66. - Permit required. 
    No person, unless specially authorized by the council, shall take up or remove any portion of the surface of the sidewalk or street, or excavate in any public street of the city, without a written permit from the city manager, who shall not refuse such permit to any applicant except for cause, but in case of refusal the applicant may appeal to the council. 
(Code 1969, § 25-15) 
Sec. 74-67. - Deposits; assent to provisions of article. 
    Before a permit as required in section 74-66 is granted, the city manager may require a deposit sufficient to pay for resurfacing the street to be disturbed, the amount of such deposit to be determined by the city manager. Every person who shall make application for such a permit shall be deemed to have assented thereby to all the provisions and terms of this article, including the right of the city to collect the actual cost of replacing the pavement, sidewalk or street surface in the manner directed in this section. 
(Code 1969, § 25-16) 
Sec. 74-68. - Duty to prosecute work without delay. 
    It shall be the duty of every person to whom a permit, as required in section 74-66, shall have been granted, to institute at once and prosecute without delay the work for which such permit was obtained, and promptly on its completion give written notice thereof to the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 25-17) 
Sec. 74-69. - Replacing surface. 
    No pavement, sidewalk or street surface shall be replaced after being taken up pursuant to a permit as required in section 74-66 by any person except under the direction of the city manager. If the applicant fails to resurface the street disturbed promptly and in a manner approved by the city manager, the city manager is authorized to cause such work to be done at the expense of the applicant. 
(Code 1969, § 25-18) 
Sec. 74-70. - Guarding by lights and barriers; responsibility for damages caused by excavation. 
    Any person to whom a permit, as required in section 74-66, is granted shall place guards or barriers around the excavation in question and shall protect it by warning lights at night, and shall be responsible for damages to persons or property caused by such excavations until taken in charge by the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 25-19) 
Sec. 74-71. - Article not applicable to work done by city. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to work done by city forces under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 25-20) 
Secs. 74-72-74-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUMBERING OF HOUSES AND BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Numbering of buildings and structures in subdivisions, § 78-214. 

Sec. 74-101. - Plans. 
(a)  All houses or buildings shall be numbered according to the centenary plan. The intersection of the centerline of Main Street and the centerline of North Broad Street on the north and South Broad Street on the south shall be considered the central point of the city, thus forming the quadrants to be styled northwest, northeast, southwest and southeast divisions. From the centerline of North Broad Street on the north and South Broad Street on the south, Main Street shall be known as West Main Street to the west and East Main Street to the east. 
(b)  Beginning at the central point as described in subsection (a) and moving therefrom upon the axis of reference, houses or buildings and vacant lot frontage shall be numbered from one upward, allowing one number for every 25 feet of street frontage on each side of the street. Odd numbers shall be placed upon the north side and even numbers upon the south side of the streets running in a generally east and west direction, and odd numbers shall be placed upon the west side and even numbers upon the east side of the streets running in a generally north and south direction. A new hundred shall be begun at each intersection as far as practicable, or where existing streets or proposed future streets would intersect if extended. Where blocks and intersection intervals are irregular a new hundred shall be begun at reasonable intervals corresponding in general to blocks or intersections in other parts of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 25-21) 
Sec. 74-102. - Assignment of numbers. 
    The city manager shall assign the proper numbers to all existing houses or buildings and to future houses or buildings as they may be constructed, in accordance with the provisions of section 74-101. 
(Code 1969, § 25-22) 
Sec. 74-103. - City to furnish numbers; duty of owner of house or building. 
    Numbers of a uniform design shall be furnished for every house or building by the city. These numbers shall be properly placed upon the house or building by the owner or other person in charge thereof, and each owner or person in charge of a house or building within the city shall secure such numbers from the office of the city manager and place and maintain such numbers upon his house or building in a proper manner within 60 days after due notice has been given through publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city, or otherwise, that the proper numbers have been assigned by the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 25-23) 
Sec. 74-104. - Improved style numbers. 
    Any other provision of this article to the contrary notwithstanding, any person who desires to have an improved style number affixed to his house or building instead of the number furnished by the city, as provided in section 74-103, may do so, but such improved style number shall correspond in figures to that assigned under the provisions of this article. The cost of the improved style number shall be borne by the person desiring to use such improved style number. 
(Code 1969, § 25-24) 
Secs. 74-105-74-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - POLES AND WIRES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Electricity, § 18-166 et seq.; city electric system, § 90-26 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-136. - Direction of placing of poles and wires on streets, etc. 
    The electrical inspector shall so direct the placing of poles and wires in the streets, alleys and public places of the city that such poles and wires will cause as little obstruction as possible, either to public travel or to the private use and enjoyment of adjacent property. 
(Code 1969, § 20-1) 
Sec. 74-137. - Notice to relocate poles or wires. 
    If poles or wires located in the streets, alleys or public places of the city are, in the opinion of the electrical inspector, improperly located or the electrical inspector desires that the location of such poles or wires be changed, the electrical inspector shall give notice to the person owning or using such poles or wires to relocate such poles or wires within five days. It shall be unlawful for the recipient of such notice to fail, neglect or refuse to comply therewith. 
(Code 1969, § 20-2) 
Sec. 74-138. - Erection or use of rejected or condemned pole. 
    The erection or use of any poles rejected or condemned by the electrical inspector shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1969, § 20-3) 
Sec. 74-139. - Notice to remove rejected or condemned pole. 
    In the event of the erection or use in the city of any poles which have been rejected or condemned by the electrical inspector, the electrical inspector shall give notice to the person owning or using such poles to remove such poles within five days. It shall be unlawful for the recipient of such notice to fail, neglect or refuse to comply therewith. 
(Code 1969, § 20-4) 
Sec. 74-140. - Compelling removal of unsafe, etc., poles. 
    The electrical inspector shall compel the removal of unsafe, unsuitable or superfluous poles. 
(Code 1969, § 20-5) 
Sec. 74-141. - Notice to remove unsafe, etc., poles. 
    If any poles in the city are, in the opinion of the electrical inspector, unsafe, unsuitable or superfluous, the electrical inspector shall give notice to the person owning or using such poles to remove such poles within five days. It shall be unlawful for the recipient of such notice to fail, neglect or refuse to comply therewith. 
(Code 1969, § 20-6) 
Sec. 74-142. - Removal, etc., of dead wires. 
    The electrical inspector shall cause all wires, except telephone wires, that have not been used for 30 days, and which are known as dead wires, to be removed at once at the expense of the owners of such wires. All dead wires of telephone companies shall be detached from the buildings with which they have been connected. 
(Code 1969, § 20-7) 
Sec. 74-143. - Removal of wires in course of repairing, painting, etc., a building. 
    Whenever a builder or person engaged in repairing, painting or doing other work in or upon a building finds it necessary to remove wires from the building in prosecuting his work, the owner of such building, or the contractor engaged thereon, shall serve the electrical inspector with written notice thereof 24 hours before such contemplated work is begun, and the electrical inspector may direct the owner of such wires to remove them. 
(Code 1969, § 20-8) 
Secs. 74-144-74-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH AND POWER COMPANIES 

Sec. 74-171. - Permit for erection of poles in street-Required. 
    No telephone, telegraph or power company shall erect any poles in any street or alley unless a written permit so to do is first obtained from the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 20-9) 
Sec. 74-172. - Same-Application. 
    Any telephone, telegraph or power company desiring a permit as required in section 74-171 shall file an application therefor with the city manager, in such form as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 20-10) 
Sec. 74-173. - Same-Height of poles to be specified. 
    Permits issued pursuant to applications filed as provided in section 74-172 shall specify the height of the poles to be erected pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1969, § 20-11) 
Sec. 74-174. - Directions for location of poles. 
    All poles erected pursuant to a permit as required in section 74-171 shall be located or moved according to the direction of the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1969, § 20-12) 
Sec. 74-175. - Certain poles to be painted; condition of poles, etc. 
    All poles erected pursuant to a permit as required in section 74-171 along any paved street or sidewalk shall be neatly painted at least a distance of six feet from the ground within 30 days after being placed in position, if so required by the city manager. All poles erected pursuant to such a permit, and the wires and appurtenances thereto, shall be kept in good repair and in a safe condition. 
(Code 1969, § 20-13) 
Chapter 78 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Salem Subdivision Ordinance adopted by City Council on March 14, 2005, effective July 1, 2005. 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; planning, ch. 62; signs, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 90; zoning, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-465 et seq.; Subdivided Land Sales Act of 1978, Code of Virginia, § 55-336 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-100. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance of Salem Virginia," or the "Subdivision Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-101. - Policy. 
(a)  Land to be subdivided within the City of Salem shall be of a character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace. Land shall not be subdivided until adequate public facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been made for drainage, public water, and public sewer. 
(b)  Proposed public improvements shall conform to proposals as may be shown in the comprehensive plan and the capital improvement program of the city. It is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in the building code, the zoning ordinance, the comprehensive plan, and the capital improvement program of the city. 
(c)  Land that has been subdivided prior to the effective date of these regulations should, whenever possible, be brought within the scope of these regulations to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-102. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and regulations for the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the City of Salem, Virginia, and to accomplish the following objectives: 
(1)  To achieve the orderly development of land through reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivision and re-subdivision of land; and ensure proper legal description and marketing of subdivided land. 
(2)  To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(3)  To guide future growth and development in accordance with the policies of the comprehensive plan; applicable zoning regulations and any other adopted policy documents of the city. 
(4)  To provide for the orderly extension of public water and sewer, streets, sidewalks and bikeways, stormwater facilities, and other public facility services in a safe, adequate and efficient manner; to secure adequate provision of street lighting, fire and police protection, recreation and educational facilities, and similar municipal services. 
(5)  To coordinate proposed public facilities and streets in new subdivisions with existing public services in a manner that minimizes adverse effects on adjacent or nearby neighborhoods. 
(6)  To reduce and prevent air, soil, noise, water pollution, and flooding; and to insure appropriate development with regard to natural resources and features, and open space which will contribute to the beauty of the community and value of the land. 
(7)  To promote the economic, social and environmental stability of the community and to protect the character of Salem through the encouragement of beneficial and balanced urban development patterns. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-103. - Jurisdiction and applicability of chapter. 
(a)  These regulations shall govern the subdivision of all land located within the corporate limits of the city occurring on or after the effective date of this chapter. No land may be subdivided through the use of any legal description other than a plat approved by the agent in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  No existing subdivision shall be modified except by approval in accordance with this and other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(c)  This chapter shall govern residential and nonresidential subdivisions. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-104. - Adoption, amendment, and recordation of this ordinance. 
(a)  The planning commission shall prepare and recommend the subdivision ordinance and transmit it to the city council. The city council shall approve and adopt a subdivision ordinance only after notice has been published, and a public hearing held, in accordance with § 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  The planning commission may, or at the request of the city council shall, prepare and recommend amendments to the subdivision ordinance. The procedure for amendments shall be the same as for the preparation, recommendation, approval and adoption of the original ordinance; provided that no amendment shall be adopted by the city council without a referral of the proposed amendment to the planning commission for recommendation, nor until 60 days after such referral, if no recommendation is made by the planning commission. 
(c)  When the subdivision ordinance has been adopted or amended, a certified copy of the ordinance and any and all amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the city manager, and in the clerk's office of the Salem Circuit Court. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-105. - Interpretation. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be the minimum requirements for submission, preparation and recordation of all plats and plans. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, except where the natural construction of this chapter indicates otherwise; words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural include the singular; "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; "may" is permissive. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-106. - Effective date. 
(a)  This chapter shall be effective on July 1, 2005. 
(b)  Any subdivision for which a preliminary or final plat has received written approval prior to the effective date of this chapter and for which a final plat for the subdivision or a section thereof is recorded within one year of the date of such approval, may be developed in accordance with the subdivision ordinance in effect on the date of such approval. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-107. - Relationship to zoning ordinance. 
(a)  The Salem Zoning Ordinance and zoning map shall control the type and intensity of use of all property within the city. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Secs. 78-108-78-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 78-200. - Planning commission. 
(a)  The planning commission, or its designated agent, shall have the authority to review, approve and disapprove the preliminary and final plats for all subdivisions of land within the corporate limits of the City of Salem. The planning commission shall perform its duties in regard to subdivisions in accordance with this chapter, and the Land Subdivision and Development Act, Title 15.2, Chapter 22, Article 6 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-201. - Agent. 
(a)  The planning commission or its designee is appointed to be the city council's agent, to administer and enforce this chapter. The agent's approval, disapproval, or other action shall be that of the governing body. 
(b)  The planning commission or its designee shall exercise authority to review, approve and disapprove plans for the construction of public facilities within all new subdivisions within the corporate limits of the City of Salem. 
(c)  All departments, officials and public employees of the city who are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or approvals under this chapter shall adhere and conform to the provisions of this chapter. Any such approvals or permits issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-201.1. - Agent authority to consult. 
(a)  The agent may call for opinions or decisions, either oral or written, from other departments or agencies in considering details of any submitted plat. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-201.2. - Agent additional authority. 
(a)  The agent may establish any reasonable administrative procedures deemed necessary for the proper administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Secs. 78-202, 78-203. - Reserved. 
Sec. 78-204. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall subdivide any tract of land that is located within the jurisdiction of the city except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable city ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall subdivide land without making and recording a plat of such subdivision and without fully complying with the provisions of this subdivision chapter and of general law. 
(c)  No such plat of any subdivision shall be recorded unless or until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission, or its designee, as appropriate. 
(d)  No person shall sell or transfer any land of a subdivision before the plat has been approved and recorded as provided herein unless such subdivision was lawfully created prior to the adoption of this chapter or any predecessor subdivision ordinance; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the passage of title of property. 
(e)  Any person violating the foregoing provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each lot or parcel of land so subdivided or transferred or sold; and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. 
(f)  The agent and city attorney may take such other legal action as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including suit for injunction, for abatement or restraining order or other appropriate proceeding. 
(g)  The zoning administrator shall not approve a site development plan nor issue a zoning permit for any lot that was created in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-205. - Fees. 
(a)  City council shall established reasonable fees for the administration of these provisions. A copy of these fees shall be available in the office of the city manager. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-206. - Waivers authorized. 
(a)  In cases of unusual situations or where strict adherence to the general regulations in this chapter would result in substantial injustice or hardship, the planning commission, may waive standards contained in Article VI of this chapter, under the terms, procedures, and conditions established in this chapter. No waiver shall be granted which is illegal or which would prejudice the health and safety of citizens of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-206.1. - Waiver process. 
(a)  Each request for a waiver from the terms of this chapter shall be made in writing by the subdivider, stating specifically the provision from which the waiver is requested, and the grounds therefore. Where possible, the subdivider should submit a request for a waiver with the preliminary plat submission. All waiver requests shall be accompanied by such plats, drawings, and engineering documents required by the agent to allow the planning commission to understand and act on the waiver. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-206.2. - Authority to grant waiver. 
(a)  The planning commission shall review, approve or disapprove any request for a waiver. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-206.3. - Time period for consideration of waiver request; notice. 
(a)  The planning commission shall take action on a request for a waiver within 60 days after the application is filed at least ten days prior to final action, the planning commission shall give written notice by regular mail or by delivery to landowners adjoining the plat involved in the request. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-206.4. - Action on waiver request. 
(a)  The planning commission shall grant or deny each request in writing, stating the reasons therefore. The action of the planning commission shall be final. As to each waiver, the planning commission shall preserve and record the application and the basis for the waiver or denial of the waiver. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Secs. 78-207-78-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 78-300. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, the words and terms set out in this section shall have the meanings described below. Any word or phrase used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as that set forth in the City of Salem Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Definitions: 
    Acceptance: The point when the public improvement is either: 
(1)  Accepted by resolution of the city council; or 
(2)  Taken over for operation and maintenance by the city or other public authority which is responsible for maintaining and for operating such facility upon acceptance. 
    Agent: A representative of the city council who has been appointed to serve as its agent in administering this chapter, as hereinafter is specifically provided. 
    Aggrieved person: A person or group of people with an immediate, pecuniary and substantial interest in a subdivision as opposed to a remote or indirect interest. The subdivider may be an aggrieved person. A person is also aggrieved if the person suffers a denial of some personal or property right or imposition of a burden or obligation different from that suffered by the public in general. 
    Alley: A service roadway providing a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Boundary line adjustment: The adjustment of a common lot line between two or more lots within a subdivision, or the vacation of a lot line for the purpose of combining two or more lots. A boundary line adjustment shall not include any action which results in the creation of one or more additional building lots, nor the vacation of any street, alley, access easement, or other public feature. 
    CBR: California Bearing Ratio. 
    Chapter: The "Subdivision Ordinance of Salem Virginia. 
    Circuit Court: The Salem Virginia Circuit Court. 
    Commission: The planning commission of Salem, Virginia. 
    Dedication: The transfer of private property to public ownership and use as a requirement of plat and/or plan approval. 
    Final subdivision plat: The map of a subdivision submitted to the agent for final approval and subsequently to be recorded with the Clerk of the Salem Circuit Court. 
    Governing body: The City Council of Salem, Virginia. 
    Major subdivision: A subdivision creating six or more lots, or any subdivision involving the creation of a public or private rights-of-way. 
    Minor subdivision: A subdivision creating five or fewer lots. 
    Performance security: Cash in the form of a certified check payable to the city, cash escrow agreement, or letter of credit. 
    Plan: The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of public improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance as a condition of approval of the plat. 
    Preliminary plat: The preliminary drawing or drawings, including the elements required by this chapter, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted for approval. 
    Public improvement: Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, bicycle or pedestrian way, or other facility for which the City may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may effect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established. 
    Resubdivision: A change in a map or an approved or existing subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon for public use or any lot line. 
    Sidewalk: A paved walk located in a rights-of-way adjacent to the public street. 
    Street, arterial: A heavily traveled thoroughfare or highway that carries a large volume of through traffic. 
    Street, collector: A street that conducts traffic between arterial and local streets and provides for the collection of traffic within, or for an entrance to, or a principal means of circulation within one or more subdivisions. 
    Street, cul-de-sac: A street with only one outlet and an appropriate turnaround for a safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
    Street, local: A street that provides direct public access to the abutting properties. 
    Street width: The total width of the improved vehicle travel way as measured from face of curb to face of curb, or edge of pavement to edge of pavement for roads without a curb. 
    Subdivide: To divide any tract, parcel or lot of land into two or more parts for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, and including all changes in street or lot lines. 
    Subdivider: An individual, corporation, partnership, or other entity owning any property to be subdivided. 
    VDOT: Virginia Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Secs. 78-301-78-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REVIEW OF PLATS 

Sec. 78-400. - Submission of plat and plans to agent. 
(a)  Whenever the owner of any tract of land located at least in part within the city desires to subdivide the tract, and before the sale of any lot located in said subdivision, the subdivider shall submit a plat and plan of the proposed subdivision to the agent. The agent shall process the plat and plan in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any change in a recorded subdivision plat that modifies, or creates lot lines shall be approved in the manner and under the requirements provided herein. This section applies to any subdivision plat of record, whether or not recorded prior to the adoption of a subdivision ordinance. Where a street, alley, easement for public passage, or other public area or easement laid out or described in such plat is affected, the plat, or pertinent part thereof, shall be vacated prior to resubdivision. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-401. - Boundary line adjustments. 
(a)  Notwithstanding, subsection 78-400(b) above, the agent may waive the procedural requirements of this chapter and approve the minor adjustment of boundary lines of any two legal lots or record, provided no additional lots are created. No such boundary line adjustment shall involve the relocation of any street, alley, easement for public passage, or other public area. No easement or utility rights-of-way shall be adjusted or relocated without the express consent of all persons holding any interest therein. 
(b)  All boundary line adjustments shall be depicted on a valid plat which shall be executed, acknowledged, and recorded by the owner or owners of such land as provided in § 15.2-2264 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  No boundary line adjustment shall result in the creation of any new violation of the zoning ordinance, however, any existing nonconformity of lot size, frontage or setback may continue so long as such nonconformity is not enlarged, extended, or expanded. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-402. - Approval process, major subdivision. 
(a)  Any applicant for a major subdivision shall submit a preliminary plat to the planning commission for review. After the approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission, the applicant shall submit a final plat and plan to the planning commission for review and approval. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-403. - Approval process, minor subdivision. 
(a)  Any applicant for a minor subdivision shall submit a preliminary plat and final plat and plans to the City of Salem Director of Planning and Development, who shall be authorized to coordinate the review and approval of said plats and plans. The Director of Planning and Development shall have the right to refer any minor subdivision to the planning commission for its review and approval. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-404. - Series of minor subdivision plats. 
(a)  The agent may determine that a series of minor subdivision plats in fact constitutes a major subdivision if the series of plats relates to the same parcels or related groups of parcels. If the agent determines that the series of plats in fact constitutes a major subdivision then the agent shall require the subdivider to follow the process for the review of major subdivision plats. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-405. - Changing plats after approval. 
(a)  No change, erasure or revision shall be made on any preliminary or final plat of a subdivision, nor on accompanying plans, after approval by the planning commission or agent, unless authorization for such change has been granted in writing by the planning commission or agent. In no case shall the planning commission or agent approve a revision of a previously approved plat unless the date of the revision and the fact that it is a revised plat is clearly stated thereon. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-406. - Pre-application conference. 
(a)  The applicant shall schedule a conference with the agent to review a concept sketch for any proposed minor or major subdivision, in order to determine whether the sketch generally meets the requirements of the zoning and subdivision ordinances, and to identify any concerns or issues raised by the proposed subdivision. The agent's comments on the sketch shall be informal, and shall not constitute a formal approval or disapproval of the subdivision plat. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-407. - Concept sketch standards. 
(a)  The concept sketch should conform to the following guidelines: 
(1)  Be drawn on white paper or on a print of a topographic map of the property. 
(2)  Be at a scale of not less than 200 feet to the inch. 
(3)  Include the name, location, dimensions of all streets entering the property, adjacent to the property or terminating at the boundary of the property to be subdivided. 
(4)  Show the approximate location of natural features, such as watercourses and slopes with approximate gradients. 
(5)  Show the approximate location and dimensions of all proposed streets, lots, parks, playgrounds and other proposed uses of the land to be subdivided. 
(6)  Include the approximate dimensions of the property to be subdivided. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-408. - Preliminary plats. 
Sec. 78-408.1. - Size and information required on a preliminary plat. 
(a)  All preliminary plats shall be either 17 by 22 inches or 24 by 36 inches in size. 
(b)  Prior to final approval by the planning commission or agent, the preliminary plat shall be signed by the owner of the land proposed for subdivision. The signature shall certify that the owner is aware of the requirements imposed by the plat and applicable city codes, and shall further certify that the owner agrees to comply with these requirements, unless modified in accordance with the City Code. 
(c)  The preliminary plat shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of the Salem Zoning Ordinance and this chapter. The agent may require the following elements: 
(1)  Name of the subdivision, with the notation, "Preliminary Plat". 
(2)  Name(s) of owner(s) of subdivision. 
(3)  Name of surveyor or engineer. 
(4)  Location of proposed subdivision by vicinity map showing adjoining roads, and names of roads. 
(5)  Adjoining subdivisions. 
(6)  Parcel tax numbers. 
(7)  Deed references. 
(8)  True, record or grid north. 
(9)  Identification of any graves, objects, or structures marking a place of human burial. 
(10)  Scale of drawing. 
(11)  Boundary survey. 
(12)  Total acreage in overall parcel or parcels involved. 
(13)  Total acreage of subdivided area. 
(14)  Number of lots. 
(15)  Area of each lot. 
(16)  Frontage of each lot. 
(17)  Purpose of dedication of land to public use, if any. 
(18)  Area, if any, in common open space, park or public lands. 
(19)  Names of all existing, platted and proposed streets. 
(20)  Width of existing, platted and proposed streets. 
(21)  Location of existing buildings within the boundaries of the tract. 
(22)  Existing and proposed utility and other easements. 
(23)  Any sidewalks or bikeways proposed. 
(24)  Existing and proposed storm drainage facilities and provisions for stormwater management. 
(25)  Location and names of water courses. 
(26)  Topography at contour intervals satisfactory to the agent for full engineering review. 
(27)  Road profiles showing existing and proposed street grades. 
(28)  Proposed connections with existing sanitary sewers. 
(29)  Proposed connections with existing water supply. 
(30)  Contiguous land owned or controlled by the subdivider. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-408.2. - Metes and bounds descriptions-Preliminary plats. 
(a)  Metes and bounds descriptions on a preliminary plat shall include distances measured to the nearest hundredth of a foot, and bearings to the nearest second. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-408.3. - Acceptance of preliminary plat and plan. 
(a)  The agent or planning commission is authorized to reject a preliminary plat on account of significant deficiencies. 
(b)  Preliminary plats which are found deficient shall not be accepted until the deficiencies have been properly addressed and remedied. Resubmittals shall reactivate the review period. 
(c)  A preliminary plat accepted for review and accompanied by the correct fee shall be deemed officially submitted to the city. 
(d)  For minor subdivisions, the agent shall review the accepted preliminary plat and plans. For major subdivisions, the agent shall forward the accepted preliminary plat and accompanying plans to the planning commission for review. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-408.4. - Review of preliminary plats. 
(a)  The preliminary plat for each phase of a multi-phased development shall demonstrate compliance with this chapter, the zoning ordinance, and other applicable city standards and ordinances. 
(b)  The planning commission or agent shall act to approve or disapprove the preliminary plat within 60 days of its acceptance; provided, however, that if referral to a state agency for review is necessary, the planning commission or agent shall act within 45 days after receiving approval from all state agencies. If a plat is disapproved, the planning commission or agent shall state the reasons therefore and shall state what corrections or modifications will permit approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission or agent. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-408.5. - Term of validity of preliminary plat. 
(a)  A preliminary subdivision plat remains valid for five years from the date of approval provided the subdivider submits a final subdivision plat for all or a portion of the property within one year of such approval and thereafter diligently pursues approval of the final subdivision plat. The final plat and final plan shall meet all of the submittal requirements established by this chapter for the subdivision or section thereof. Failure to do so shall make the preliminary plat approvals null and void. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-408.6. - Multi-phase subdivisions. 
(a)  When the planning commission approves the preliminary plat of a multi-phase subdivision, it may approve an extended period for the recordation of the final plats of the subdivision. The final plats for all phases must be recorded within five years of the first recordation of a final plat for any phase, unless this period is extended by the planning commission at the time of the approval of the preliminary plat. The planning commission may grant the extension for such time as it may deem to be reasonable, taking into consideration the size and phasing of the proposed subdivision. The final plats for unrecorded phases shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the engineering and construction standards and zoning requirements in effect at the time that each remaining phase is recorded, except if they conflict directly with the approved preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-408.7. - Appeal of failure to act on preliminary plat. 
(a)  If the planning commission or agent fails to approve or disapprove the preliminary plat within 90 days after it has been officially submitted for approval, the subdivider, after ten days' written notice to the planning commission or agent, may petition the circuit court for an order with respect thereto as it deems proper, which may include directing approval of the plat. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-408.8. - Appeal of disapproval of preliminary plat. 
(a)  If the planning commission or agent disapproves a preliminary plat and the subdivider contends that the disapproval was not properly based on the ordinance applicable thereto, or was arbitrary or capricious, the subdivider may appeal to the circuit court which shall hear and determine the case as soon as may be. The appeal must be filed with the circuit court within 60 days of the written disapproval by the planning commission or agent. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Secs. 78-409-78-415. - Reserved. 
Sec. 78-416. - Engineering plans. 
Sec. 78-416.1. - Engineering plan specifications. 
(a)  Every engineering plan shall be 24 by 36 inches in size and at a scale of not smaller than 50 feet to the inch (1" = 50'), except in cases where the agent has approved an alternate scale. 
(b)  Prior to final approval by the city, engineering plans shall be signed by the owner of the land proposed for subdivision. The signature shall certify that the owner is aware of the design requirements imposed by the plan and other applicable city codes, and shall further certify that the owner agrees to comply with these requirements, unless modified in accordance with the City Code. 
(c)  The engineering plan shall include the following: 
(1)  General information: 
a.  Name of subdivision. 
b.  True, record, or grid north (identified as such). 
c.  Scale of drawing. 
d.  Number of sheets. 
e.  Name and address of person and firm preparing the plan. 
f.  Approval block providing for signature and date. 
g.  Vicinity map indicating adjoining roads and road names, and at a scale not smaller than 1" = 2,000'. 
h.  Date drawing prepared, and revision dates. 
(2)  General notes: 
a.  Name and address of owner and developer. 
b.  Address and tax parcel number of property to be subdivided. 
c.  Zoning district. 
d.  Number of lots. 
e.  Total area of subdivision. 
f.  Means of providing public water and sewer service to each lot. 
(3)  Street information: 
a.  Plan and profile of all streets. 
b.  Vertical and horizontal curve data for all streets. 
c.  Sight distances. 
d.  Typical section of all streets including pavement structure proposed and typical grading. 
e.  Traffic projections and analysis where necessary to estimate warrants for signalization, turn lanes, and other related features. 
(4)  Stormwater management information: 
a.  Engineering calculations establishing pre- and post-development runoff for the subdivision. 
b.  Detention facility calculations establishing the adequacy of proposed measures and downstream channels. 
c.  Erosion and sediment control plan and narrative. 
d.  Plan and profile and grading of a typical section of proposed detention facilities. 
(5)  Drainage information: 
a.  Plan and profile of all proposed street drain pipes and channels identifying all inlets, specifying material type and size, with design of invert and top elevation. 
b.  All existing and proposed drainage easements. 
c.  Watercourses, springs and other natural drainage features. 
(6)  Water supply information: 
a.  Plan and profile, including material, size, cover and utility crossings, of existing and proposed water mains. 
b.  Existing and proposed hydrants, valves and other associated features. 
c.  Existing and proposed service laterals and meter locations. 
d.  Existing and proposed easements. 
e.  Fire flow and water pressure calculations. 
(7)  Sanitary sewer information: 
a.  Plan and profile, including material, size, cover, grade, structures, invert, top elevation and utility crossings. 
b.  Existing and proposed service laterals and clean out locations. 
c.  Existing and proposed easements. 
d.  Downstream sewer capacity analysis. 
e.  Lowest floor elevation sewerable by gravity on each lot. 
(8)  Other information: 
a.  Information, details or design as necessary to demonstrate or achieve compliance with the standards of this chapter. 
b.  Existing and proposed topographic lines at two inch intervals. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-416.2. - Waiver of engineering plan elements. 
(a)  The agent may waive the requirement to show on the engineering plan specific items if, in his or her opinion, and based on recognized engineering principles and in an effort to achieve the goals of this chapter, they are unnecessary to determine compliance with appropriate codes and standards and ordinances. Such waiver shall not be construed to authorize the reduction or waiver of any standard or required improvement. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-416.3. - Preparation of plan by certified professional engineer or land surveyor B. 
(a)  Every engineering plan shall be prepared by a certified professional engineer or land surveyor, B who shall endorse the plan. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-416.4. - Process for approval of engineering plans. 
(a)  Engineering plans for the design and construction of required public facilities shall be submitted with the final plat. The agent shall approve or disapprove plans within 60 days of their submission. In the event of the failure of the agent to act within such period, the plans may be submitted, after ten days' notice to the city, to the circuit court for its approval or disapproval. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-416.5. - Effect of approval. 
(a)  Approval of the engineering plan shall, upon issuance of all necessary permits including, but not limited to, land disturbing permits constitute authority to commence development and construction activities which are in accordance with the approved plan but only within such section or sections which have received approval. Nothing in this provision however, shall be interpreted to authorize the construction of any structure on any proposed lot other than such structures which are appurtenant to utility installations. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Secs. 78-417-78-420. - Reserved. 
Sec. 78-421. - Final plats. 
Sec. 78-421.1. - Elements of final plats. 
(a)  All final subdivision plats shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink, at a scale of not smaller than 50 feet to the inch (1' = 50'), except in cases where the agent has approved an alternate scale, on sheets being 24 by 36 or 17 by 22 inches in size. 
(b)  The final plat shall show the following information: 
(1)  General information: 
a.  Name of subdivision. 
b.  True, record, or grid north. 
c.  Scale of drawing, which shall be not smaller than 1" = 50', without approval of the agent. 
d.  Number of sheets. 
e.  Name and address of person and firm preparing plat. 
f.  Vicinity map indicating adjoining roads and road names, and at a scale not smaller than 1" = 2,00'. 
g.  Date drawing prepared, and revision dates. 
(2)  General notes: 
a.  Name and address of owner and developer. 
b.  Address and tax parcel number of property to be subdivided. 
c.  Zoning district. 
d.  Number of lots. 
e.  Total area of subdivision. 
f.  Means of providing water and sewer service to each lot. 
(3)  Plat information: 
a.  Metes and bounds of the perimeter of the subdivision. 
b.  Interior tract lines. 
c.  Departing lot lines for adjacent parcels. 
d.  Property owner names for adjacent parcels. 
e.  Area of each proposed lot. 
f.  Proposed lot numbers. 
g.  Boundaries of proposed and existing rights-of-way with metes and bounds description, stated in one consistent direction. 
h.  Rights-of-way width of each existing and proposed, interior and adjacent, rights-of-way. 
i.  Names (and state route numbers where applicable) of all existing and proposed streets and alleys. 
j.  Boundaries of any proposed common area or open space or public dedicated area, with metes and bounds. 
k.  Intended use of any common area, open space, or public dedicated area. 
l.  Boundaries of proposed and existing easements, with bearings and distances where necessary to establish location. 
m.  Curve data table including curve number, arc length, tangent length and bearing, and radius. 
n.  Major watercourses. 
o.  Floodplain boundaries. 
p.  Identification of graves, objects or structures marking a place of burial. 
q.  All conditional zoning proffers, special exception conditions, or Board of Zoning Appeals actions applicable to the site. 
(4)  Statements and certifications: 
a.  Owner's consent and dedication statement (notarized). 
b.  Surveyors source of title statement (signed and dated by a Virginia Licensed Surveyor). 
c.  Owner's conforming statement (notarized). 
d.  Approval block providing for signature and date. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-421.2. - Preparation of final plat by land surveyor. 
(a)  Every final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor, who shall sign and date each plat and include a certificate signed by him setting forth the source of title of the owner of the land subdivided and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. When the plat is of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated upon the plat. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-421.3. - Final plats-Signature by owners, proprietors, and trustees. 
(a)  Every final plat shall contain in addition to land surveyor's certificate a statement as follows: "The platting or dedication of the following described land (here insert a correct description of the land subdivided) is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any." The statement shall be signed by the owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any, and shall be duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgment of deeds. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-421.4. - Deadline for filing final plat and plans for major subdivisions. 
(a)  The subdivider shall file with the agent the final plat and final engineering plans meeting the standards of this chapter for all or one or more sections of the subdivision within one year of the planning commission's approval of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-421.5. - Review of final plat. 
(a)  The agent, or the planning commission, as appropriate, shall approve the final plat, if found to be in conformity with the requirements of law and this chapter, within 60 days after it has been officially submitted or resubmitted for approval. 
(b)  The final subdivision plat, including the final plat for each phase of a multi-phase development, shall demonstrate compliance with this chapter, the zoning ordinance, and other applicable city standards and ordinances. 
(c)  The agent shall not approve a final plat until any necessary deed of dedication has been submitted and approved by the city attorney. A deed of dedication is required to convey parkland, pump station sites, and other property to the city. One is not necessary to convey streets, alleys, any easement for public passage, or an easement for the conveyance of stormwater, domestic water or sewage. 
(d)  The agent shall not approve a final plat until any necessary subdivision agreement, with surety has been submitted and approved by the city attorney. 
(e)  Where appropriate, the agent shall not approve a final plat until any required deeds of easement to a homeowner's association are submitted and approved by the city attorney. 
(f)  After final plat approval by the agent, no change, erasure or revision shall be made on the plat or accompanying data sheets unless authorization for such change has been granted in writing by the agent. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-421.6. - Disapproval of final plat. 
(a)  In the case of disapproval, the agent shall give the subdivider specific reasons for denial, and these may be contained in a separate document or may be written on the plat. They shall relate in general terms such modifications or corrections as will permit approval of the plat. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-421.7. - Effect of approval of final plat. 
(a)  Only a final plat approved by the city may be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court. 
(b)  An approved final plat must be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court within six months of the date of approval. However, this time period shall be extended to one year if: 
(1)  The subdivider has commenced the construction of facilities to be dedicated to public use, pursuant to an approved plan, or permit with security approved by the agent; or, if 
(2)  The subdivider has furnished surety to the agent by certified check, cash escrow, bond, or letter of credit in the amount of the estimated cost of construction for such facilities. 
These exceptions apply only if construction has commenced or security has been approved and accepted before the expiration of the six-month time period. The deadline for filing the plat may be extended for the period specified in the security agreement. 
(c)  In any case where a deed of dedication accompanies the final plat, the agent shall record both the final plat and the deed of dedication. 
(d)  The subdivider shall record any required deeds of easement to a homeowner's association contemporaneously with the final plat. 
(e)  If the subdivider fails to timely record the final plat, then the approval shall become null and void and the subdivider shall return the plat to the agent so that it may be so marked. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-421.8. - Final plat-Recordation in phases. 
(a)  If the subdivider records a final plat which is a section or phase of a subdivision as shown on the approved preliminary plat within the period established in section 78-421.7 above, then the subdivider may record the remaining sections or phases for a period of five years from the recordation date of the first section, in accordance with this section. The subdivider shall furnish the city with a certified check, cash escrow, bond, or letter of credit in the amount of the estimated cost of construction of the facilities to be dedicated within said section for public use and maintained by the city, the Commonwealth, or other public agency. The five-year time period provided herein may be extended by the planning commission at the time of approval of the preliminary plat, as provided in section 78-408.6 above. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-421.9. - Effect of recordation of approved plat. 
(a)  The recordation of an approved plat shall operate to transfer, in fee simple, to the city, the portion of the premises set apart for streets, alleys, bikeways, sidewalks or other public use, and to convey facilities and easements for the conveyance of stormwater, public water and sewage. 
(b)  When the agent approves in accordance with this chapter a plat or replat of land, then upon the recording of the plat or replat in the circuit court clerk's office, all rights-of-way, easements or other interest of the city in the land included on the plat or replat, except as shown thereon, shall be terminated and extinguished. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-421.10. - Appeal of failure to act on final plat. 
(a)  If the agent or planning commission fails to approve or disapprove a final plat within 60 days after it has been officially submitted for approval, the subdivider, after ten days' notice to the agent, may petition the circuit court to decide whether the plat should or should not be approved. The court shall hear the matter and make and enter an order with respect thereto as it deems proper, which may include directing approval of the plat. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-421.11. - Appeal of disapproval of final plat. 
(a)  If the agent or planning commission disapproves a final plat and the subdivider contends that the disapproval was not properly based on the ordinance applicable thereto, or was arbitrary or capricious, the subdivider may appeal to the circuit court within 60 days of the written disapproval. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-421.12. - Final plat and plans-Copies to be provided. 
(a)  Subsequent to the approval of the final plat and plans, the subdivider shall provide the city with one reproducible and three printed copies of all approved plats and plans. The city may also require that the subdivider provide one digital copy of all approved plats and plans in a format specified by the city. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Secs. 78-422-78-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SECURITY FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 78-500. - Surety in lieu of completion. 
(a)  When a subdivider wishes to record a final plat, but physical improvements and installations including public streets, shown on the approved plan and/or final plat have not been made, in whole or in part, the subdivider may enter into a subdivision agreement with the city and submit a performance surety in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the satisfactory construction and completion of said improvements or installations. 
(b)  Such physical improvements and installations shall include, but not be limited to, any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, drainage or sewerage system, public water line, or any other improvements intended for dedication for public use to be maintained by the city. Also included, shall be any physical improvement required by this or other chapters of the City Code for vehicular access, stormwater management or other improvements accepted as a condition of rezoning pursuant to the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-501. - Subdivision agreement. 
(a)  When a subdivider chooses to post surety in lieu of completion of those physical improvements shown on an approved plan and/or final plat in order to allow recordation prior to completion and acceptance of all required improvements, the subdivider shall enter into a subdivision agreement, approved as to content and form by the city attorney, with the city prior to approval of the final plat. The agent shall provide the subdivider with a sample subdivision agreement during review of the final plat. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-501.1. - Time of agreement. 
(a)  The period within which improvements or installations shall be completed and inspected for acceptance shall be specified in the subdivision agreement. In approving the time of performance of the subdivision agreement, the agent shall require a report containing the following information from the subdivider: 
(1)  Percent of public improvements already completed; and 
(2)  Rate of construction activity including the estimated completion date for each major feature (roads, sewer, water, lights, etc.) remaining to be completed. 
(b)  The agent shall not permit a subdivision agreement to be executed where, on the basis of the report submitted by the subdivider, it is apparent that the improvements or installations covered by said agreement cannot reasonably be expected to be completed by the deadline established therein. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-502. - Reserved. 
Sec. 78-503. - Security required. 
(a)  The subdivider shall furnish to the city a certified check or cash escrow in the amount of the estimated costs of construction or a personal, corporate or property bond, with surety satisfactory to the agent, in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of such facilities. 
(b)  The subdivider may furnish a bank or savings institution's letter of credit on certain designated funds, satisfactory to the agent as to the bank or savings institution, the amount and the form. The letter of credit may be used in lieu of the certified check, cash escrow, or bond in subsection (a). 
(c)  The amount of the certified check, cash escrow, bond, or letter of credit shall not exceed the total of the estimated cost of construction based on unit prices for new public or private sector construction in the city and a reasonable allowance for estimated administrative costs, inflation, and potential damage to existing roads or utilities, which shall not exceed 25 percent of the estimated construction costs. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-503.1. - Periodic partial release of security. 
(a)  Upon completion of at least 30 percent of the facilities covered by any bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee, the agent is authorized to make periodic partial releases of the security. 
(b)  A maximum of three periodic partial releases per any 12-month period shall be authorized. The agent shall make periodic partial releases of such bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee in a cumulative amount equal to no less than 90 percent of the original amount for which the performance guarantee was taken. 
(c)  The agent shall provide for the periodic partial release of any bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee required by this chapter within 30 days after receipt of written notice by the subdivider or developer of completion of part or all of any facilities required to be constructed. 
(d)  No such release need be made if the agent notifies the subdivider or developer in writing of non-receipt of approval by the applicable state agency or of any specified defects or deficiencies in construction and suggested corrective measures prior to the end of the 30-day period. 
(e)  If no such action is taken by the agent within the 30-day time period, the request shall be deemed approved and a partial release granted to the subdivider or developer. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-503.2. - Final and complete release of security. 
(a)  In addition to the written request for release of security and 30-day time period as established, above, the subdivider or developer shall submit a second written request for the final and complete release of security. The agent shall approve or deny the request within ten working days of receipt of the request for final release. If no action is taken the request shall be deemed approved and final release granted to the subdivider or developer. 
(b)  Upon final completion and acceptance of the facilities, the agent shall release any remaining bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee to the subdivider or developer. For the purpose of final release, the term "acceptance" means: when the public facility is accepted by and taken over for operation and maintenance by the city or other public agency which is responsible for maintaining and operating such facility. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-503.3. - Grounds for refusal to release security. 
(a)  The agent shall not refuse to make a periodic partial or final release of a bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee for any reason not directly related to the specified defects or deficiencies in construction of facilities covered by said bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-503.4. - Use of security. 
(a)  In those cases where performance surety has been posted and the required improvements or installations have not been completed within the terms of the subdivision agreement, the agent shall declare the subdivider to be in default and shall draw on the posted surety. After the funds or proceeds from the property have been received, the agent shall cause such improvements to be completed. The subdivider shall be fully and completely responsible and liable for the entire cost of completing the improvements, even when such cost exceeds the amount of surety. 
(b)  If the funds or proceeds from the surety are insufficient to complete the improvements, the agent and the city attorney shall proceed to obtain such funds from the subdivider, its successor or assigns including such reasonable costs as may be expended in the process. 
(c)  If any funds remain after all improvements or installations are completed and accepted with all necessary fees paid and no defects are found therein which must be repaired, such remaining funds, less any such reasonable administrative or overhead costs which may have accrued, shall be returned to the subdivider within 180 days of final acceptance of the final improvement or installation. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Secs. 78-504-78-507. - Reserved. 
Sec. 78-508. - Issuance of residential certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the surety requirements contained in this chapter, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city for any residential structure, until such time that the public street or streets that provide vehicle access to the residential structure have been completed and accepted by the city. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Secs. 78-509-78-599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGN STANDARDS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 78-600. - Land must be suitable. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements established by this chapter, all subdivision plats shall comply with the Salem Zoning Ordinance; all applicable chapters of the Salem City Code, as amended; the rules and regulations of the Virginia Department of Transportation; and any other applicable federal, state, or local requirement. 
(b)  Each lot shall be suitable for a building site. Land not suitable for a building site shall be combined with other lots. The planning commission shall have the authority to deny any preliminary or final subdivision plat if the planning commission finds the land to be unsuitable for the purposes for which it was intended. 
(c)  All lots subdivided under the authority of this chapter shall lie wholly within the municipal boundary of the City of Salem. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 7-11-05(2); Ord. of 3-10-08(1)) 
Sec. 78-601. - Flooding. 
(a)  Land in the floodplain overlay district of the zoning ordinance and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable because of flooding shall not be platted for residential occupancy or for such other uses that may increase danger to health, life or property, or cause erosion or flood hazards. Such land within the subdivision shall be set aside on the plat for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional flooding or shall not produce conditions contrary to public welfare. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-602. - Off-site improvements. 
(a)  Where the construction or improvement of a subdivision of land makes necessary, at least in part, the installation of new or improved sewerage, water, or drainage facilities located outside the property limits of the subdivision, the subdivider or developer of the subdivision shall pay a proportionate share of the cost of the facilities, in accordance with this section. 
(b)  No such payment shall be required until the city council has established (or has committed itself by ordinance to the establishment of) a general sanitary sewer, water or drainage improvement program for an area having related and common sanitary sewer, water and drainage conditions, or any of them, and within which the land to be subdivided is located. The city may develop and administer all three programs together or any one, or other number, separately or jointly. 
(c)  The program shall include regulations that establish reasonable standards to determine the proportionate share of the total estimated cost of ultimate sanitary sewerage, water and drainage facilities required adequately to serve a related and common area, when and if fully developed in accord with the comprehensive plan, that shall be borne by each subdivider or developer within the area. 
(d)  The share to be borne by each subdivider shall be limited to the proportion of such total estimated cost which the increased sanitary sewerage flow, water use or increased volume and velocity of stormwater runoff to be caused by the proposed subdivision bears to the total estimated volume and velocity of such sanitary sewerage, water or runoff from such area in its fully developed state. In calculating the volume and velocity of stormwater runoff, the city shall take into account the effect of all on-site stormwater facilities or best management practices constructed or required to be constructed by the subdivider or developer and give appropriate credit therefore. 
(e)  Each such payment received shall be expended only for the necessary engineering and related studies and the construction of those facilities for which the payment was required and, until so expended, shall be held in an interest-bearing account for the benefit of the subdivider. In lieu of such payment, the agent may accept a letter of credit satisfactory to the agent conditioned upon the payment at the commencement of construction. The payments received shall be kept in a separate account for each of the individual improvement programs until such time as they are expended for the improvement program. All payments shall be released and used, with any interest earned, as a tax credit on the real estate taxes on the property if construction of the facilities identified in the established water, sewer and drainage programs is not commenced within 12 years from the date of the posting of the payment. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall imply or constitute an obligation on the part of the city to upgrade or construct any sanitary sewerage, water or storm drainage facilities or prevent the subdivider from constructing on his own account and to satisfy his own schedule such off-site facilities necessary or desirable for the safe and proper provision of utility service to the subdivision in accordance with this subdivision chapter and other ordinances and standards of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-603. - Improvements by developer. 
(a)  All required subdivision improvements shall be installed by the subdivider at his or her cost. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-604. - Land for public purposes. 
(a)  Where a subdivider dedicates or otherwise conveys land for public purposes including, but not limited to, parks, playgrounds, pump station lots, detention lots, greenways, bikeways, and similar public uses, it shall be of a character, size, dimension, and location suitable for the particular use for which the land is dedicated or conveyed. Land held by the city or other political subdivision or public agency is not required to meet the minimum street frontage, lot size, lot shape, or other lot requirements, so long as it is suitable for its public use. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-605. - Lot shape. 
(a)  Lot arrangement, design and shape shall be such that all lots will provide appropriate sites for buildings and be properly related to topography so that each lot has an acceptable building site with direct access from an improved street. Lots shall not contain peculiarly shaped elongations solely to provide necessary square footage of area which would be unusable for normal purposes. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-606. - Lot dimensions. 
(a)  Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the Salem Zoning Ordinance. Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the zoning district, the planning commission or agent may require that those lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve potential lots, all in compliance with the zoning ordinance and this chapter. 
(b)  In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in the zoning ordinance. Townhouse lots may be subdivided along the party walls into lots smaller than those normally allowed for single-unit dwellings. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-607. - Lot orientation. 
(a)  Except as may be allowed by the zoning ordinance, each lot shall be served by and abut on a public street dedicated by the subdivision plat or on an existing public street. Lots shall be arranged so that each lot may access a local street, unless the parent parcel fronts only on an arterial or collector street and the parcel depth is insufficient to accommodate the construction of a new local street. 
(b)  No lot shall have reverse frontage on any public street. Planning commission may waive this requirement. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1); Ord. of 3-10-08(2)) 
Sec. 78-608. - Lots dedicated to public use; common areas. 
(a)  Lots dedicated to the city for a public use and lots set aside as common area or open space are not required to meet the standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-609. - Remnants. 
(a)  All land below minimum lot size left over after subdividing a tract shall be added to adjacent lots. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-610. - Subdivider to dedicate streets; private streets prohibited. 
(a)  Subject to all other applicable provisions of this chapter, the following street improvements shall be installed and provided by the subdivider and, with the approval of the city engineer, shall be dedicated to the city: 
(1)  Cross drains and catch basins. 
(2)  Curbs and gutters. 
(3)  Street paving. 
(4)  Street name signs. 
(b)  Except as approved by city council pursuant to an approved cluster housing development, or as part of an approved planned unit development, private streets shall not be allowed in any subdivision. There shall be no private reserve strips controlling access to any street or adjoining property. This section shall not preclude the approval of parking lots and access drives for parking lots serving townhouse or multifamily dwellings. 
(c)  This section shall not preclude the approval of separate lots without street frontage in the following zoning districts: DBD, TBD, HBD, BCD, LM, and HM; provided that an adequate, safe, and unobstructed access is created from these lots to a public street. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1); Ord. of 12-12-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-611. - Street names. 
(a)  Street names shall be indicated on the preliminary and final plats and shall be approved by the agent or planning commission, as appropriate. Proposed streets which are in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the name of the existing street. In no case shall the name of the proposed streets duplicate or be similar, literally or phonetically, to existing street names, regardless of the use of the terms street, avenue, boulevard, driveway, place, lane, court, etc. Names of existing streets shall not be changed except by the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-612. - Dedication of streets. 
(a)  The subdivider shall make provision for the dedication to the city of any proposed street extensions as set forth in the comprehensive plan or in other formal documents approved by the planning commission and city council and for the dedication to the city of the fee simple title to land for other proposed streets in the subdivision. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-613. - Access to and from adjoining property. 
(a)  Where it is necessary for the orderly extension of the city's transportation system to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary line of such property. Half streets along the boundary of land proposed for subdivision are not permitted. 
(b)  The subdivider enjoys the right to tie into and access adjoining, existing streets under the guidelines and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-614. - Coordination of streets with existing streets. 
(a)  The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas where streets already exist. Arterial, collector and local streets shall be respectively extended as such. The street arrangement must be such as to cause no unnecessary hardship to owners of adjoining property when the subdividers plat their land and seek to provide for convenient vehicle access to it. 
(b)  Access points to and from the subdivision and the arrangement of streets within the proposed subdivision and their relationship to adjoining, existing streets shall be such as to minimize the effects of traffic, noise, light and danger to pedestrians and children caused by vehicular traffic to and from the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-615. - Approach angle. 
(a)  All streets shall approach arterial or collector streets at an angle of not less than 80 degrees unless the planning commission, by waiver, shall approve a lesser angle of approach for reasons of contour, terrain, or matching existing patterns. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-616. - Street intersections-Rounding of property lines. 
(a)  At all street intersections, property lines shall be rounded by an arc having a radius of not less than 15 feet. The city engineer may require a larger radius at arterial and collector street intersections, or at other locations where traffic hazards or congestion have occurred or are likely to occur. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-617. - Minimum rights-of-way widths. 
(a)  The minimum rights-of-way width of proposed streets shall be 50 feet. 
(b)  If the existing streets within the subdivision are not 50 feet in width the subdivider shall dedicate by subdivision plat so that such streets will meet the standards of this chapter. 
(c)  If the existing streets abutting the subdivision are not 50 feet in width, and if the need for additional rights-of-way width is generated, in whole or in part, by the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate by subdivision plat additional rights-of-way so that such streets will have a width of 25 feet from the center line where the street abuts the subdivided parcel. 
(d)  The agent may require additional rights-of-way width where Virginia Department of Transportation standards for the traffic generated by the subdivision require additional width. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-618. - Culs-de-sac. 
(a)  A permanent culs-de-sac shall not be longer than 900 feet, including the turnaround. The paved area of the bulb turnaround at the end of the cul-de-sac shall be a minimum of 90 feet in diameter. 
(b)  Rights-of-way at culs-de-sac bulbs shall be at least five feet beyond the edge of the pavement or the back of the curve. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-619. - Traffic control devices. 
(a)  The subdivider shall install traffic control devices within the subdivision and where subdivision streets connect with existing streets in accordance with Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices standards and city practices. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-620. - Turn lanes. 
(a)  Turn lanes shall be provided on all streets adjacent to and within a subdivision where warranted by the standards of the "Minimum Standards of Entrances to State Highways," latest edition, published by the Virginia Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-621. - Street design. 
(a)  Streets shall be designed as follows: 
(1)  Arterial and collector street grades shall not exceed seven percent. Local street grades shall not exceed 15 percent. No street grade shall be less than 0.4%. 
(2)  Street intersections shall provide landings of not more than five percent grade for a distance of not less than 100 feet. 
(3)  All streets shall be designed and constructed with VDOT standard CG-6 curb and gutter and be a minimum of 30 feet in width or greater as required by VDOT subdivision street standards, based upon projected traffic generated by the development. 
(4)  Street intersections shall be designed so as to provide a minimum sight distance of ten times the posted speed limit of the street. 
(5)  Street pavement sections shall meet VDOT pavement design guidelines based upon a California Bearing Ratio ("CBR") of ten. The minimum roadway section shall be six inches of aggregate base material and two inches of compacted pavement. All base and pavement materials shall be approved by the city engineer. During construction, and prior to sub-grade approval by the city, CBR test results must be provided to the city. The city engineer shall specify the number and location of CBR tests required. Pavement design based upon the actual CBR's shall be certified by a professional engineer, and shall be provided to the city by the subdivider. 
(6)  For design standards not explicitly set forth herein, Virginia Department of Transportation standards shall apply. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-622. - Street signs. 
(a)  The subdivider shall be responsible for the cost of fabrication and installation of all street signs. Once the streets have been accepted for maintenance by the city, the city will maintain all standard signs. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-623. - Street inspections. 
(a)  The subdivider is responsible for contacting the city engineer at least 48 hours prior to required inspections. Base stone shall not be installed until the sub-grade has been approved by the city engineer. No asphalt pavement shall be installed until the base stone has been inspected and approved by the city engineer. The city engineer may require compaction tests in areas suspected of inadequate compaction and may require undercutting and additional tests in areas that appear deficient during proof-rolling. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-624. - Handicap access. 
(a)  Curb cut ramps for handicap access shall be provided at each intersection, for all streets within and adjacent to a subdivision, regardless of whether a sidewalk is installed at that location. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-625. - Blocks. 
(a)  Design standards for blocks are as follows: 
(1)  Length: The length of blocks shall be determined by public safety, traffic flow, and natural topography considerations. Where streets are approximately parallel, connecting streets shall be provided between the parallel streets at reasonable intervals as established by application of the criteria in the preceding sentence. In general, residential blocks should be between 500 feet and 1,200 feet in length. 
(2)  Width: Blocks shall be designed in two tiers of lots, except where prevented by the natural topography, size of the property, or adjoining railroads or waterways, in which case the agent may approve a single tier of lots. Where the property to be subdivided adjoins an arterial road, the agent may require a single tier of lots and a restricted access easement along the arterial road. 
(3)  Orientation: Where a proposed subdivision adjoins an arterial or collector road, the agent may require that blocks be oriented and designed to limit or reduce the number of points of access to that road. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-626. - Driveways. 
(a)  A maximum of two driveway entrances per lot is permitted for single family dwellings and two family dwellings. The curb cut shall be a maximum of 20 feet in width at the rights-of-way line. Curb cuts on the same lot shall be separated by a minimum of 40 feet, measured from center line to center line. 
(b)  All entrances constructed from a new or existing street or road shall be in accordance with the "Minimum Standards of Entrances to State Highways" of the Virginia Department of Transportation, as amended from time to time, incorporated by reference except as these may be varied by this section. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-627. - Medians. 
(a)  Collector and arterial roads within a proposed subdivision shall be built with medians to provide for landscaping and to provide for efficient traffic movement. The medians shall meet the current standards of the Virginia Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-628. - Street lights. 
(a)  Street lights shall be provided, by the city, on all new collector and arterial streets within a subdivision. The street light layout shall be per city requirements. The city shall provide the poles and lights, and the subdivider shall be responsible for all ditching and backfilling associated with the instillation of street lights. 
(b)  Street lights are not required to be installed upon local streets. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-629. - Monuments visible for inspection. 
(a)  Upon completion of subdivision streets, sewers and other improvements, the subdivider shall install at his expense all monuments required by the agent or planning commission. Such monuments shall be clearly visible and shall be inspected and approved by the agent before any improvements are accepted by the governing body. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-630. - Location of rights-of-way iron rod. 
(a)  Iron rods not less than five-eighths-inch in diameter and 24 inches long shall be driven into the ground so as to be flush with finished grade at all lot corners and at all points of curvature in street rights-of-way lines. When rock is encountered, a hole shall be drilled four inches deep in the rock, and an iron rod shall be cemented therein with the top flush with the finished grade. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-631. - Standards for alleys. 
(a)  In certain situations, the use of alleys may be a desirable alternative to the more traditional type of residential development. When new alleys are proposed for a subdivision, or when the improvement of existing alleys is proposed, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Frontage on an alley shall not be construed to satisfy any public street lot frontage requirements. 
(2)  Unless dedicated to, and accepted by, the city, alleys shall be maintained and perpetuated by a duly constituted property owners' association and notations to this effect shall be clearly indicated on the face of the final plat. 
(3)  Alleys shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the potential for through traffic. 
(4)  Alleys shall have a minimum paved width of ten feet. New alleys shall have a minimum rights-of-way width of 20 feet. 
(5)  Alleys shall have an asphalt surface constructed in accordance with section 78-621 of this chapter. 
(6)  Sight distances which comply with Virginia Department of Transportation standards, shall be provided at intersections with public streets. Alleys shall be built with a minimum pavement edge radius of 25 feet at their intersections with public streets. 
(7)  Alleys shall not dead end. Alleys shall end in an intersection with a public street, or in a cul-de-sac constructed to comply with the standards of section 78-618 of this chapter. 
(8)  Alley length shall not exceed 1,200 feet without an intersecting street. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-632. - Public water required. 
(a)  Public water shall be extended at the subdividers cost to all lots within a subdivision. If the existing public water system does not have the existing capacity to meet the needs of the proposed new subdivision, as determined by the city engineer, the subdivider shall at his or her expense upgrade the public water mains or facilities to provide the additional capacity. 
(d)  The subdivider shall install the public water distribution system within the subdivision, including water mains, service lateral through the curb line for each lot, and fire hydrants as may be required by the city,, and upon its completion, shall dedicate and convey title to the water distribution system to the city. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-632.1. - Water system construction and design standards. 
(a)  Public water system design and construction standards shall be in accordance with adopted city standards, as specified by the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-633. - Reserved. 
Sec. 78-634. - Sanitary sewer required. 
(a)  Sanitary sewerage facilities shall connect with existing public sanitary sewerage systems where available and adequate capacity exists. 
(b)  If public sanitary sewerage facilities are reasonably available to serve the proposed subdivision, but inadequate capacity, as determined by the city engineer, in such facilities exists, the subdivider shall at his or her expense upgrade the sanitary sewerage lines or facilities to provide the additional capacity. 
(c)  In considering the availability of a public sewer, the agent shall consider the following criteria: the proximity of public sewer lines; engineering feasibility and cost of extension of such lines to serve the subdivision; appropriateness of the area and soils for septic sewer service; public health and safety of the proposed subdivision; and the city's plans for sewer line extension or service in the area. 
(d)  Unless public sewer is determined not to be available, the subdivider shall install the sanitary sewer system within the subdivision, in accordance with city standards and upon its completion, shall dedicate and convey title to the sanitary sewer system to the city. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-634.1. - Construction and design of sanitary sewer. 
    (a) Public sanitary sewer system design and construction standards shall be in accordance with adopted city standards, as specified by the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-635. - Reserved. 
Sec. 78-636. - Stormwater management required. 
(a)  The subdivider shall design and construct stormwater management facilities for the subdivision. The design shall include, but not be limited to, an analysis of: Proposed stormwater drainage facilities, pre- and post-development stormwater runoff calculations, impacts on downstream properties, impacts upon downstream stormwater management facilities, and existing and potential runoff from upstream drainage areas. All designs for stormwater management shall be in accordance with professionally accepted hydraulic engineering practices, the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook or any later, comparable source, and stormwater management policies of the city, including chapter 30, article IV, of the City Code. 
(b)  The subdivider shall install the stormwater management system, including detention facilities. 
(c)  Each phase of a phased subdivision shall demonstrate compliance with these stormwater management regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1); Ord. of 3-10-08(3)) 
Sec. 78-636.1. - Capacity standards for stormwater management facilities. 
(a)  The engineering calculations shall demonstrate that runoff from the subdivision post-development will be detained to pre-development levels as evaluated under the ten-year frequency storm, and under the two-year frequency storm. Evaluation and detention of storms more frequent than a two-year storm may be required by the city engineer on a case by case basis. Evaluation shall include downstream conditions, size of proposed impervious area, or total flow from the proposed detention facility or development. 
(b)  Stormwater detention may be waived by the city engineer if the subdivider provides field survey verification and calculations demonstrating that the existing downstream system is adequate to carry the increased runoff from the development to the point where the increased runoff is less than one percent of the contributing flow. Where possible, the subdivider shall maintain pre-development runoff velocities and overland flows to encourage groundwater recharge, using engineering methods conducive to groundwater recharge. 
(c)  The engineering calculations shall demonstrate the safe passage of the 25-year storm and the 100-year storm through the stormwater management facility. 
(d)  Where the downstream channel is inadequate to carry the outfall from the detention pond, the 25-year storm shall also be detained to pre-development levels and the discharge from the pond shall be restricted so as to conform to the required erosion and sediment control standards. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-636.2. - Maintenance of stormwater management facilities. 
(a)  Stormwater management facilities serving a subdivision shall be maintained by the homeowner's association or equivalent body for that subdivision, unless city maintenance or another arrangement is approved by the city engineer. An approved maintenance plan for the facilities shall be provided as part of the plan for the subdivision, and maintenance responsibility shall be designated on the subdivision plat. The subdivider shall provide a maintenance easement to the party responsible for maintaining the facilities. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-636.3. - Storm drainage design and construction. 
(a)  The subdivider shall design and construct a storm drainage system for the subdivision. Design and construction of the storm drainage system, including inlets, pipes, culverts, and appurtenances shall be in accordance with city and VDOT standards. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-636.4. - Drainage easements. 
(a)  The subdivider shall dedicate drainage easements to the city consistent with the storm water management plan for the subdivision. All drainage easements offered for dedication shall have a minimum width of 15 feet. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Secs. 78-637-78-640. - Reserved. 
Sec. 78-641. - Underground utility wiring. 
(a)  All new or extended distribution and customer service utility facilities installed within the boundaries of new subdivisions or within 200 feet of the boundaries of new subdivisions for the purpose of serving the subdivision shall be underground, when and where practical, except: 
(1)  Equipment normally installed above ground in accordance with accepted utility practices for underground distribution. 
(2)  Temporary overhead facilities required for construction. 
(3)  Streetlights, where provided, shall be installed with underground service. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-642. - Public utility easements. 
(a)  The subdivider shall convey a 15-foot wide common or shared public utility easement centered on all interior lot lines and interior to all perimeter lot lines, to franchised cable television operators furnishing cable television and public service corporations furnishing cable television, gas, telephone, and electric service to the subdivision. Such easements may be conveyed by reference on the final recorded plat. 
(b)  The agent may require a wider easement where necessary to provide adequate separation between water, sewer, and/or stormwater management facilities 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Secs. 78-642-78-699. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - VACATION OF PLATS 

Sec. 78-700. - Relocation or vacation of boundary lines. 
(a)  The boundary lines of any lot or parcel of land may be vacated, relocated or otherwise altered as a part of an otherwise valid and properly recorded plat of subdivision or resubdivision. Such action shall not involve the relocation or alteration of streets, alleys, easements for public passage, or other public areas. No easements or utility rights-of-way shall be relocated or altered without the express consent of all persons holding any interest therein. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-701. - Vacation of plat before sale of lot therein; by the owners. 
(a)  The owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, who signed the statement of consent to subdivide on the final recorded subdivision plat of any subdivision, may apply in writing for the vacation of the recorded plat or part thereof. The agent shall refer the application to the planning commission, which shall review the application for its consistency with the comprehensive plan. The planning commission shall forward the application, with its recommendation, to the city council for action. 
(b)  With the consent of the city council, the owners, proprietors and trustees shall duly execute, acknowledge and record in the Salem Circuit Court Clerk's Office a written instrument declaring the plat or part thereof to be vacated. The city council's consent shall appear on the face of the instrument, by the signature of the mayor or agent. The effect of recording this instrument shall be to divest all public rights in, and to reinvest the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, with the title to the streets, alleys, easements for public passage and other public areas laid out or described in the plat. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-702. - Vacation of plat before sale of lot therein; ordinance of vacation. 
(a)  The city council may adopt an ordinance vacating a recorded plat, or part thereof, where no lot has been sold. The city council may refer the ordinance to the planning commission for a review and recommendation in light of the city's comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The ordinance shall not be adopted until after notice has been given as required by Virginia Code, 1950, as amended § 15.2-2204. The notice shall clearly describe the plat or portion thereof to be vacated and state the time and place of the meeting of the governing body at which the adoption of the ordinance will be voted upon. Any person may appear at the meeting for the purpose of objecting to the adoption of the ordinance. 
(c)  An appeal from the adoption of the ordinance may be filed with Salem Circuit Court within 30 days of the adoption of the ordinance. Upon appeal, the court may nullify the ordinance if it finds that the owner of the property shown on the plat will be irreparably damaged. 
(d)  If no appeal from the adoption of the ordinance is filed within the time above provided, or if the ordinance is upheld on appeal, a certified copy of the ordinance of vacation may be recorded in the Salem Circuit Court Clerk's office. 
(e)  The execution and recordation of the ordinance of vacation shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat, or any portion thereof, so vacated, and to divest all public rights in and to the property and reinvest the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, with the title to the streets, alleys, and easements for public passage and other public areas laid out or described in the plat. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-703. - Vacation of plat after sale of lot; consent of all owners. 
(a)  The owners of all lots shown on a subdivision plat may apply in writing for the vacation of the recorded plat or part thereof. For the purposes of this section, the word "owners" shall not include lien creditors except those whose debts are secured by a recorded deed of trust or mortgage and shall not include a consort of an owner. 
(b)  In cases involving drainage easements or street rights-of-way where the vacation does not impede or alter drainage or access for any lot owners other than those lots owners immediately adjoining or contiguous to the vacated area, only the signature of those lot owners immediately adjoining or contiguous to the vacated area shall be required. 
(c)  The agent shall refer the application to the planning commission, which shall review the application for its consistency with the comprehensive plan. The planning commission shall forward the application, with its recommendation, to the city council for action. 
(d)  With the consent of the city council, the owners shall duly execute, acknowledge and record in the Salem Circuit Court Clerk's office a written instrument declaring the plat or portion thereof to be vacated. The city council's consent shall appear on the face of the instrument, by the signature of the mayor or agent. The effect of recording this instrument shall be to divest all public rights in, and to reinvest the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, with the title to the streets, alleys, easements for public passage and other public areas laid out or described in the plat. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-704. - Vacation of plat after sale of lot; ordinance of vacation. 
(a)  The city council may adopt an ordinance vacating a recorded plat, or part thereof, where a lot has been sold. The ordinance may be initiated by motion of one of the city council members or on the application of any interested person. The city council may refer the ordinance to the planning commission for a review and recommendation. The planning commission shall consider the city's comprehensive plan and whether the proposed vacation would irreparably damage the owner of any lot shown on the plat. 
(b)  The ordinance shall not be adopted until after notice has been given as required by Virginia Code, 1950, as amended § 15.2-2204. The notice shall clearly describe the plat or portion thereof to be vacated and state the time and place of the meeting of the governing body at which the adoption of the ordinance will be voted upon. Any person may appear at the meeting for the purpose of objecting to the adoption of the ordinance. 
(c)  An appeal from the adoption of the ordinance may be filed with the Salem Circuit Court within 30 days of the adoption of the ordinance. Upon appeal the court may nullify the ordinance if it finds that the owner of the property shown on the plat will be irreparably damaged. 
(d)  If no appeal from the adoption of the ordinance is filed within the time above provided or if the ordinance is upheld on appeal, a certified copy of the ordinance of vacation may be recorded in the Salem Circuit Court Clerk's office. 
(e)  The execution and recordation of the ordinance of vacation shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat, or any portion thereof, so vacated, and to divest all public rights in and to the property and reinvest the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, with the title to the streets, alleys, and easements for public passage and other public areas laid out or described in the plat. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-705. - Effect of vacation of plat after lot has been sold. 
(a)  The recordation of the instrument as provided in section 78-703 or of the ordinance as provided in section 78-704 shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat or part thereof so vacated, and to vest fee simple title to the centerline of any streets, alleys or easements for public passage so vacated in the owners of abutting lots free and clear of any rights of the public or other owners of lots shown on the plat, but subject to the rights of the owners of any public utility installations which have been previously erected therein. 
(b)  If any street, alley or easement for public passage is located on the periphery of the plat, the title for the entire width thereof shall vest in the abutting lot owners. The fee simple title to any portion of the plat so vacated as was set apart for other public use shall be re-vested in the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, who signed the statement of consent to the subdivision, on the final recorded subdivision plat, free and clear of any rights of public use in the same. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Sec. 78-706. - Notation on vacated plat. 
(a)  Immediately upon the vacation of a recorded subdivision plat, or part thereof, the clerk of the circuit court shall write in plain legible letters across such plat or part thereof, the word, "VACATED" and also make a reference on the same to the volume and page in which the instrument of vacation is recorded. The agent shall cause similar notations to be made on any official copy of the plat retained by the city. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(1)) 
Chapter 82 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Powers as to taxes and assessments (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-841) adopted, § 2.2. See Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1104. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54. 
State Law reference- Priority of taxes in distribution of assets of person or corporation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-6 et seq.; Setoff Debt Collection Act, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-520 et seq.; local sales and use taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605 et seq.; local bank franchise tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1208 et seq.; local taxes generally, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3000. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Books for taxation of real and personal property. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall annually prepare one book for real property and another for personal property, in which shall be placed, respectively, all the real and personal property subject to taxation in the city. These books shall be arranged according to the forms of the state books for the assessments of taxes, so far as such forms may be practicable. 
(Code 1969, § 2-55) 
Sec. 82-2. - Probate tax. 
(a)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3805 et seq., there is hereby imposed a city tax on the probate of every will or grant of administration in an amount equal to one-third of the amount of the state tax on such probate of a will or grant of administration. 
(b)  The clerk of the circuit court of the city collecting the tax imposed under this section shall pay the proceeds from such tax into the treasury of the city. For each service in collecting the tax imposed by this section, the clerk shall be compensated out of the treasury in the amount of five percent of the amount collected and remitted upon each instrument taxable under this section recorded in his office. Such compensation shall be paid out of the city treasury. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-1) 
State Law reference- Tax on wills and administration, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3805 et seq. 
Sec. 82-3. - Payment of real estate taxes. 
(a)  All city taxes on real estate for each year shall be due and payable during the year for which the real estate taxes are assessed in two approximately equal installments, as follows: one-half on or before May 1 and one-half on or before November 1 of such year. 
(b)  Any person who fails to pay to the city treasurer, on or before June 5 and December 5 of each year, the installment of real estate taxes becoming due and payable on or before May 1 and November 1, respectively, shall be assessed and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax past due on such property, or the sum of $10.00, whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax due and any such penalty shall become a part of the tax. Interest at the rate of ten percent per annum shall be assessed and collected on the principal and penalties of all such taxes and levies remaining unpaid from the date fixed by general law for the payment of interest on delinquent taxes. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-2) 
Sec. 82-4. - Imposition and levy of taxes on fiscal year basis. 
    City taxes on real estate shall be levied and imposed by the city council on a fiscal year basis of July 1 to June 30. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-3) 
Sec. 82-5. - Payment of tangible personal property taxes and motor vehicle license fees; proration of personal property tax generally. 
(a)  Returns. 
(1)  Returns for tangible personal property (except tangible personal property on motor vehicles and trailers), tangible personal property (including motor vehicles and trailers) employed in a trade or business and machinery and tools taxes shall be filed with the commissioner of the revenue on or before February 15 of the year for which the tax is to be assessed. Any person who shall fail to file such a return on or before February 15 of the year for which the tax is to be assessed shall, in addition to the tax to be paid, be assessed a penalty of ten percent of the tax assessable on such return or $10.00, whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount to the tax due. 
(2)  Provided there has been no change in status or situs of any motor vehicles or trailers and that a personal property tax return on any such motor vehicles or trailers has previously been filed with the commissioner, no returns of tangible personal property on motor vehicles or trailers with a situs within the city on January 1 need be filed with the commissioner of the revenue. 
(3)  Returns of tangible personal property on motor vehicles and trailers shall be filed within 30 days of the occurrence of any of the following events, for the year for which the tax is to be assessed: 
a.  A change in the name or address of the person or persons owning tangible personal property; 
b.  A change in situs of the taxable personal property; 
c.  A change in which a person acquires one or more motor vehicles and for which no personal property tax return has been filed; or 
d.  Any other change affecting the assessment or levy of the personal property tax on motor vehicles and trailers for which a tax return has been filed previously. 
    Any person who shall fail to file such return within 30 days of the occurrence of any of the changes described in a., b., c., or d. shall, in addition to the tax to be paid, be assessed a penalty of ten percent of the tax assessable on such return or $10.00, whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax due. 
(b)  When due and payable. 
(1)  City taxes on tangible personal property, tangible personal property employed in a trade or business and machinery and tools for each year shall be due from and after January 1 and payable on or before May 31 during the year for which the same are assessed. 
(2)  The personal property tax assessed against vehicles and trailers shall be prorated for the period of time the property has its tax situs in the city or is owned by any person within the city, as follows: 
a.  For property which acquires or loses a tax situs within the city after January 1 of any year, the personal property tax shall be prorated on a monthly basis. 
b.  For purposes of proration, a period of more than one-half of a month shall be counted as a full month and a period of less than one-half of a month shall not be counted as any portion of a month. 
c.  Whenever title to any such property is transferred to a new owner within the city after January 1 of any year, the personal property tax to be paid by the seller and purchaser on such property shall be prorated on a monthly basis from the time of sale. 
d.  Any person relieved of liability for any taxes may receive a credit against any personal property taxes outstanding against such a person, a credit upon any taxable property newly transferred to such person, or a refund as to personal property tax already paid on such property at the option of the taxpayer, upon application to the commissioner of the revenue, provided that application is made within three years from the last day of the tax year during which property lost its tax situs or was transferred to a new owner. A credit shall be extended or refund made within 30 days of the date such tax is relieved. No refund shall be made if the motor vehicle or trailer acquires a situs within the state in a nonprorating locality. 
e.  When any personal property acquires a tax situs in the city after January 1 or is transferred to a new owner in the city after January 1, the owner or purchaser of the property shall declare such property with the commissioner of the revenue within 30 days of the acquisition or purchase of said personal property and the commissioner of the revenue shall assess such property pursuant to subsection (b)(1) above. For failure to declare such property within 30 days of such acquisition or purchase, any owner or purchaser shall be subject to the same penalty as established in subsection (a) above, for failure to timely file a return. Any such tax shall be due and payable within 60 days of such acquisition or purchase or May 31 of the tax year, whichever shall occur later, and failure to pay in a timely fashion shall subject the owner or purchaser to penalties and interest as established by subsection (a) above. 
f.  Any person who moves from a nonprorating locality to the city in a single tax year shall be entitled to a property tax credit in the city if (i) the person was liable for personal property taxes on a motor vehicle and has paid those taxes to a nonprorating locality and (ii) the owner replaces for any reason the original vehicle upon which taxes are due to the nonprorating locality for the same tax year. The city shall provide a credit against the total tax due on the replacement vehicle in an amount equal to the tax paid to the nonprorating locality for the period of time commencing with the disposition of the original vehicle and continuing through the close of the tax year in which the owner incurred tax liability to the nonprorating locality for the original vehicle. 
g.  No such prorated tax shall be assessed against any property for any year or portion of a year for which a property tax on the same property has been paid to any other jurisdiction of the state; provided that the taxpayer shall be responsible for providing evidence that such a tax has been paid and not refunded in whole or in part by another jurisdiction in the state. 
h.  No refund under this section of less than $5.00 shall be issued to a taxpayer unless specifically requested by the taxpayer. 
(c)  Penalty and interest on delinquencies. 
(1)  Any person who shall fail to pay any tangible personal property tax when due shall be assessed and shall pay the city treasurer, along with such tax, a penalty of ten percent of the tax past due on such property, or the sum of $10.00, whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of tax due. 
(2)  In the event any tax on tangible personal property is not paid on or before the date the same is due, interest at the rate of ten percent per year, commencing on July 1 or the first day of the month after the due date, whichever is later, of the year for which such tax was assessed, shall be assessed and collected on the principal of and penalties on such tax. 
(d)  Motor vehicle license fee. 
(1)  Every motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer normally garaged, stored, and parked or acquiring a situs within the city and capable of being operated on the streets, highways, roads, or other traveled ways in the city shall be licensed and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any such vehicle on the streets, highways, roads, or other traveled ways in the city, unless such vehicle is so licensed for the current year. 
(2)  Application for and securing a vehicle license from the city shall be in accordance with the provisions of chapter 86 herein. 
(3)  The annual vehicle license fee on every motor vehicle, trailer, and semitrailer shall be fixed and levied, from time to time, by city council. 
(4)  No motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer taxable hereunder shall be licensed, unless the applicant for such license produces satisfactory evidence that all personal property taxes upon the vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer to be licensed have been paid and satisfactory evidence that any delinquent motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer personal property taxes owing have been paid which have been properly assessed or are assessable against the applicant by the city. 
(5)  Purchasers of new or used motor vehicles shall be allowed a 30-day grace period, beginning with the date of purchase, during which to pay such license fee. 
(Ord. of 11-11-91(3); Ord. of 8-28-95; Ord. of 3-10-97(3); Ord. of 10-11-99; Ord. of 3-25-2013) 
Cross reference- License tax for motor vehicles and carriers, § 86-416 et seq. 
Sec. 82-5.1. - Administrative fees and costs for collection. 
    To cover administrative costs of collection, there is hereby imposed upon the person or persons owing delinquent taxes or other charges administrative fees of: 
(1)  $35.00 for taxes and other charges collected subsequent to judgment; or 
(2)  $30.00 for taxes and other charges collected subsequent to 30 or more days after notice of delinquent taxes or charges pursuant to the Code of Virginia § 58.1-3919. 
    Any such administrative fee shall be in addition to all penalties and interest. 
    There is further imposed upon person or persons owing delinquent taxes or other charges an attorney's or collection agency's fees, actually contracted for, not to exceed 20 percent of the taxes or other charges so collected. 
    There is further imposed upon person or persons who have failed to timely pay personal property taxes a $25.00 administrative fee for division of motor vehicle withholding. The administrative fee for setoff debt claims, not to exceed $25.00 may be added to the amount of the claim. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010(1); Ord. of 9-25-2017(1)) 
State Law reference- Authority for the above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3958. 
Sec. 82-6. - Tax-exempt property; biennial application. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3605, any entity which owns real property exempt under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3600 et seq., shall, after receiving 60 days' written notice, biennially file an application with the city assessor as a requirement for retention of the exempt status of the property. A separate application shall be filed for each property. Application forms shall be furnished by the city assessor. Each application shall disclose among other things the ownership and usage of such property and shall be filed within the next 60 days preceding the tax year for which such exemption or the retention thereof is sought. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-3.2) 
Sec. 82-7. - Service charge on certain dwellings for police and fire protection and for collection and disposal of refuse. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon the owners of all real estate situated within the city which is exempted from real estate taxation under Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3606(A)(3), (4), and (7), and 58.1-3607(A)(2)-(7) and all sections of Article 3, 4, and 4.1 of Chapter 36 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, except buildings with land actually occupied and lawfully owned and held by churches or religions bodies and wholly and exclusively used for religious worship, or for the residence of the minister of any church or religious body, or for use as a religious convent, nunnery, monastery, cloister or abbey, or used or operated exclusively for educational or charitable purposes and not for profit, together with the additional adjacent land reasonably necessary for the convenient use of any such building, a service charge for police and fire protection and for the collection and disposal of refuse. Such service charge shall be based on the assessed value of the real estate and the amount which the city shall have expended in the year preceding the year such charge is assessed for the purpose of furnishing police and fire protection and for the collection and disposal of refuse, excluding any amount received from federal or state grants specifically designated for such purposes. The expenditures for services not provided for certain real estate shall not be applicable to the calculations of the service charge for such real estate, nor shall such expenditures be applicable when a service is currently funded by another service charge. The service charge shall not be applicable to public roadways or property held for future construction of such roadways. The service charge, which shall not exceed 20 percent of the real estate tax rate, shall be fixed by dividing such expenditures by the assessed fair market value of all of the real estate within the city, except real estate owned by the United States government or any of its instrumentalities, expressed in hundreds of dollars, including nontaxable property. The commissioner of the revenue, however, shall first list and publish in the land books of the city, in the same manner as taxable real estate, all the exempt real estate. In the valuation of exempt real estate for the purposes of this section, artistic and historical significance shall not be taken into account. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-4; Ord. of 2-13-95; Ord. of 12-8-08) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Land book retained by commissioner of the revenue, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3310 et seq.; payments in lieu of real property taxation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3400 et seq. 
Sec. 82-8. - Application for retention of tax-exempt status of certain property. 
(a)  All persons, corporations, associations, groups or entities owning real property in the city which is exempt from taxation under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3600 et seq., shall file triennially an application with the city assessor as a requirement for retention of the exempt status of the property, which application shall be filed within the next 60 days preceding the tax year for which such exemption, or the retention thereof, is sought. 
(b)  The application required by subsection (a) shall be on forms provided by the city assessor and shall show the ownership and usage of such exempt property and other information necessary to show tax-exempt status; provided, that this application requirement shall not apply to the state, any political subdivision of the state or the United States. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-5; Ord. of 6-13-2016) 
State Law reference- Triennial application for exemption, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3605. 
Sec. 82-9. - Abatement of taxes on buildings razed, destroyed, or damaged. 
    The real estate assessor shall, upon application made as provided in this section, abate the current tax on any building which is razed or destroyed or damaged by a fortuitous happening beyond the control of the owner; provided, that no such abatement shall be allowed if the damage to such building shall impair the value thereof by less than $500.00; and no such abatement shall be allowed in the case of damage to any such building if such damage is repaired during the same calendar year in which it occurred. The tax on such razed, destroyed or damaged building shall be computed according to the ratio which the portion of the year such building was fit for use, occupancy or enjoyment bears to the entire year. Application for such abatement shall be made to the real estate assessor, by or on behalf of the owner of such building, within six months of the date in which such building was razed or destroyed or in which such damage was sustained. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3222. 
Sec. 82-10. - Enhanced emergency telephone tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the city upon every purchaser of local telephone service a tax in the amount of $1.40 per month per telephone line, except that Centrex service as defined in the telephone company tariffs shall be taxed at the rate of $1.40 per month for every ten Centrex lines. This tax shall be paid by the purchaser to the seller of local telephone service for the use of the city to pay the recurring and maintenance costs of its enhanced 9-1-1 system. If such tax is to be changed, the city treasurer shall notify the seller of the date on which the tax is to be changed under this section. This notification will be sent by certified mail to the registered agent of the seller 60 days in advance of the date on which the tax is to be changed. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every seller in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency for the city to collect from the purchaser for the use of the city the tax imposed and levied by this section at the time of collecting the purchase price charged therefor and the taxes collected during each calendar month shall be reported by each seller to the commissioner of the revenue on or before the last day of the calendar month thereafter, together with the name and address of any purchaser who has refused to pay his tax. Simultaneously therewith, the seller shall file a copy of such report with and remit to the city treasurer the taxes so collected and reported. The required report shall be in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall be charged with the power and the duty of collecting the taxes levied and imposed under this section and shall cause the proceeds of such tax to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(d)  Each and every seller shall keep complete records showing all purchases in the city, which records shall show the price charged against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date thereof, the date of payment thereof, and the amount of tax imposed under this section, and such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times, and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(e)  In all cases where the seller collects the price of utility services periodically, the tax imposed and levied by this section may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during such period; provided, that the amount of the tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(f)  The United States of America, the state and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and authorities thereof, are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this section. 
(g)  Any purchaser failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed or levied by this section, and any seller violating the provisions of this section, and any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this section, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Such conviction shall not relieve any such person from the payment of the tax. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each day's continuance thereof will constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  The following words and phrases as used in this section shall, for the purposes of this section, have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(1)  Enhanced 9-1-1 system means a telephone service which utilizes a computerized system to automatically route emergency telephone calls placed by dialing the digits "9-1-1" to the proper public safety answering point serving the jurisdiction from which the emergency telephone call was placed. An enhanced 9-1-1 system includes selective routing of telephone calls, automatic telephone number identification, and automatic location identification performed by computers and other ancillary control center communications equipment. 
(2)  Public safety answering point means a communications facility operated on a 24-hour basis which first receives E9-1-1 calls from persons in a service area and which may, as appropriate, directly dispatch public safety services or extend, transfer or relay E9-1-1 calls to appropriate public safety agencies. 
(3)  Public safety agency means a functional division of a public agency which provides firefighting, police, medical or other emergency services, or a private entity which provides such services on a voluntary basis. 
(4)  Local telephone service means switched local exchange access service. 
(i)  Whenever the tax levied by this section is collected by the seller acting as a tax collecting medium or agency for the city in accordance with subsection (b), such seller shall be allowed as compensation for the collection and remittance of this tax, three percent of the amount of tax due and accounted for. The seller shall deduct this compensation from the payments made to the city treasurer in accordance with subsection (b). 
(Ord. of 7-27-87, § 14-44.4; Ord. of 6-12-95(1); Ord. of 6-14-99(1)) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813. 
Secs. 82-11-82-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX RELIEF FOR THE ELDERLY AND DISABLED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Exemptions for elderly and disabled, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210 et seq. 

Sec. 82-41. - Exemption authorized; generally. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall, upon application made and within the limits as hereinafter provided, order exemption of tax on real property owned by and occupied as the sole dwelling house of the person or persons not less than 65 years of age or a person or persons less than 65 years of age determined to be permanently and totally disabled as defined in this Article, upon the terms and conditions hereinafter set out. A dwelling jointly held by husband and wife may qualify for exemption if either spouse is over 65 years or is disabled. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-11; Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 82-42. - Administration of exemption. 
    The exemption authorized by this article shall be administered by the commissioner of the revenue according to the provisions of this article. The commissioner of the revenue is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations in conformance with the provisions of this article, including the requirement of answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for exemption as specified by this article. The commissioner of the revenue may require the production of certified tax returns and appraisal reports to establish income or financial worth. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-12) 
Sec. 82-43. - Requirements for exemption. 
    Exemption under this article shall be granted to persons subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The title to the property for which exemption is claimed is held, or partially held, on January 1 of the taxable year by the person claiming exemption. 
(2)  The head of the household occupying the dwelling and owning title, or partial title, thereto is 65 years or older on December 31 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year. 
(3)  The gross combined income of the owner(s) of the dwelling who use it as their principal residence during the year immediately preceding the taxable year shall be determined by the commissioner of the revenue in an amount not to exceed $50,000.00. Gross combined income shall include all income from all sources of the owner(s) and of the owner's relatives living in the dwelling for which exemption is claimed; except, that the first $6,500.00 of income of each relative, other than the spouse, of the owner or owners, who is living in the dwelling shall not be included in such total. 
(4)  The total combined financial worth of the owner(s) as of December 31 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year shall be determined by the commissioner of the revenue in an amount not to exceed $100,000.00. Total financial worth shall include the value of all assets, including equitable interest, of the owners and the spouse of any owner but shall exclude the fair market value of the dwelling and the land upon which it is situated, not exceeding one acre, for which exemption is claimed. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-13; Ord. of 2-24-92; Ord. of 6-25-01(2); Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 82-44. - Claiming of exemption. 
(a)  The person claiming an exemption under this article must file a real estate exemption affidavit with the commissioner of the revenue, beginning on July 1 and not later than August 31 of the taxable year. Such affidavit shall be filed on a three-year cycle. In the first year of the cycle, the taxpayer shall file the affidavit, and during the second and third years of the cycle, the taxpayer shall file a certification that no information contained on the last preceding affidavit filed has been changed to violate the limitations and conditions provided in this article. 
(b)  The affidavit shall set forth, in a manner prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue, the names of the related persons occupying the dwelling for which exemption is claimed, their gross combined income and their total combined net worth. 
(c)  If, after audit and investigation, the commissioner of the revenue determines that the person or persons are qualified for exemption, he shall so certify to the treasurer of the city, who shall deduct the amount of the exemption from the claimant's real estate tax liability. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-14) 
Sec. 82-45. - Amount of exemption. 
    The amount of tax exempted upon any one property for any year shall be a sum equal to the amount by which the tax for any tax year exceeds the amount of tax on the property for the tax year during which the owner claiming an exemption under this article first qualified for such exemption. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-15) 
Sec. 82-46. - Changes in status. 
    Changes in respect to income, financial worth, ownership of property or other factors occurring during the taxable year for which the affidavit is filed and having the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions provided in this article shall nullify any relief of real estate tax liability for the then-current taxable year and the taxable year immediately following. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-16) 
Sec. 82-47. - Penalty for falsely claiming exemption. 
    Any person falsely claiming an exemption shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-17) 
Sec. 82-48. - Appeals; board of real estate tax relief review. 
(a)  Appeals from decisions of the commissioner of the revenue may be taken by an aggrieved party to a board of real estate tax relief review, which is hereby created, consisting of three members to be appointed by the city council, one of whom may be a member of council. Members shall be appointed for staggered terms of three years as vacancies occur. 
(b)  Appeals shall be taken within 15 days after the decision appealed from by filing with the commissioner of the revenue a notice of appeal. The commissioner of the revenue shall forthwith transmit the appeal, together with all related documents, to the real estate tax relief review board, which shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing, notifying the parties concerned, and thereafter decide the matter within a period of 30 days. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-18) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 82-49. - Exemption applicable to permanently and totally disabled persons. 
(a)  The same tax exemptions for such property of a person who is determined to be permanently and totally disabled as defined in subsection (b) of this section are granted, whether they have reached the age of 65 years or not, provided they otherwise meet all the requirements set forth in sections 82-41 through 82-48. 
(b)  A person claiming tax exemption under this section must be permanently and totally disabled and, if under the age of 65, there shall be attached to his application form a certificate of the Social Security Administration, the department of veterans affairs or the railroad retirement board, or if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two medical doctors who are either licensed to practice medicine in the state or are military officers on active duty who practice medicine with the United States Armed Forces, to the effect that such person is permanently and totally disabled to such an extent so as to be unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of such person's life. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-18.1) 
Secs. 82-50-82-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITY SERVICE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions of this article III shall be effective Jan. 1, 2001, in accordance with Ord. of 10-9-00(2). 
State Law reference- Consumer utility taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812 et seq. 

Sec. 82-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Purchaser means and includes every person who purchases a utility service. 
    Seller means and includes every person, whether a public service corporation or not, who sells or furnishes a utility service. 
    Utility service means and includes but is not limited to local telephone service, local cellular, local digital, mobile, radio, telecommunications service, electricity service, gas service, sewer service, bottled gas service and water service furnished in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-19; Ord. of 10-9-00(2)) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-77. - Amount of tax; to be paid by purchaser. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the city upon every purchaser of a utility service a tax, per billing period in an amount as follows: 
    Local exchange telephone service. Six percent of the first $15.00 of revenue not to exceed $0.90 per service for residential customers or six percent of the first $5,000.00 of revenue not to exceed $300.00 per service for business, commercial, or industrial customers. 
    Such tax, in every case, shall be collected by the seller from the purchaser and shall be paid by the purchaser unto the seller for use of the city at the time that the purchase price or such charge shall become due and payable under the agreement between the purchaser and the seller. 
    Mobile local telecommunication service. 
(a)  Ten percent of the monthly gross charge made by the seller against the purchaser or consumer with respect to each mobile local telecommunication service, which tax, in every case, shall be collected by the seller from the purchaser or consumer and shall be paid by the purchaser or consumer and shall be paid by the purchaser or consumer to the seller for use of the city at the time that the purchase price or such charges shall become due and payable under the agreement between the purchaser or consumer and the seller; provided, however, that the tax hereinabove imposed shall not be deemed to apply to that part of the charge in excess of $30.00 per month made by any seller of said mobile local telecommunication service to any mobile service purchaser or consumer thereof. 
(b)  This tax is imposed and levied by the city on each and every purchaser or consumer of mobile local telecommunication service provided by a mobile service provider or by retailers of cellular telephone service. 
(c)  This tax is imposed or levied on a taxable purchase by a purchaser or consumer of such service, if the purchaser's or consumer's service address is located in the city. 
(d)  "Mobile local telecommunication service" shall mean any two-way mobile or portable telecommunication service, including cellular mobile radio telecommunication service and specialized mobile radio. 
(e)  The terms "consumer," "gross charge," "mobile service consumer," and "taxable purchase" shall have the meanings as provided in section 58.1-3812, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, and such definitions are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-20; Ord. of 10-9-00(2); Ord. of 10-28-02) 
Sec. 82-78. - Duty of seller to collect tax; report filed with treasurer; applicability of tax. 
    It shall be the duty of every seller in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency for the city to collect from the purchaser for the use of the city the tax imposed and levied by this article at the time of collecting the purchase price charged therefor, and the taxes collected during each calendar month shall be reported by each seller to the director of finance of the city on or before the 30th day of the calendar month thereafter, together with the name and address of any purchaser who has refused to pay his tax. Simultaneously therewith, the seller shall file a copy of such report with and remit to the city treasurer the taxes so collected and reported. The required report shall be in the form prescribed by the director of finance. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-21; Ord. of 10-9-00(2); Ord. of 10-28-02) 
Sec. 82-79. - Collection of taxes from seller. 
    The city treasurer shall be empowered and charged with the duty of collecting the taxes levied and imposed under this article and shall cause the proceeds from such taxes to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-22; Ord. of 10-9-00(2)) 
Sec. 82-80. - Record of purchases. 
    Each and every seller shall keep complete records showing all purchases in the city, which records shall show the price charged against each purchaser with respect to purchase, the date thereof, the date of payment thereof, and the amount of tax imposed under this article, and such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times, and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make transcripts or copies thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-23; Ord. of 10-9-00(2)) 
Sec. 82-81. - Computation of tax. 
    In all cases where the seller collects the price for utility services periodically, the tax imposed and levied by this article may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during such period; provided, that the amount of the tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-24; Ord. of 10-9-00(2)) 
Sec. 82-82. - Telephone service. 
    The tax imposed and levied by this article on the purchases with respect to local telephone service shall apply to any services taxable as local telephone service under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code from 1954, as amended, relating to federal communication taxes, as such provisions are in force and effect on December 31, 1971. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-25; Ord. of 10-9-00(2)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812. 
Sec. 82-83. - Governmental agencies exempt from tax. 
    The United States of America, the state and the political subdivision, boards, commissions and authorities thereof are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this article with respect to the purchase of utility services used by such governmental agencies. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-26; Ord. of 10-9-00(2)) 
Sec. 82-84. - Penalty for violations of article. 
    Any purchaser failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed or levied by this article, and any seller violating the provisions of this article, and any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Such conviction shall not relieve any such person from the payment of the tax. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-27; Ord. of 10-9-00(2)) 
Secs. 82-85-82-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAX ON PREPARED FOOD AND BEVERAGES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- In accordance with Ord. of 6-12-00, the provisions of art. IV shall be effective July 1, 2000. 
Cross reference- Food establishments, § 38-56 et seq. 
State Law reference- Excise tax on meals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 82-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have, for the purposes of this article, the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cater means the furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for compensation. 
    Caterer means a person who furnishes food on the premises of another for compensation. 
    Commissioner of the revenue means the commissioner of the revenue of the city and any of his duly authorized deputies, assistants, employees or agents. 
    Food means all food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
    Food establishment means any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the city, including but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption. 
    Meal means any prepared food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, company, limited liability company, association, firm, partnership, sole proprietorship, or any group of individuals acting as a unit. 
    Purchaser means any person who purchases food in or from a food establishment or from a caterer. 
    Seller means any person who sells food in or from a food establishment or as a caterer. 
    Treasurer means the treasurer of the city and any duly designated deputies, assistants, inspector or other employees. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-28; Ord. of 6-12-00; Ord. of 10-22-2012(1); Ord. of 9-26-2016(1)) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-102. - Levy. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the city on each person a tax at the rate of six percent on the amount paid for meals purchased from any food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not. In the computation of this tax, any fraction of one-half cent or more shall be treated as one cent. 
    The revenue generated from two percent of the tax rate shall be dedicated to capital projects of the Salem Public Schools. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-29; Ord. of 6-12-00; Ord. of 12-12-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. of 12-12-2011 shall be in full force and effect on February 1, 2012. 
Sec. 82-103. - Collection of tax by seller. 
    Every person receiving any payment for food with respect to which a tax is levied hereunder shall collect and remit the amount of the tax imposed by this article from the person on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such food at the time payment for such food is made; provided, however, no blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the department for the visually handicapped and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes. All tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city. 
A.  All reports and remittances required under this article shall be made on or before the last day of each month, covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. 
B.  The situs for taxation for any tax levied on the sale of food and beverages or meals shall be the city in which the sales are made, namely the locality in which each place of business is located without regard to the locality of delivery or possible use by the purchaser. The term "sale" means a final sale to the ultimate consumer. 
C.  If any person has a definite place of business or maintains an office in more than one locality, then such other locality may impose its tax on the sale of food and beverages or meals which are made by such person, provided the locality imposes a local tax on the sale of food and beverages or meals. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-30; Ord. of 6-12-00; Ord. of 9-26-2016(1)) 
Sec. 82-104. - Exemptions-Limits on application. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption. 
(1)  Factory-prepackaged candy, gum, nuts and other items of essentially the same nature. 
(2)  Factory-prepackaged donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and items of essentially the same nature. 
(3)  Food sold in bulk. For the purpose of this provision, a bulk sale shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on premises consumption (e.g. a whole cake, a gallon of ice cream); a bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption. 
(4)  Alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages sold in factory sealed containers. 
(5)  Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the Food Stamp Program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children. 
(6)  Any food or food product purchased for home consumption as defined in the Federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 U.S.C. Section 2012, as amended except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items whether or not purchased for immediate consumption are excluded from the said definition of food in the Federal Food Stamp Act: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, and nonfactory sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subparagraphs (d)(3), (4) and (5) hereinbelow. 
(b)  A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages. 
(c)  The tax imposed hereunder shall not be levied on the following purchases of food and beverages: 
(1)  Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee. 
(2)  Food and beverages sold by non-profit day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools. 
(3)  Food and beverages sold by any college or university to its students when such food is incorporated as a part of its charge for room and board. In all other cases, when food is sold and sales tax collected under the state retail sales and use tax act, the tax on prepared food and beverages shall apply. 
(4)  Food and beverages for use or consumption and which are paid for directly by the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth or the United States. 
(5)  Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof. 
(6)  Food and beverages furnished by a public or private non-profit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations. 
(7)  Food and beverages sold on an occasional basis by a non-profit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church, or religious body as a fundraising activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for non-profit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes. 
(8)  Food and beverages sold through vending machines. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 82-105. - Gratuities and service charges. 
    Where a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax imposed by this article, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's account, provided in the latter case, the full amount of the gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller. 
    An amount or percent, whether designated as a gratuity, tip or service charge, that is added to the price of the food and beverages by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser, as a part of the selling price of the food and beverages and is subject to the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 82-106. - Report of taxes collected; remittance; preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person required by this article to pay to the city the taxes imposed by this article to make a report thereof setting forth such information as the commissioner of the revenue may prescribe and require, including all purchases taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. Such records shall be kept and preserved for a period of five years. The commissioner of the revenue or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00; Ord. of 10-22-2012(1), eff. 1-2-2013) 
Sec. 82-107. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is $1,000.00 or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) above, any corporate, partnership or limited liability company officer, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for, or pay over the meals tax imposed under this article, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, or who willfully evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00; Ord. of 9-26-2016(1)) 
Sec. 82-108. - Duty of seller when going out of business. 
    Whenever any seller required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under this article shall become immediately due and payable, and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-35; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 82-109. - Discount. 
    For the purpose of compensating sellers for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, every seller shall be allowed three percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction on his monthly return, provided the amount due: 
(a)  Is not delinquent at the time of payment, and 
(b)  Remitted by the seller and received by the commissioner of the revenue on or before the 20th day of the month following the month of collection. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-36; Ord. of 6-12-00; Ord. of 9-26-2016(1)) 
Sec. 82-110. - Enforcement of article; duty of commissioner of the revenue. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall promulgate rules and regulations for the interpretation, administration and enforcement of this article. It shall also be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to ascertain the name of every seller liable for the collection of the tax imposed by this article who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or make the reports and remittances required by this article. The commissioner of the revenue may have issued a summons for such person and may serve a copy of such summons upon such person in the manner provided by law. One return of the original summons shall be made to the general district court for the city. Police powers are hereby conferred upon assistants, employees and agents while engaged in their duties pursuant to this article, and they shall exercise all the powers and authorities of police officers in performing such duties. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall have all of the enforcement powers as authorized by Article I, Chapter 31 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-37; Ord. of 6-12-00; Ord. of 10-22-2012(1); Ord. of 9-26-2016(1)) 
Sec. 82-111. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report, etc. 
    If any seller, whose duty is to do so, shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, the reports and remittances mentioned in this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of the revenue shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain, upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any seller who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such seller the tax and penalties provided by this article and shall notify such seller, by registered mail sent to this last known place of address, of the total amount of such tax and penalties, and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date such notice is sent. 
    All food and beverage tax collections and all meals tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust. The wrongful and fraudulent use of such collections other than remittance of the same as provided by law shall constitute embezzlement pursuant to the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-38; Ord. of 6-12-00; Ord. of 10-22-2012(1); Ord. of 9-26-2016(1)) 
Sec. 82-112. - Duty of city treasurer. 
    The treasurer shall have the power and the duty of collecting the taxes imposed and levied under this article and shall cause the proceeds from such taxes to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-39; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 82-113. - Penalty for late remittance or false return. 
(a)  If any seller, whose duty it is to do so, shall fail or refuse to file any report required by this article or to remit to the city treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid under this article within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the city treasurer a penalty in the amount of ten percent for the first month the taxes are past due and five percent for each month thereafter up to a maximum of 25 percent of the taxes collected but not remitted, or $10.00, whichever is greater. Provided, however, that the penalty shall, in no case, exceed the amount of the tax assessable. 
(b)  In the event that any tax under this section is not paid by the due date, interest may commence not earlier than the first day following the day such taxes are due by ordinance to be filed, at the rate not to exceed ten percent per year. 
(c)  In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to defraud the city of any tax due under this article, a penalty of 50 percent of the tax shall be assessed against the person required to collect such tax. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-40; Ord. of 6-12-00; Ord. of 10-22-2012(1); Ord. of 9-26-2016(1)) 
Secs. 82-114, 82-115. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of 6-12-00 repealed §§ 82-114 and 82-115 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to penalty for violation of article and exemptions as related to taxes on prepared food and beverages. See the Code Disposition Table. 
Secs. 82-116-82-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRANSIENT LODGING TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Excise tax on transient room rentals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 82-136. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commissioner of the revenue means the commissioner of the revenue of the city and any of his duly authorized deputies, assistants, employees or agents. 
    Hotel means any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, roominghouse or other lodging place within the city offering lodging, for compensation, to any transient. 
    Lodging means space or room furnished any transient. 
    Transient means any person who, for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging at any hotel. 
    Treasurer means the treasurer of the city and any of his duly authorized deputies, assistants, employees or agents. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-43; Ord. of 10-22-2012(2), eff. 1-2-2013) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-137. - Levy of tax; amount. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the city on each transient a tax equivalent to eight percent of the total amount paid for lodging, excluding any other taxes levied thereon, by or for any transient to any hotel. Such tax shall be collected from such transient by the person providing such lodging at the time and in the manner provided in this article. In computation of this tax, any fraction of one-half cent or more shall be treated as one cent. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-44; Ord. of 7-13-98; Ord. of 6-10-02(1); Ord. of 10-22-2012(2), eff. 1-2-2013) 
Sec. 82-138. - Collection and payment of tax. 
    Every provider of lodging with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of tax imposed under this article from the purchaser on whom such tax is levied at the time payment for such lodging becomes due and payable, whether payment is to be made in cash or on credit, by means of a credit card or otherwise. The amount of tax owed by the purchaser shall be added to the cost of the lodging by the seller, who shall pay the taxes collected to the city as provided in this article. Taxes collected by the seller shall be held in trust by the seller until remitted to the city. 
    All reports and remittances required under this article shall be made on or before the last day of each month, covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-45; Ord. of 9-26-2016(2)) 
Sec. 82-139. - Reports and remittances generally. 
    Every provider of lodging with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall make out a report upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of the revenue may prescribe and require, showing the amount of lodging charges collected and the tax required to be collected, and shall sign and deliver such report to the city treasurer with a remittance of such tax. Such reports and remittance shall be made each month, covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-46; Ord. of 10-22-2012(2); Ord. of 9-26-2016(2)) 
Sec. 82-140. - Preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of any provider of lodging liable for collection and remittance of the taxes imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for a period of five years, records showing gross charges for lodging, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. The commissioner of the revenue shall have the power to examine such records, at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of the seller, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make copies of all or any parts thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-47; Ord. of 10-22-2012(2), eff. 1-2-2013) 
Sec. 82-141. - Duty of seller when going out of business. 
    Whenever any provider required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under this article shall become immediately due and payable, and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-48) 
Sec. 82-142. - Discount. 
    For the purpose of compensating providers for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, every seller shall be allowed three percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction on his monthly return; provided the amount due: 
(a)  Is not delinquent at the time of payment, and 
(b)  Remitted by the sellers and received by the commissioner of the revenue on or before the 20th day of the month following the month of collection. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-49; Ord. of 9-26-2016(2)) 
Sec. 82-143. - Enforcement of article; duty of commissioner of the revenue. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall promulgate rules and regulations for the interpretation, administration and enforcement of this article. It shall also be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to ascertain the name of every seller liable for the collection of the tax imposed by this article who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make the reports and remittances required by this article. The commissioner of the revenue may have issued a summons for such person and may serve a copy of such summons upon such person in the manner provided by law. One return of the original summons shall be made to the general district court for the city. Police powers are hereby conferred upon the commissioner of the revenue and his duly authorized deputies, assistants, employees and agents while engaged in their duties pursuant to this article, and they shall exercise all the powers and authorities of police officers in performing such duties. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-50; Ord. of 10-22-2012(2), eff. 1-2-2013) 
Sec. 82-144. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report, etc. 
    If any provider of lodging, whose duty it is to do so, shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, the reports and remittances mentioned in this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of the revenue shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain, upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any seller who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such seller the tax and penalties provided for by this article and shall notify such seller, by registered mail sent to his last known place of address, of the total amount of such tax and penalties, and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date such notice is sent. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-51; Ord. of 10-22-2012(2), eff. 1-2-2013) 
Sec. 82-145. - Duty of city treasurer. 
    The treasurer shall have the power and the duty of collecting the taxes imposed and levied under this article and shall cause the proceeds from such taxes to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-52) 
Sec. 82-146. - Penalty for late remittance or false return. 
(a)  If any provider of lodging, whose duty it is to do so, shall fail or refuse to file any report required by this article or to remit to the city treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid under this article, within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the city treasurer a penalty in the amount of ten percent for the first month the taxes are past due and five percent for each month thereafter, up to a maximum of 25 percent of the taxes collected but not remitted or $10.00, whichever is greater. Provided, however, that the penalty shall, in no case, exceed the amount of the tax assessable. 
(b)  In the event that any tax under this section is not paid by the due date, interest may commence not earlier than the first day following the day such taxes are due by ordinance to be filed, at the rate not to exceed ten percent per year. 
(c)  In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to defraud the city of any tax due under this article, a penalty of 50 percent of the tax shall be assessed against the person required to collect such tax. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-53; Ord. of 10-22-2012(2); Ord. of 9-26-2016(2)) 
Sec. 82-147. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating, failing, refusing or neglecting to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Conviction of such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the taxes provided for in this article. An agreement by any person to pay the taxes provided for in this article by a series of installment payments shall not relieve any person of criminal liability for violation of this article until the full amount of taxes agreed to be paid by such person is received by the treasurer. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-54; Ord. of 9-26-2016(2)) 
Sec. 82-148. - Exemptions from tax. 
    No tax shall be payable under this article in any of the following instances: 
(1)  On charges for lodging paid to any hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home or home for the aged. 
(2)  On charges made for providing space for a mobile home in a duly authorized mobile home park. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-55) 
Secs. 82-149-82-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DAILY RENTAL PROPERTY TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Daily rental property tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510.1. 

Sec. 82-176. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Daily rental property means all tangible personal property held for rental and owned by a person engaged in the shortterm rental business, except trailers as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, and other tangible personal property required to be licensed or registered with the state department of motor vehicles, state department of game and inland fisheries or state department of aviation. Except for daily rental of passenger cars, all rental property that is not daily rental property shall be classified pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3503. 
    Gross proceeds means the total amount charged to each person for the rental of daily rental property, excluding any state and local sales tax paid under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-600 et seq. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-57) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3510, 58.1-3510.1. 
Sec. 82-177. - Imposed. 
    There shall be imposed a tax on the gross proceeds of daily rentals of property in the city as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-56) 
Sec. 82-178. - Persons engaged in shortterm rental business. 
(a)  A person is engaged in the shortterm rental business if not less than 80 percent of the gross rental receipts of such business in any year are from transactions involving rental periods of 92 consecutive days or less, including all extensions and renewals to the same person or a person affiliated with the lessor. 
(b)  "Affiliated" for the purposes of this section means any common ownership interest in excess of five percent of any officers or partners in common with the lessor and lessee. For purposes of this article, (i) any rental to a person affiliated with the lessor shall be treated as rental receipts but shall not qualify for purposes of the 80 percent requirement; and (ii) any rental of personal property which also involves the provision of personal services for the operation of the personal property rented shall not be treated as gross receipts from rental. For purposes of this section, the delivery and installation of tangible personal property shall not mean operation. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-58) 
Sec. 82-179. - Levy of tax on daily rental property. 
    There shall be imposed a tax in the amount of one percent of the gross proceeds of any person engaged in the shortterm rental business in the city. The tax shall be in addition to the tax levied pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-59) 
Sec. 82-180. - Collection of daily rental tax from lessee by person engaged in shortterm rental business. 
    Any person engaged in the shortterm rental business as defined in section 82-178 shall collect the rental tax from the lessee of the daily rental property at the time of the rental. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-60) 
Sec. 82-181. - Transmission of quarterly return by lessor to commissioner of the revenue; assessment and collection of tax. 
    The lessor of the daily rental property shall transmit a quarterly return to the commissioner of the revenue, indicating thereon the total gross proceeds derived from the shortterm rental business during the preceding quarter. Upon receipt of the quarterly return, the commissioner of the revenue shall assess the daily rental tax due and transmit the tax so assessed to the treasurer. The treasurer shall collect the daily rental tax assessment in a manner prescribed in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3900 et seq. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-61) 
Sec. 82-182. - Exclusions and exemptions. 
    No tax shall be assessed or collected pursuant to this article on rentals by the state, any political subdivisions of the state or the United States, or upon any rental of durable medical equipment as defined by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-609.7(2). All exemptions applicable to the tax imposed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-600 et seq., shall also apply to the daily rental property tax. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-62) 
Sec. 82-183. - Renter's certificate of registration. 
(a)  On January 1 of each calendar year, every person engaging in the business of shortterm rental of tangible personal property shall file an application for a certificate of registration with the commissioner of the revenue. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue and shall set forth the name under which the applicant intends to operate the rental business, the location of such rental business, and such other information as the commissioner of the revenue may require. Each applicant shall sign the application as owner of the rental business. If the rental business is owned by an association, partnership or corporation, the application shall be signed by a member, partner, executive officer or other person specifically authorized by the association, partnership or corporation to sign. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application by the commissioner of the revenue, a certificate of registration shall be issued to the applicant. The certificate shall be conspicuously displayed at all times at the place of business for which it is issued. The certificate is not assignable and shall be valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and the place of business designated and valid for only the year in which it is issued. 
(Code 1969, § 27A-63) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510.2. 
Secs. 82-184-82-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMISSIONS TAX[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Excise tax on admissions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 82-206. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Admission charge means the charge made for admission to any amusement or entertainment, exclusive of any federal tax thereon, including a charge made for season tickets, whether obtained by contribution or subscription, and including a cover charge or a charge made for the use of seats or tables, whether reserved or otherwise, and for similar accommodations in the city. 
    Place of amusement or entertainment means any place in the city, including the Salem-Roanoke County Civic Center and the municipal athletic field, wherein or whereat any of the following are located, conducted, performed, exhibited or operated and for which an admission charge is made: a circus; a carnival; a menagerie; a moving picture show; a fair; a show or an exhibition of any kind; a dance; a baseball, basketball or football game; a wrestling match or a boxing match or a sport of any kind; a swimming contest or exhibition; a swimming pool; a concert; a theatrical, vaudeville, dramatic, operatic or musical performance or a performance similar thereto; a lecture, talk, literary reading or performance similar thereto; an attraction such as a merry-go-round, Ferris wheel, roller coaster, leap-the-dips or the like; an automobile race; a midget auto race; a horse race; a horse show; an ice skating or roller skating rink or arena; or any other public amusement, performance or exhibition. The foregoing enumeration of specific amusements and entertainments shall not be deemed to exclude other amusements and entertainments otherwise within the meaning of those words. 
(Ord. of 2-9-81, § 14-55.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-207. - Levy; rate. 
    A tax of $0.01 for each $0.20, or fraction thereof in excess of $0.09, of the amount paid for the admission to any place of amusement or entertainment is hereby levied upon and shall be collected from every person who pays an admission charge to such a place. 
(Ord. of 2-9-81, § 14-55.2) 
Sec. 82-208. - Collection. 
    Every person receiving any payment for admission to any place of amusement or entertainment with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of tax hereby imposed from the person making an admission payment at the time of the payment of such admission. If tickets or cards of admission are issued, the tax shall be collected at the time of the issuance of such tickets or cards. The taxes required to be collected under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect such taxes until remitted as required in this article. 
(Ord. of 2-9-81, § 14-55.3) 
Sec. 82-209. - Report and remittance. 
    The person collecting any admission tax required by this article shall make out a report upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of the revenue may prescribe and require, showing the amount of admission charges collected, exclusive of the federal tax thereon, and the tax from the admissions for which he is liable, and shall sign and deliver such report to the commissioner of the revenue with a remittance of such tax. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the last day of each month covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. If the remittance is by check or money order, the check or money order shall be payable to the city, and all remittances received under this article by the commissioner of the revenue shall be promptly turned over to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. of 2-9-81, § 14-55.4) 
Sec. 82-210. - Interest and penalties. 
(a)  If any person shall fail or refuse to remit to the commissioner of the revenue the tax required to be collected and paid under this article within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the commissioner of the revenue penalty at the rate of ten percent for the first month the taxes are past due and five percent for each month thereafter, up to a maximum of 25 percent of the taxes due but not remitted, or $10.00, whichever is greater. The penalty in no case shall exceed the amount of the tax assessed. 
(b)  In the event that any tax under this section is not paid by the due date, interest may commence not earlier than the first day following the day such taxes are due by ordinance to be filed, at the rate not to exceed ten percent per year. 
(Ord. of 2-9-81, § 14-55.5; Ord. of 11-14-2016(1)) 
State Law reference- Excise tax on admissions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 
Sec. 82-211. - Failure to collect and report tax. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to collect the admissions tax required by this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, any report and remittance required by this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of the revenue shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and penalties provided for by this article and shall notify such person by registered mail sent to his last known place of address of the total amount of such tax and interest and penalties, and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date of such notice. 
(Ord. of 2-9-81, § 14-55.6) 
Sec. 82-212. - Records to be kept. 
    It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for a period of two years, such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the commissioner of the revenue shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. of 2-9-81, § 14-55.7) 
Sec. 82-213. - Cessation of business. 
    Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under this article to the city shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Ord. of 2-9-81, § 14-55.8) 
Sec. 82-214. - Exceptions. 
    No tax shall be payable under this article by the following persons if admitted to any place of amusement or entertainment free: 
(1)  A bona fide officer or employee of the operator of such a place. 
(2)  Any federal, state, city, county or town official or employee on official business. 
(3)  Any person whose admission to such a place is required for the performance of some duty or work for the operator of such a place. 
(4)  Any newspaper reporter, photographer, telegrapher, radio announcer or person performing a similar vocation who is admitted for the performance of special duties in connection with any event and whose special duties are the sole reason for his presence. 
(5)  A child under 12 years of age. 
(Ord. of 2-9-81, § 14-55.9) 
Sec. 82-215. - Temporary places of amusement or entertainment. 
(a)  Whenever any place of amusement or entertainment makes an admission charge which is subject to the tax levied in this article and the operation of such a place is of a temporary or transitory nature, the commissioner of the revenue shall require the report and remittance of the admission tax to be made on the day following its collection if the operation is for one day only, or on the day following the conclusion of a series of performances or exhibitions conducted or operated on more than one day, or at such other reasonable time or times as he shall determine. 
(b)  Before any temporary or transient amusement or entertainment shall begin operation, and before any license shall be issued therefor if a license is required, the person operating such temporary or transient amusement or entertainment shall deposit with the city treasurer a sum of money, or in lieu thereof a bond with corporate surety conditioned upon the faithful compliance with this article and in a form approved by the city attorney, in an amount to be estimated by the commissioner of the revenue as sufficient to cover the admission tax required to be collected by such person under the provisions of this article, which money or bond shall be security for the collection of and payment to the city of the admission tax. At the conclusion of such transitory or transient operation in the city, such person shall file with the commissioner of the revenue the report required by this article and pay the tax collected to the treasurer of the city. Upon such report being filed and payment being made, the city treasurer shall refund the deposit, or cancel the bond, as the case may be. 
(c)  Should any person fail to file the report required by this article or pay the amount of tax collected within five days from the termination of the operation of such amusement or entertainment, the commissioner of the revenue may thereupon assess such person with the tax computed on the basis of the best information available to him and proceed to collect the tax out of the deposit, or by virtue of the bond, and by any other lawful means. 
(Ord. of 2-9-81, § 14-55.10) 
Sec. 82-216. - Admission charges of less than $0.10. 
    Where the admission charge is less than $0.10, no tax shall be payable. Amounts paid for admission by season tickets or subscription shall be exempt only if the amount to be charged the holder or subscriber for a single admission is less than $0.10. 
(Ord. of 2-9-81, § 14-55.11) 
Sec. 82-217. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor and be punishable as such, and each such violation or failure shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection or remittance of such tax as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 2-9-81, § 14-55.13) 
Sec. 82-218. - Powers and duties of license inspector. 
    It shall be the duty of the license inspector to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-9-81, § 14-55.14) 
Secs. 82-219-82-239. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CIGARETTE TAX 

Sec. 82-240. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent shall mean and include every dealer, seller, or other person who shall be authorized by the director of finance to purchase and affix stamps to packages of cigarettes under the provisions of this article. 
    Cigarette shall mean a roll of finely cut tobacco enclosed in paper. 
    Dealer shall mean and include every manufacturer, jobber, wholesaler, or other person who supplies a seller with cigarettes. 
    Package shall mean and include every package, box, can or other container of any cigarettes, irrespective of the material from which such container is made, facilitating sale of cigarettes to the ultimate consumer or utilized with the sale of cigarettes to the ultimate consumer. 
    Person shall mean and include any individual, partnership, society, association, joint stock company, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee or any other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination of individuals. 
    Purchaser shall mean and include every person to whom the title to any cigarette is transferred by a seller within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Sale shall mean and include every act or transaction, irrespective of the method or means employed, including the use of vending machines and other mechanical devices, whereby title to any cigarettes shall be transferred from the seller to any other person within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Seller shall mean and include every person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes who transfers title or in whose place of business title to any cigarettes are transferred within the corporate limits of the city for any purpose other than resale. 
    Stamp shall mean the small gummed piece of paper or decal to be sold by the treasurer and to be affixed by an agent to every package of cigarettes sold at retail in the city. It shall also denote any insignia or symbol printed by a meter machine upon any such package under the authorization of the director of finance. 
    Treasurer shall mean the Treasurer of the City of Salem. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 82-241. - General powers of director of finance under article. 
    In addition to the powers granted to him in other sections of this article, the director of finance is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the delegation of any of his powers granted by this article to his representatives; and any other matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 82-242. - Levied; amount. 
    In addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by law, there is hereby levied and imposed by the city, upon each and every sale of cigarettes, a tax equivalent to $0.0225 per cigarette (twenty-two and one-half mills per cigarette) sold within the city, the amount of such tax to be paid by the seller in the manner and at the time prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02; Ord. of 6-10-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. of 6-10-2013 shall be in full force and effect on and after July 1, 2013, for cigarettes sold in the City of Salem on or after that date. 
Sec. 82-243. - Method of payment; appointment of agents to affix stamps. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid by a local dealer or other agent affixing a stamp or stamps, or causing a stamp or stamps to be affixed, to each and every package of cigarettes in the manner and at the time or times provided for in this article. Every dealer in the city shall have the right to buy and affix such stamps as an agent, and the director of finance may appoint, in addition to local dealers, such other persons as agents for the purpose of buying and affixing stamps as he may deem necessary. Every agent shall at all times have the right to appoint a person in his employ to affix the stamps to any cigarettes under the agent's control. 
(b)  The director of finance is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe the method to be employed and the conditions to be observed in the use of meter machines for printing upon packages of cigarettes insignia to represent the payment of the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 82-244. - Preparation and sale of stamps generally. 
    For the purpose of making the stamps referred to in section 82-243 available for use by local dealers and other agents, the director of finance shall prescribe, prepare and furnish to the treasurer stamps for sale of such denominations and quantities as may be necessary for the payment of the tax imposed by this article. In the sale of such stamps to a local dealer or other agent, the treasurer shall allow a discount of seven percent of the denominational or face value thereof to cover the costs which will be incurred by such dealer or agent in affixing the stamps to packages of cigarettes. The director of finance may, from time to time and as often as he deems advisable, provide for the issuance and exclusive use of stamps of a new design and forbid the use of stamps of any other design and he may make and carry into effect such reasonable rules and regulations relating to the preparation, furnishing and sale of stamps as he may deem necessary. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 82-245. - General duties of dealers, agents and sellers with respect to stamps. 
(a)  Every local dealer in cigarettes and every agent appointed under this article is hereby required, and it shall be his duty, to purchase such stamps at the office of the treasurer as shall be necessary to pay the tax imposed under the provisions of this article, and to affix a stamp or stamps of the monetary value prescribed by this article, or cause such stamp or stamps to be affixed, to each package of cigarettes prior to delivering or furnishing such cigarettes to any seller who is not also an agent. Nothing herein contained shall preclude any dealer from authorizing and employing an agent to purchase and affix such stamps in his behalf or to have a stamp meter machine used in lieu of gummed stamps to effectuate the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Every seller is hereby required to examine each package of cigarettes prior to exposing it for sale for the purpose of ascertaining whether such package has the proper stamp affixed thereto in compliance with the provisions of this article. If, upon such examination, unstamped or improperly stamped packages of cigarettes are discovered, the seller, when such cigarettes were obtained from a local dealer, shall immediately notify such dealer, and upon such notification, such dealer shall forthwith either affix to such unstamped or improperly stamped packages the proper amount of stamps or shall replace such packages with others to which stamps have been properly affixed. 
(c)  If a seller, who is not also an agent, shall obtain or acquire possession of unstamped or improperly stamped cigarettes from any person other than a local dealer, the seller shall forthwith notify the director of finance of such fact and the director of finance shall thereupon designate an agent to affix the proper stamps to such cigarettes, the funds required to purchase such stamps at face value to be advanced to such agent by such seller. The agent so designated shall thereupon affix the appropriate stamps at such agent's place of business. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 82-246. - Visibility of stamps or meter markings. 
    Stamps or the printed markings of a meter machine evidencing payment of the tax imposed by this article shall be placed upon each package of cigarettes in such manner as to be readily visible to the purchaser. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 82-247. - Cancellation of stamps. 
(a)  The director of finance is hereby authorized to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the method and means to be used in the cancellation of stamps provided for in this article. 
(b)  In the event that the director of finance shall promulgate rules and regulations so requiring, every local dealer, agent or seller is hereby required, and it shall be his duty, to cancel all stamps upon all packages of cigarettes in his possession in accordance with such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 82-248. - Redemption of stamps; refund for destroyed stamps. 
    The director of finance is hereby empowered to make and carry into effect such reasonable rules and regulations relating to the redemption of stamps provided for by this article as he may deem necessary; provided, however, that in redeeming stamps or making refund for destroyed stamps, he shall in no case refund more than 90 percent of the face value of such redeemed or destroyed stamps. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 82-249. - Dealer's and seller's records generally. 
    It shall be the duty of every local dealer and seller to maintain and to keep, for a period of two years, such records of cigarettes received and sold by him as may be required by the director of finance, to make all such records available for examination in the city by the director of finance or the license inspector upon demand, and to make available the means, facilities and opportunity for making such examination at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 82-250. - Examination of books, records, etc. 
    The director of finance and the license inspector are hereby authorized and empowered to examine books, records, invoices, papers and any and all cigarettes in and upon any premises where the same are placed, stored, sold, offered for sale or displayed for sale by a seller. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 82-251. - Seizure of unstamped cigarettes. 
    In the event the director of finance or the license inspector discovers any cigarettes which are subject to the tax imposed under the provisions of this article, but upon which such tax has not been paid and upon which stamps have not been affixed or evidence of payment shown thereon by the printed markings of a meter machine in compliance with the provisions of this article, such officers, or any of them, are hereby authorized and empowered to seize and take possession forthwith of such cigarettes, which shall thereupon be deemed to be forfeited to the city. The director of finance or his designee ("director") shall, after providing notice of such seizure to the known holders of property interests in such property and waiting the required length of time for an appeal as further set forth in this section, destroy any seized cigarettes or other property used in the furtherance of any illegal evasion of the tax. Such seizure shall not be deemed to relieve any person from any of the penalties provided in this article. 
    Any such notice of seizure shall include procedures for an administrative hearing for return of such property seized, in addition to any affirmative defenses set forth in this section which may be asserted. Such hearing shall be requested from the director within ten days of the notice of seizure, and shall set forth the reasons why said cigarettes or other property should be returned. Within ten days after receipt of a hearing request, the director shall review the appeal request and shall notify the petitioner via certified mail of a date, time and place for the informal presentation of evidence at a hearing or request further evidence, to be within 15 days of the date such notification is mailed. Any request for a hearing shall be denied if the request is received more than ten days from the date of the notice to petitioner of the seizure. Within five days after the hearing, the director shall inform the petitioner of the final decision. 
    The director shall cause the return of the seized property if convinced by a preponderance of the evidence that the illegal sale of unstamped cigarettes or possession of other property used in the furtherance of illegal evasion of the tax was not intentional on the part of the petitioner and that seized cigarettes were in the possession of a person other than the petitioner without the petitioner's consent at the time said cigarettes or other property was seized, or that petitioner was authorized to possess unstamped cigarettes or other such property. Any petitioner who is unsatisfied with the written decision of the director may within 30 days of the date of said decision, appeal such decision to the city manager. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 82-252. - Administration of oaths, examination of witnesses, etc., for enforcement of article. 
    The director of finance and the license inspector are authorized and empowered to administer oaths and to take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceedings in the exercise of their powers and duties relating to the tax imposed by this article, and they shall have power to subpoena and to require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers or documents, and to examine such witnesses, books, papers and documents, for the purpose of securing information pertinent to the performance of such duties. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 82-253. - Remedies. 
(a)  If the director of finance has evidence of sale of cigarettes in this city without the payment of the tax, he may perform an assessment of the tax due with respect to the cigarettes, using the best information available. The director of finance shall mail, by certified mail, a notice of summary assessments to the taxpayer. If the tax described in the notice is not paid within ten days after the mailing, the Director may collect the tax due by any method authorized by general law. 
(b)  If the taxpayer shall fail or refuse to pay to the city the tax required to be paid under this article within the time and in the amount as provided for in this article, there shall be added to such tax a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the tax due or the sum of $10.00 whichever is greater, provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax due. The director of finance shall also assess interest on the tax and penalty at the rate of ten percent per year from the day after the tax is due until paid. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 82-254. - Criminal penalties. 
    It shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this article or to forge, alter, steal, or use without paying for any stamped or metered insignia described in this Article. Conviction shall not relieve any person from payment of the tax as provided in this article. Each violation or failure shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
ARTICLE IX. - RECORDATION TAX 

Sec. 82-255. - Imposed. 
    A city recordation tax is hereby imposed in an amount equal to one-third of the amount of the state recordation collectable for the state on the first recordation of each taxable instrument; provided, that no tax shall be imposed under this section upon any instrument on which the state recordation tax is $0.50 specifically; and provided further, that where a deed or other instrument conveys, covers or relates to property located partly in the city and partly in another county or city, or in other counties or cities, the tax imposed under the authority of this section shall be computed only with respect to the property located in the city. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010(2)) 
Sec. 82-256. - Collection and payment into city treasury. 
    The clerk of the circuit court of the city collecting the tax imposed under section 82-255 shall pay the same into the treasury of the city. For such services in collecting such tax, the clerk shall be compensated out of the treasury of the city, in the amount of five percent of the amount so collected. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2010(2)) 
Chapter 86 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Powers as to regulation of traffic (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-891) adopted, § 2.2. 
Cross reference- Transportation safety commission, § 2-2; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; motor vehicle emissions, § 30-48; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; filling of motor vehicle tanks while motor is running, § 34-115; law enforcement, ch. 46; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; summoning ambulances and firefighting equipment without just cause, § 58-7; sleeping in automobiles, § 58-32; damaging vehicles, § 58-35; entering or setting in motion vehicles, § 58-36; repossession of vehicle under lien permitted, § 58-37; using vehicles to promote prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse, § 58-89; signs, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; vehicles for hire, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Inoperable motor vehicles, etc., on residential or commercial property in certain cities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-11.03; local vehicle licenses, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752 et seq.; abandoned vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200 et seq.; removal or immobilization of motor vehicles against which there are outstanding parking violations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1216; parking regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220; general powers of local governments as to motor vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Definitions generally. 
    Words and terms used and contained in this chapter shall be defined as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
(Code 1969, § 15-1) 
Sec. 86-2. - Applicability of chapter to vehicles regardless of ownership. 
    The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles regardless of their ownership, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 15-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-801. 
Sec. 86-3. - Riding bicycles or mopeds; riding or driving animals. 
    Every person riding a bicycle, moped or an animal or driving an animal on a highway shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and shall have all of the rights and duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle, unless the context of the provision clearly indicates otherwise. 
(Code 1969, § 15-6) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800. 
Sec. 86-4. - Powers and duties of city manager relative to traffic and parking generally. 
(a)  The city manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the council, shall have power and is hereby authorized to regulate the operation and parking of vehicles within the corporate limits of the city by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating prohibited or limited parking, angle parking, the parking of buses, trucks and other vehicles of various weights, U-turns, turning at intersections, hazardous intersections, school zones, hospital zones, loading and unloading zones, quiet zones, traffic control signals exhibiting colored lights or the words "go," "caution" or "stop," and other signs or markers indicating the place and manner of operating or parking vehicles in the city. 
(b)  The city manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the council, shall have the power and is hereby authorized to regulate the movement of pedestrians upon the streets and sidewalks of the city by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating the flow of pedestrian traffic. 
(c)  The city manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the council, shall have the power and is hereby authorized to designate bus stops and to erect signs prohibiting the parking of vehicles other than buses at such stops. 
(d)  The city manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the council, shall have the power and is hereby authorized to designate taxicab stands and to erect signs prohibiting the parking of vehicles other than taxicabs at such stands. 
(e)  The city manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the council, is empowered and authorized to mark off traffic lanes on streets and parts of streets indicating and directing the flow of traffic. 
(f)  The city manager shall have the power and is hereby authorized to secure all necessary signs, signals or markers to be erected or placed on any street or part of a street. The existence of such signs, signals or markers at any place within the corporate limits of the city shall be prima facie evidence that such signs, signals or markers were erected or placed by and at the direction of the city manager in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1969, § 15-7) 
State Law reference- Authority to delegate right to promulgate parking regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Sec. 86-5. - Powers and duties of school board relative to traffic and parking on school property. 
    The school board of the city is authorized and empowered to establish reasonable rules and regulations relative to the general use of its school properties, more especially with regard to the operation and parking of all manner of vehicles, however powered, and any person violating any of such rules and regulations shall be deemed guilty of committing a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00, as defined and set forth in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113. Such rules and regulations need not necessarily be uniform as applicable to the several separate school properties due to their location, areas and more especially use by pupils of varying ages. 
(Code 1969, § 15-7.1) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 86-6. - Powers and duties of city manager relative to stop intersections and yield intersections. 
(a)  The city manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the council, may designate intersections at which vehicles shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the power and is hereby authorized to secure all such necessary signs, signals or markers to be erected or placed on or at any such intersection, so that an ordinarily observant person, who may be affected by such regulation, may be aware of such regulation. The existence of such signs, signals or markers at any place within the corporate limits of the city shall be prima facie evidence that such signs, signals or markers were erected or placed by and at the direction of the city manager in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1969, § 15-8) 
State Law reference- Authority to delegate right to designate stop or yield right-of-way intersections, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301. 
Sec. 86-7. - Compliance with signs, etc., erected or placed pursuant to section 86-4 or 86-6. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with the directions indicated on any sign, signal or marker erected or placed in accordance with the provisions of section 86-4 or section 86-6 when such sign, signal or marker so placed or erected is visible and legible. 
(Code 1969, § 15-9) 
Sec. 86-8. - Permit prerequisite to funeral, procession or parade. 
    No funeral, procession or parade, excepting the forces of the United States armed services, the military forces of this state, and the forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street, except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police. 
(Code 1969, § 15-10) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
Sec. 86-9. - Stopping vehicles for inspection or to secure information. 
    Except as prohibited by Code of Virginia, § 19.2-59, on his request or signal, any law enforcement officer who is in uniform or displays his badge or other sign of authority may: 
(1)  Stop any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to inspect its equipment, operation, manufacturer's serial or engine number; or 
(2)  Stop any property-carrying motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to inspect its contents or load or to obtain other necessary information. 
(Code 1969, § 15-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-103. 
Sec. 86-10. - Valid inspection sticker prerequisite to driving, etc., vehicle on street. 
    It is unlawful for any person to drive, stop or park or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven, stopped or parked on any street within the city any vehicle which is required under the laws of the state to be inspected, unless such vehicle has been inspected and has attached thereto, in proper position, a valid and unexpired certificate of inspection as required by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1969, § 15-12) 
State Law reference- Inspection of vehicles generally, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1158; unauthorized taking, possession or use of inspection stickers, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1172; imitation or counterfeit inspection stickers, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1173. 
Sec. 86-11. - Valid state license plate prerequisite to driving, etc., vehicle on street. 
    It is unlawful for any person to drive, stop or park or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven, stopped or parked on any street within the city any vehicle having no valid state license as required by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1969, § 15-13) 
State Law reference- Titling and registration of motor vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-600 et seq. 
Sec. 86-12. - Boarding or alighting from vehicles. 
    No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1969, § 15-14) 
Sec. 86-13. - Riding upon portion of vehicle not designed for use of passengers. 
    No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to a person riding within truck bodies in the space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1969, § 15-15) 
Sec. 86-14. - Opening, etc., of door of vehicle in path of approaching vehicle. 
    No person shall open the door of or enter or emerge from any vehicle in the path of any approaching vehicle without due regard for safety of persons and property. 
(Code 1969, § 15-16) 
Sec. 86-15. - Riding motorized bicycles, minibikes, motorcycles, etc., on city property. 
    No person shall ride or drive any motorized bicycle, minibike, trailbike, motorcycle or like vehicle in or on any property belonging to the city or controlled by the city, except in or on specified areas designated and set aside for the riding of such motorized vehicles and except upon public highways when such is otherwise permissible. 
(Code 1969, § 15-16.1) 
Sec. 86-16. - Law enforcement officers. 
(a)  Any law enforcement officer of the city, operating a bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle, all-terrain vehicle or moped during the course of his or her duties, shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle, all-terrain vehicle or moped being operated by a law enforcement officer of the city, during the course of his or her duties, shall be deemed to be a law enforcement vehicle and shall have the same rights and privileges as any other law enforcement vehicle when the bicycle, all-terrain vehicle or moped is being operated in response to an emergency call, while engaged in rescue operations or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law. 
(Ord. of 7-25-2016) 
Sec. 86-17. - Distribution of handbills, etc., solicitation of contributions, and sale of merchandise, services, etc., on highways prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(a)  Distribute handbills, leaflets, bulletins, literature, advertisements, or similar material to occupants of motor vehicles on highways located within the boundaries of the city or on public roadways and medians, or 
(b)  Solicit contributions of any nature from the occupants of motor vehicles on highways within the boundaries of the city or on public roadways and medians, or 
(c)  Sell merchandise or services or attempt to sell merchandise or services to occupants of motor vehicles on highways located within the boundaries of the city or on public roadways and medians. 
    The penalty for any such violation shall be as provided in section 86-45 herein. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. of 2-9-2015 set out provisions adding § 86-16. To facilitate inclusion of Ord. of 7-25-2016 as § 86-16, and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been included herein as § 86-17. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-931. 
Secs. 86-18-86-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY 

Sec. 86-41. - Arrest for violation of chapter; release on summons and promise to appear. 
(a)  Whenever any person is arrested for a violation of any provision of this chapter except of section 86-96, the arresting officer shall, except as otherwise provided in section 86-42 or any other section of this chapter, take the name and address of such person and the license number of his motor vehicle and issue a summons or otherwise notify him in writing to appear at a time and place to be specified in such summons or notice. Such time shall be at least five days after such arrest unless the person arrested shall demand an earlier hearing. Such person shall, if he so desires, have a right to an immediate hearing or a hearing within 24 hours at a convenient hour, before a court having jurisdiction. Such officer shall thereupon and upon the giving by such person of his written promise to appear at such time and place forthwith release him from custody. 
(b)  Any person refusing to give a written promise to appear under the provisions of this section shall be taken immediately by the arresting officer before a magistrate or other issuing officer having jurisdiction who shall proceed according to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-940. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully to violate his written promise to appear, given in accordance with this section, regardless of the disposition of, and in addition to, the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(d)  Any officer violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of misconduct in office and subject to removal therefrom upon complaint filed by any person in a court of competent jurisdiction. This section shall not be construed to limit the removal of a police officer for other misconduct in office. 
(Code 1969, § 15-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-936. 
Sec. 86-42. - When arresting officer shall take person before issuing authority. 
    If any person is (1) believed by the arresting officer to have committed a felony; (2) believed by the arresting officer to be likely to disregard a summons issued under section 86-41; or (3) refuses to give a written promise to appear under the provisions of section 86-41, the arresting officer shall promptly take him before a magistrate or other issuing authority having jurisdiction to determine whether probable cause exists that such person is likely to disregard a summons. The magistrate or other issuing authority may issue either a summons or warrant as he shall determine proper. 
(Code 1969, § 15-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-940. 
Sec. 86-43. - Procedure with reference to motor vehicle found parked, etc., in violation of chapter generally. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked, stopped or standing in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this chapter, the police officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to such a vehicle a traffic citation or notice in writing, on a form provided by the clerk of council, requiring the driver of the vehicle in question to answer the charge against him within five days, during the hours and at a place specified in the traffic citation notice. The police officer shall send one copy of such traffic citation or notice to the police department or to the traffic violations bureau. 
(Code 1969, § 15-19) 
Sec. 86-44. - Illegal cancellation of traffic citations, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation summons or notice as provided for in this article in any manner other than as provided by this article. 
(Code 1969, § 15-20) 
Sec. 86-45. - Compliance with chapter; penalty for violation of chapter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter. Unless otherwise stated, these violations shall constitute traffic infractions punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
(Code 1969, § 15-21) 
State Law reference- Counties, cities and towns prohibited from imposing penalty for traffic violation in excess of penalty imposed by state for similar offense, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300; penalty for violation of motor vehicle and traffic regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113. 
Secs. 86-46-86-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKERS GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-61. - Authority of police to act in direction of traffic. 
    Every police officer of this city is authorized to act as a traffic officer in the direction of traffic on any street where traffic is heavy or continuous, and the direction by such traffic officers shall take precedence over any signs, signals, markings or lights. 
(Code 1969, § 15-22) 
Sec. 86-62. - Signs, etc., prerequisite to enforcement of chapter and regulations; exception. 
    No provision of this chapter, or of any regulation, relating to the prohibition of disobeying signs or violating local traffic signals, markings and lights shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, any such sign, signal, marking or light is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section of this chapter does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Code 1969, § 15-23) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-830. 
Sec. 86-63. - Drivers to obey signs, etc. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall stop, slow down or regulate the speed of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to accord with the requirements of road signs, signals, markings or lights erected upon the authority of the state transportation board, proper agencies of the federal government or the city, and the failure of such driver to comply with this section shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 86-45, unless otherwise prescribed. 
(Code 1969, § 15-24) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-830. 
Sec. 86-64. - Officers may direct traffic; signals. 
    Law enforcement officers and uniformed school crossing guards may direct traffic by signals. Such signals other than by voice shall be as follows: 
(1)  To stop traffic by hand: Standing with shoulders parallel to moving traffic; raising arms 45 degrees above shoulder with hand extended, palm towards moving traffic to be stopped. 
(2)  To move traffic by hand: Standing with shoulders parallel to traffic to be moved; extending right arm and hand full length at height of shoulders towards such traffic, fingers extended and joined, palm down; bringing hand sharply in direction traffic is to move. Repeating movement with left arm and hand to start traffic from opposite direction. 
(3)  To stop and start traffic by whistle: One blast, moving traffic to stop; two blasts, traffic in opposite direction to move. 
(4)  Emergency stop of traffic by whistle: Three or more short blasts, all traffic shall immediately clear the intersection and stop. 
(Code 1969, § 15-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1309. 
Sec. 86-65. - Traffic light indications. 
    Signals by traffic lights shall be as follows: 
(1)  Steady red. Steady red indicates that moving traffic shall stop and remain stopped as long as the red signal is shown, except in the direction indicated by a lighted green arrow. 
(2)  Green. Green indicates that traffic shall move in the direction of the signal and remain in motion as long as the green signal is given, except that such traffic shall yield to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within the intersection. 
(3)  Steady amber. Steady amber indicates that a change is about to be made in the direction of the moving of traffic. When the amber signal is shown, traffic which has not already entered the intersection, including the crosswalks, shall stop if it is not reasonably safe to continue, but traffic which has already entered the intersection shall continue to move until the intersection has been cleared. The amber signal is a warning that the steady red signal is imminent. 
(4)  Flashing red. Flashing red indicates that traffic shall stop before entering an intersection. 
(5)  Flashing amber. Flashing amber indicates that traffic may proceed through the intersection or past such signal with reasonable care under the circumstances. 
(Code 1969, §§ 15-26(a)-(c), 15-27) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-833. 
Sec. 86-66. - Signals by law enforcement officers and crossing guards. 
    Law enforcement officers and uniformed school crossing guards may assume control of traffic otherwise controlled by lights and, in such event, signals by such officers and uniformed crossing guards shall take precedence over such traffic control devices. 
(Code 1969, § 15-26(d)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-834. 
Sec. 86-67. - Authority of members of the fire department to direct traffic. 
    Officers and members of the fire department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at or in the immediate vicinity of a fire and while so acting shall have all the authority of peace officers. 
(Code 1969, § 15-28) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34. 
Sec. 86-68. - Unofficial traffic signs prohibited; penalties. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall erect or maintain on any highway any warning or direction sign, signal or light in imitation of any official sign, signal or light erected as provided by law. No person shall erect or maintain on any highway any traffic or highway sign or signal bearing any commercial advertising. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the erection or maintenance of signs or signals bearing the name of an organization authorized to erect it by the state transportation board or by the city manager as provided by law. Nor shall this section be construed to prohibit the erection by contractors or public utility companies of temporary signs approved by the state department of transportation warning motorists that work is in progress on or adjacent to the highway. 
(c)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 15-29) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-831. 
Sec. 86-69. - Injuring signs. 
    No person shall deface, obscure, injure, knock down or remove any sign legally posted as provided in this chapter. Any violation of this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 15-30) 
Cross reference- Injuring property generally, § 58-19. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-832. 
Secs. 86-70-86-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Driving into or upon construction or maintenance or repair work on street or alley, § 74-37. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-86. - Driving without operator's license; penalty. 
    No person, except those expressly exempted in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-303 through 46.2-309, shall drive any motor vehicle on any highway in this city until such person has applied for a driver's license, satisfactorily passed the examination and obtained a driver's license, and unless the license is valid. A conviction of a violation of this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 15-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-300. 
Sec. 86-87. - Driving while license, permit or privilege to drive suspended or revoked. 
(a)  Except as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-304 and 46.2-357, no resident or nonresident (i) whose driver's license, learner's permit, or privilege to drive a motor vehicle has been suspended or revoked, or (ii) who has been directed not to drive by any court, by the commissioner, or by operation of law pursuant to this chapter, or (iii) who has been forbidden, as prescribed by law, the commissioner, the state corporation commission, the state transportation commissioner, any court, or the superintendent of state police, to operate a motor vehicle in the state shall thereafter drive any motor vehicle or any self-propelled machinery or equipment on any highway in the city until the period of such suspension or revocation has terminated. For the purposes of this section, the phrase "motor vehicle or any self-propelled machinery or equipment" shall not include mopeds. 
(b)  A first offense of violating this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. A second or subsequent offense shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. In addition, the court shall suspend the person's license, permit or privilege to drive for the same period for which it had been previously suspended or revoked when the person violated this section. If the person has violated this section by driving during a period of suspension or revocation which was not for a definite period of time, the court shall suspend the person's license, permit or privilege to drive for an additional period not to exceed 90 days. Any additional suspension ordered under the provisions of this section shall commence upon the expiration of the previous suspension or revocation unless the previous suspension or revocation has expired prior to the ordering of an additional suspension or revocation. 
(Code 1969, § 15-32) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-301. 
Sec. 86-88. - Driving while restoration of license is contingent on furnishing proof of financial responsibility. 
(a)  No resident or nonresident whose driver's license or learner's permit has been suspended or revoked by any court or by the commissioner or by operation of law, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271, or who has been disqualified pursuant to the provisions of the commercial driver's license act (Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.1 et seq.), or who has been forbidden as prescribed by law by the commissioner, the state corporation commission, the state transportation commissioner or the superintendent of state police to drive a motor vehicle in the state shall drive any motor vehicle in the city during any period wherein the restoration of license or privilege is contingent upon the furnishing of proof of financial responsibility, unless he has given proof of financial responsibility in the manner provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-435 et seq. Any person who drives a motor vehicle and has furnished proof of financial responsibility but who has failed to pay a reinstatement fee, shall be tried under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-300. 
(b)  A first offense violation of this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. A second and subsequent violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 15-33) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-302. 
Sec. 86-89. - Permitting unauthorized person to drive. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven by any person who has no legal right to do so or in violation of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-300 et seq. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 15-34) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-349, 46.2-350. 
Sec. 86-90. - Restrictions on backing. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not back such vehicle unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. When backing, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to moving traffic and to pedestrians. 
(Code 1969, § 15-35) 
Sec. 86-91. - Entering intersection or marked crosswalk when space is insufficient for accommodation of vehicle. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space beyond such intersection or crosswalk in the direction in which such vehicle is proceeding to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1969, § 15-36) 
Sec. 86-92. - Coasting. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle when traveling upon a downgrade upon any highway shall not coast with the gears of such vehicle in neutral. 
(Code 1969, § 15-37) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-811. 
Sec. 86-93. - Riding on motorcycles generally. 
(a)  Every person operating a motorcycle, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, excluding three-wheeled vehicles, shall ride only upon the permanent seat attached to the motorcycle, and such operator shall not carry any other person. No other person shall ride on a motorcycle unless the motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride on the permanent seat if designed for two persons, or on another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the seat for the operator. If the motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, it shall also be equipped with a footrest for the use of such passenger. 
(b)  Every person operating a motorcycle shall wear a face shield, safety glasses or goggles, or have his motorcycle equipped with safety glass or a windshield at all times while operating the vehicle; and operators and any passengers thereon shall wear protective helmets. Operators and passengers riding on motorcycles with wheels of eight inches or less in diameter or in three-wheeled motorcycles which have nonremovable roofs, windshields and enclosed bodies shall not be required to wear protective helmets. The superintendent of state police shall establish standards for the windshields, face shields, glasses or goggles and protective helmets required in this section. Failure to wear a face shield, safety glasses or goggles or protective helmet shall not constitute negligence per se in any civil proceeding. No motorcycle operator shall use any face shield, safety glasses or goggles or have his motorcycle equipped with safety glass or a windshield unless of a type approved by the superintendent. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 15-38) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-909-46.2-911. 
Sec. 86-94. - Obedience to railroad warning signals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to fail to obey a clearly visible or audible crossing signal at a street and railway grade crossing, which signal gives warning of the immediate approach of a railway train. 
(Code 1969, § 15-39) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-884. 
Sec. 86-95. - Driving through, etc., closed, etc., crossing gates. 
    No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1969, § 15-40) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-885(B). 
Sec. 86-96. - Driving while intoxicated, etc. 
    Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 et seq., is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set out at length in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of the Code of Virginia adopted by this section. The penalties for violations of any provisions adopted by this section shall be as prescribed therein. 
(Code 1969, § 15-80) 
State Law reference- General authority of city to prohibit operation of vehicles while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-132; authority to adopt state law on the subject, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313. 
Sec. 86-97. - Reimbursement of expenses incurred in responding to certain traffic incidents. 
    A person convicted of violating any of the following provisions shall be liable for restitution at the time of sentencing, or in a separate civil action, to the city or to any responding rescue squad for reasonable expenses incurred by the city for responding law-enforcement, fire-fighting, rescue and emergency services, or by any volunteer rescue squad, or by any combination of the foregoing, when providing an appropriate emergency response to an accident or incident related to a violation of the following: 
(a)  The provisions of Code of Virginia §§ 18.2-36.1, 18.2-51.4, 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1, 29.1-738, 29.1-738.02, 46.2-341.24 or similar ordinance, when such operation of a motor vehicle, engine, train or watercraft while so impaired is the proximate cause of the accident or incident; 
(b)  The provisions of Article 7 (Code of Virginia § 46.2-852 et seq.) of Chapter 8 of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia relating to reckless driving, when such reckless driving is the proximate cause of the accident or incident; 
(c)  The provisions of Article 1 (Code of Virginia § 46.2-300 et seq.) of Chapter 3 of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia relating to driving without a license or driving with a suspended or revoked license; and 
(d)  The provisions of Code of Virginia § 46.2-894 relating to improperly leaving the scene of an accident. 
    Personal liability under this section for reasonable expenses of an appropriate emergency response shall not exceed $1,000.00 in the aggregate for a particular accident, arrest or incident occurring in the city. In determining the "reasonable expenses" the city may bill a flat fee of $350.00 or a minute-by-minute accounting of the actual costs incurred. As used in this section, "appropriate emergency response" includes all costs of providing law-enforcement, fire-fighting, rescue, and emergency medical services. The court may order as restitution the reasonable expenses incurred by the city for responding law-enforcement, fire-fighting, rescue and emergency medical services. The provisions of this section shall not pre-empt or limit any remedy available to the Commonwealth, to the locality or to any volunteer rescue squad to recover the reasonable expenses of an emergency response to an accident or incident not involving impaired driving, operation of a vehicle or other conduct as set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 9-13-2010(4), eff. 10-1-2010) 
Secs. 86-98-86-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RECKLESS DRIVING 

Sec. 86-116. - General rule. 
    Irrespective of the maximum speeds permitted by law, any person who drives a vehicle on any highway recklessly or at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person shall be guilty of reckless driving. 
(Code 1969, § 15-41) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-852. 
Sec. 86-117. - Specific instances. 
    A person shall be guilty of reckless driving who shall: 
(1)  Drive a vehicle which is not under proper control or which has inadequate or improperly adjusted brakes on any highway in the city. 
(2)  While driving a vehicle, overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction upon or approaching the crest of a grade or upon or approaching a curve in the street, where the driver's view along the street is obstructed, except where the overtaking vehicle is being operated on a street having two or more designated lanes of roadway for each direction of travel or on a designated one-way street. 
(3)  Drive a vehicle when it is so loaded or when there are in the front seat such number of persons as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(4)  Pass or attempt to pass two other vehicles abreast, moving in the same direction, except on highways having separate roadways of three or more lanes for each direction of travel or on designated one-way streets or highways. This subsection shall not apply, however, to a motor vehicle passing two other vehicles when one or both of such other vehicles is a bicycle or moped; nor shall this subsection apply to a bicycle or moped passing two other vehicles. 
(5)  Overtake or pass any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction at any railroad grade crossing or at any intersection of highways unless such vehicles are being operated on a highway having two or more designated lanes of roadway for each direction of travel or unless such intersection is designated and marked as a passing zone or on a designated one-way street or highway, or while pedestrians are passing or about to pass in front of either of such vehicles, unless permitted so to do by a traffic light or law enforcement officer. 
(6)  Fail to stop, when approaching from any direction any school bus which is stopped on any highway or school driveway for the purpose of taking on or discharging children, the elderly, or mentally or physically handicapped persons, and to remain stopped until all such persons are clear of the highway or school driveway and the bus is put in motion. The driver of a vehicle, however, need not stop when approaching a school bus if such school bus is stopped on the other roadway of a divided highway, on an access road or on a driveway when such other roadway, access road or driveway is separated from the roadway on which he is driving by a physical barrier or an unpaved area. The driver of a vehicle also need not stop when approaching a school bus which is loading or discharging passengers from or onto property immediately adjacent to a school, if such driver is directed by a law enforcement officer or other duly authorized uniformed school crossing guard to pass such school bus. This section shall apply to school buses which are equipped with warning devices prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1090, and are painted yellow with the words "School Bus" in black letters at least eight inches high on the front and rear thereof. Only school buses which are painted yellow and equipped with the required lettering and warning devices shall be identified as school buses. 
(7)  Fail to give adequate and timely signals of intention to turn, partly turn, slow down or stop, as required by sections 86-170 through 86-175. 
(8)  Exceed a reasonable speed under the circumstances and traffic conditions existing at the time, regardless of any posted speed limit. 
(9)  Drive a motor vehicle upon the streets of the city at a speed of 20 or more miles per hour in excess of the applicable maximum speed limits or in excess of 80 miles per hour regardless of the posted speed limit. 
(10)  Fail to bring his vehicle to a stop immediately before entering a street from a side road when there is traffic approaching upon such street within 500 feet of such point of entrance, unless a "yield right-of-way" sign is posted; or where such sign is posted, fail upon entering such street to yield the right-of-way to the driver of a vehicle approaching on such street from either direction. 
(11)  Drive or operate an automobile or other motor vehicle on any driveway or premises of a church, school, recreational facility or business property open to the public or on the premises of any industrial establishment providing parking space for customers, patrons or employees or on any highway under construction or not yet open to the public at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person. 
(12)  Drive any motor vehicle, including any motorcycle, so as to be abreast of another vehicle in a lane designed for one vehicle or drive any motor vehicle, including any motorcycle, so as to travel abreast of any other vehicle traveling in a lane designed for one vehicle. However, this section shall not apply to any validly authorized parade, motorcade or motorcycle escort, nor shall it apply to a motor vehicle traveling in the same lane of traffic as a bicycle or moped. 
(Code 1969, § 15-42) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-853-46.2-864. 
Sec. 86-118. - Racing; penalty. 
    Any person who engages in a race between two or more motor vehicles on the highways in the city or on any driveway or premises of a church, school, recreational facility or business property open to the public in the city shall be guilty of reckless driving, unless authorized by the owner of the property or his agent. When any person is convicted of reckless driving under this section, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the driver's license of such person shall be suspended by the court for a period of not less than six months nor more than two years. In case of conviction the court shall order the surrender of the license to the court where it shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-398. 
(Code 1969, § 15-43) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-865. 
Sec. 86-119. - Penalty for reckless driving under section 86-116, 86-117 or 86-118. 
    Every person convicted of reckless driving under section 86-116, 86-117 or 86-118 shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 15-44) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-868. 
Sec. 86-120. - Disregarding signal by law enforcement officer to stop; eluding police; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who, having received a visible or audible signal from any law enforcement officer to bring his motor vehicle to a stop, drives such motor vehicle in a willful or wanton disregard of such signal so as to interfere with or endanger the operation of the law enforcement vehicle or endanger other property or person, or who increases his speed and attempts to escape or elude such law enforcement officer, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  When any person is convicted under this section, in addition to the other penalties provided in this section, the driver's license of such person may be suspended by the court or judge for a period not to exceed one year. However, in any case where the speed of the accused is determined to have exceeded the maximum allowed by 15 miles per hour where the maximum speed is 55 miles per hour or greater, his driver's license shall be suspended by the court trying the case for a period of not less than 90 days. In case of conviction and suspension the court or judge shall order the surrender of the license to the court, which shall dispose of it in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-398. 
(Code 1969, § 15-45) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-817. 
Sec. 86-121. - Improper driving; penalty. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this division, upon the trial of any person charged with reckless driving where the degree of culpability is slight, the court in its discretion may find the accused not guilty of reckless driving but guilty of improper driving. Improper driving shall be punishable as a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(Code 1969, § 15-46) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-869. 
Sec. 86-122. - Suspension of license on conviction of reckless driving-Generally. 
(a)  In addition to the penalties for reckless driving prescribed in section 86-119, any court may suspend any license issued to a convicted person under Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-300-46.2-363, for a period of not less than ten days nor more than six months, and the court shall require the convicted person to surrender his license so suspended to the court, where it will be disposed of in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-398. 
(b)  If a person so convicted has not obtained the license required by this chapter, or is a nonresident, the court may direct in the judgment of conviction that he shall not, for a period of not less than ten days or more than six months as may be prescribed in the judgment, drive any motor vehicle in the state. The court or the clerk of court shall transmit the license to the commissioner along with the report of the conviction required to be sent to the department. 
(Code 1969, § 15-47) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-392. 
Sec. 86-123. - Same-Involving driving 20 or more miles per hour faster than speed limit. 
    When any person is convicted of reckless driving as provided in section 86-117, in addition to any penalties provided by law, the driver's license of the person may be suspended by the court for a period of not less than 60 days nor more than six months. In case of conviction the court shall order the surrender of the license to the court where it shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-398. Where the conviction is a second conviction which would require revocation under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-389, the court shall suspend the driver's license of the person and transmit it to the department as provided by law. If the person so convicted has not obtained a license required by this chapter or is a nonresident, the court shall direct in the judgment of conviction that the person shall not drive any motor vehicle in the state for a period of not less than 60 days nor more than six months. 
(Code 1969, § 15-48) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-393. 
Secs. 86-124-86-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LIMITATIONS ON SPEED 

Sec. 86-141. - Maximum and minimum speed limits; posting, etc., of school zones. 
(a)  Maximum and minimum speed limits designated. The maximum and minimum speed limits on streets of this city shall be as follows: 
(1)  Maximum limits. 
a.  The maximum speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour between portable signs, tilt-over signs, or fixed blinking signs placed in or along any highway and bearing the word "school" or "school crossing." Any signs erected under this section shall be placed not more than 600 feet from the limits of the school property or crossing in the vicinity of the school. However, "school crossing" signs may be placed in any location if the state department of transportation or the council approves the crossing for such signs. Such portable signs shall be furnished and delivered by the city. The principal or chief administrative officer of each school or a school board designee, preferably not a classroom teacher, shall place such portable signs in the highway at a point not more than 600 feet from the limits of the school property and remove such signs when their presence is no longer required by this section. Such portable signs, tilt-over signs, or fixed blinking signs shall be placed in a position plainly visible to vehicular traffic approaching from either direction, but shall not be placed so as to obstruct the roadway. Such portable signs, tilt-over signs, or blinking signs shall be in a position, or be turned on, for 30 minutes preceding regular school hours, for 30 minutes after regular school hours, and during such other times as the presence of children on such school property or going to and from school reasonably requires a special warning to motorists. 
b.  Twenty-five miles per hour on streets in a business or residential district, unless otherwise prescribed by the proper authorities. 
c.  Thirty-five miles per hour on all other streets in the city, unless otherwise prescribed by the proper authorities. 
(2)  Minimum speed limits. 
a.  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
b.  Whenever the state transportation commissioner or local authorities within their respective jurisdictions determine on the basis of a traffic engineering and traffic investigation study that slow speeds on any part of a highway consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the commissioner or such local authority may determine and declare a minimum speed limit to be set forth on signs posted on such highway below which no person shall drive a vehicle except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(b)  Authority to change speed limits. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this division, the state transportation commissioner or other authority having jurisdiction over highways may decrease the speed limits set forth in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-870 and may increase or decrease the speed limits set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-873 through 46.2-875 on any highway under its jurisdiction; and may establish differentiated speed limits for daytime and nighttime by decreasing for nighttime driving the speed limits set forth in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-870 and by increasing for daytime or decreasing for nighttime the speed limits set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-873 through 46.2-875 on any highway under his jurisdiction. Such increased or decreased speed limits and such differentiated speed limits for daytime and nighttime driving shall be effective only when prescribed after a traffic engineering investigation and when indicated on the highway by signs. 
(c)  Authority of city manager. The city manager is authorized to increase or decrease the speed limit within the city, provided such increase or decrease in speed shall be based upon a traffic engineering and traffic investigation study conducted by the city and provided such speed area or zone is clearly indicated by markers or signs. The city manager is further authorized to reduce, for a temporary period not to exceed 60 days, without such traffic engineering and traffic investigation study, the speed limit on any portion of any highway of the city on which work is being done or where the highway is under construction or repair. 
(d)  Sign or marker missing. No person shall be in violation of such increase or decrease in the speed limit if an appropriate sign or marker showing the general regulations applicable to the operation of vehicles on such highways is missing, substantially defaced or obscured so that an ordinarily observant person under the same circumstances would not be aware of the existence of such sign or marker. 
(Code 1969, § 15-49) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-873-46.2-878; authority of governing body to increase or decrease certain speed limits, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-873. 
Sec. 86-142. - Checking on speed with various devices; certificate as to accuracy of device; arrest without warrant. 
(a)  The speed of any motor vehicle may be checked by the use of radar or an electrical or microcomputer device which is physically connected to an odometer cable and which both measures and records distance traveled and elapsed time to determine the average speed of a motor vehicle. The results of such checks shall be accepted as prima facie evidence of the speed of such motor vehicle in any court or legal proceeding where the speed of the motor vehicle is at issue. 
(b)  In any court or legal proceeding in which any question arises about the calibration or accuracy of any radar, electrical or microcomputer device used to check the speed of any motor vehicle, a certificate, or a true copy thereof, showing the calibration or accuracy of the speedometer of any vehicle or of any tuning fork employed in calibrating or testing the device, and when and by whom the calibration was made, shall be admissible as evidence of the facts therein stated. No calibration or testing of such device shall be valid for longer than six months. 
(c)  The driver of any such motor vehicle may be arrested without a warrant under this section if the arresting officer is in uniform and displays his badge of authority and if the officer has observed the registration of the speed of such motor vehicle by the radar, electrical or microcomputer device, or has received a radio message from the officer who observed the speed of the motor vehicle registered by the radar, electrical or microcomputer device. However, in case of an arrest based on such a message, such radio message shall have been dispatched immediately after the speed of the motor vehicle was registered and furnished the license number or other positive identification of the vehicle and the registered speed to the arresting officer. 
(d)  Law enforcement officers shall not have the authority to utilize radar, electrical or microcomputer devices in airplanes or helicopters for the purpose of determining the speed of motor vehicles. 
(e)  The city may use radar or other electrical devices to measure speed. 
(Code 1969, § 15-51) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-882. 
Secs. 86-143-86-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RULES OF THE ROAD 

Sec. 86-161. - Driving on right side of highways. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, on all highways of sufficient width, the driver of a vehicle shall drive on the right half of the highway, unless it is impracticable to travel on such side of the highway and except when overtaking and passing another vehicle, subject to the provisions applicable to overtaking and passing set forth in this division. 
(Code 1969, § 15-52) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-802. 
Sec. 86-162. - Driving around rotary traffic islands. 
    A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. 
(Code 1969, § 15-53) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-807. 
Sec. 86-163. - Keeping to the right in crossing intersections or railroads. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, when crossing an intersection of highways or the intersection of a highway by a railroad right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall drive on the right half of the roadway unless it is obstructed or impassable. When crossing an intersection of highways, however, the driver of a vehicle may overtake or pass another vehicle in the intersection if such intersection is designated and marked as a passing zone. 
(Code 1969, § 15-54) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-803. 
Sec. 86-164. - Special regulations applicable on highways laned for traffic. 
    Whenever any roadway has been divided into clearly marked lanes for traffic, drivers of vehicles shall obey the following: 
(1)  Any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions existing shall be driven in the lane nearest the right edge or right curb of the highway when such lane is available for travel except when overtaking and passing another vehicle or in preparation for a left turn or where right lanes are reserved for slow-moving traffic as permitted in this section. 
(2)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as is practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from that lane until the driver has ascertained that such movement can be made safely. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (5) of this section, on a highway which is divided into three lanes, no vehicle shall be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle or in preparation for a left turn or unless such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signed or marked to give notice of such allocation. Traffic control devices may be erected directing specified traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. 
(4)  Whenever the city manager designates righthand lanes for slow-moving traffic and when such lanes are signposted or marked to give notice of such designation, a vehicle may be driven in any lane allocated to traffic moving in the direction such vehicle is proceeding, but when traveling within such inside lanes vehicles shall be driven at approximately the speed authorized in such lanes and speed shall not unnecessarily be decreased so as to block, hinder or retard traffic. 
(5)  Wherever a highway is marked with double traffic lines consisting of a solid line immediately adjacent to a broken line, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of such line if the solid line is on the right of the broken line, but it shall be lawful to make a left turn for the purpose of entering or leaving a public, private or commercial road or entrance. Where the middle lane of a highway is marked on both sides with a solid line immediately adjacent to a broken line, such middle lane shall be considered a left-turn or holding lane and it shall be lawful to drive to the left of such line if the solid line is on the right of the broken line for the purpose of turning left into any road or entrance, provided that the vehicle may not travel in such lane further than 150 feet. 
(6)  Wherever a highway is marked with double traffic lines consisting of two immediately adjacent solid lines, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of such lines, except when turning left. 
(Code 1969, § 15-55) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-804. 
Sec. 86-165. - Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions. 
    Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions on highways not marked to indicate traffic lanes shall pass each other to the right, each giving to the other, as nearly as possible, one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Code 1969, § 15-56) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-837. 
Sec. 86-166. - Passing when overtaking a vehicle. 
    The driver of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass at least two feet to the left of the overtaken vehicle and shall not again drive to the right side of the highway until safely clear of such overtaken vehicle, except as otherwise provided in this division. 
(Code 1969, § 15-57) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-838. 
Sec. 86-167. - Horn signal when overtaking vehicle. 
    The driver of an overtaking motor vehicle when traveling outside a business or residence district shall, when necessary to ensure safe operation, give an audible warning with his horn or other warning device before passing or attempting to pass a vehicle proceeding in the same direction. 
(Code 1969, § 15-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-840. 
Sec. 86-168. - When overtaking vehicle may pass on right. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of another vehicle only: 
(1)  When the overtaken vehicle is making or about to make a left turn, and its driver has given the required signal; 
(2)  On a highway with unobstructed pavement, not occupied by parked vehicles, of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in each direction; or 
(3)  On a one-way street or on any one-way roadway when the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle on the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. Except where driving on paved shoulders is permitted by lawfully placed signs, no such movement shall be made by driving on the shoulder of the highway or off the pavement or main traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Code 1969, § 15-59) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-841. 
Sec. 86-169. - Driver to give way to overtaking vehicle. 
    Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. Any overwidth or slow-moving vehicle as defined by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1081 shall be removed from the roadway at the nearest suitable location when necessary to allow traffic to pass. 
(Code 1969, § 15-60) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-842. 
Sec. 86-170. - Limitations on overtaking and passing. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall not drive to the left side of the centerline of a highway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be made safely. 
(b)  No person operating a truck or combination of vehicles shall pass or attempt to pass any truck or combination of vehicles going in the same direction on an upgrade if such passing will impede the passage of following traffic. 
(Code 1969, § 15-61) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-843. 
Sec. 86-171. - Overtaking or passing a vehicle stopped at a crosswalk to permit pedestrian to cross roadway. 
    Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall neither overtake nor pass such vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 15-62) 
Sec. 86-172. - Following too closely. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of both vehicles and the traffic on, and conditions of, the street at the time. 
(Code 1969, § 15-63) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-816. 
Sec. 86-173. - Limitation on turning so as to proceed in opposite direction. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle in the city shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction except at an intersection; provided, however, that no driver shall cause any vehicle to make a turn to proceed in the opposite direction at any intersection where there is a sign or other marking prohibiting such action. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction on any curve, or on the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where the vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from any direction within 500 feet. 
(Code 1969, § 15-64) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-845. 
Sec. 86-174. - Required position and method of turning at intersections. 
(a)  Except where turning is prohibited, a driver intending to turn at an intersection or other location on any highway shall execute the turn as provided in this section. 
(1)  Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made from the right half of the roadway and as close as possible to the roadway's centerline, passing to the right of the centerline where it enters the intersection. After entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(3)  Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, and at any crossover from one roadway of a divided highway to another roadway thereof on which traffic moves in the opposite direction, the driver intending to turn left at any such intersection or crossover shall approach the intersection or crossover in the extreme left lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection or crossover the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection or crossover, as nearly as practicable, in the left lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(b)  The city manager may cause markers or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at any intersection. When markers or signs are so placed, no driver shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed by such markers or signs. 
(Code 1969, § 15-65) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-846. 
Sec. 86-175. - Signals required on backing, stopping or turning. 
    Every driver who intends to back, stop, turn or partly turn from a direct line shall first see that such movement can be made safely and, whenever the operation of any other vehicle may be affected by such movement, shall give the signals required in this division, plainly visible to the driver of such other vehicle, of his intention to make such movement. 
(Code 1969, § 15-66) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-848. 
Sec. 86-176. - How signals given. 
(a)  Signals required by section 86-175 shall be given by means of the hand and arm or by some mechanical or electrical device approved by the superintendent, in the manner specified in this section. Whenever the signal is given by means of the hand and arm, the driver shall indicate his intention to start, stop, turn or partly turn by extending the hand and arm beyond the left side of the vehicle in the manner following: 
(1)  For left turn or to pull to the left, the arm shall be extended in a horizontal position straight from and level with the shoulder. 
(2)  For right turn or to pull to the right, the arm shall be extended upward. 
(3)  For slowing down or stopping, the arm shall be extended downward. 
(b)  Wherever the lawful speed is more than 35 miles per hour, such signals shall be given continuously for a distance of at least 100 feet, and in all other cases at least 50 feet, before slowing down, stopping, turning or partly turning. 
(c)  A person riding a bicycle or moped shall signal his intention to stop or turn. Such signals, however, need not be given continuously if both hands are needed in the control or operation of the bicycle or moped. 
(Code 1969, § 15-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-849. 
Sec. 86-177. - Change of course after giving signal. 
    Drivers having once given a hand or light signal shall continue the course thus indicated unless they alter the original signal. 
(Code 1969, § 15-68) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-850. 
Sec. 86-178. - Duty of drivers receiving signals. 
    Drivers receiving a signal from another driver shall keep their vehicles under complete control and shall be able to avoid an accident resulting from a misunderstanding of such signal. 
(Code 1969, § 15-69) 
Sec. 86-179. - Signals prior to moving standing vehicles into traffic. 
    Drivers of vehicles stopped at the curb or edge of a highway, before moving such vehicles, shall signal their intentions to move into traffic, as provided in this division, before turning in the direction the vehicle will proceed from the curb. 
(Code 1969, § 15-70) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-851. 
Sec. 86-180. - Right-of-way at uncontrolled intersections generally. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this division, when two vehicles approach or enter an uncontrolled intersection at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. Where a "yield right-of-way" sign is posted, the driver of the vehicle approaching or entering such intersection on the highway, road or street on which such sign is posted shall yield the right-of-way to the driver of a vehicle approaching or entering such intersection from either direction. At traffic circles, vehicles already in the circle shall have the right-of-way over vehicles approaching and entering the circle. The driver of any vehicle traveling at an unlawful speed shall forfeit any right-of-way which he might otherwise have under this section. 
(Code 1969, § 15-71) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-820. 
Sec. 86-181. - Stop required before entering public highway or sidewalk from private road, etc.; yielding right-of-way. 
    The driver of a vehicle entering a public highway or sidewalk from a private road, driveway, alley or building shall stop immediately before entering such highway or sidewalk and yield the right-of-way to vehicles approaching on such public highway and to pedestrians or vehicles approaching on such public sidewalk. The provisions of this section shall not apply at an intersection of public and private roads controlled by a traffic signal. At any such intersection, all movement of traffic into and through the intersection shall be controlled by the traffic signal. 
(Code 1969, § 15-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-825. 
Sec. 86-182. - Stop required before entering street or sidewalk from private road, driveway, etc. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle entering a public street or sidewalk from a private road, driveway, alley or building shall stop immediately before entering such street or sidewalk and, upon entering such street or sidewalk, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such public street or to all pedestrians or vehicles approaching on such public sidewalk. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply at an intersection of public or private roads controlled by a traffic signal. At any such intersection, all movement of traffic into and through the intersection shall be controlled by the traffic signal. 
(Code 1969, § 15-73) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-826. 
Sec. 86-183. - Right-of-way of United States forces, troops, national guard, etc. 
    United States forces or troops, or any portion of the state national guard or naval militia, parading or performing any duty according to law, or any civil defense personnel performing any duty according to law, shall have the right-of-way in any highway through which they may pass. Such passage, however, shall not interfere with the carrying of the United States mails and the legitimate functions of police and firefighters or with the passage of emergency vehicles as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-920. 
(Code 1969, § 15-74) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-827. 
Sec. 86-184. - Approach of law enforcement or firefighting vehicles, rescue vehicles or ambulances; violation as failure to yield right-of-way. 
    Upon the approach of any emergency vehicle as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-920 giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or air horn designed to give automatically intermittent signals, and displaying a flashing, blinking or alternating emergency light or lights as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1022 through 46.2-1024, the driver of every other vehicle shall immediately drive to the nearest edge of the roadway, clear of any intersection of highways, and stop and remain there, unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer, until the emergency vehicle has passed. This section shall not relieve the driver of any such vehicle to which the right-of-way is to be yielded of the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway, nor shall it protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of an arbitrary exercise of such right-of-way. Violation of this section shall constitute failure to yield the right-of-way. 
(Code 1969, § 15-75) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-829. 
Sec. 86-185. - Emergency vehicles exempt from regulations in certain situations. 
(a)  The driver of any emergency vehicle, when such vehicle is being used in the performance of public services, and when such vehicle is operated under emergency conditions, may, without subjecting himself to criminal prosecution: 
(1)  Disregard speed limits, while having due regard for safety of persons and property. 
(2)  Proceed past any steady or flashing red signal, traffic light, stop sign or device indicating moving traffic shall stop if the speed of the vehicle is sufficiently reduced to enable it to pass a signal, traffic light or device with due regard to the safety of persons and property. 
(3)  Park or stop notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing a direction of movement of vehicles turning in specified directions so long as the operator does not endanger life or property. 
(5)  Pass or overtake, with due regard to the safety of persons and property, another vehicle at any intersection. 
(6)  Pass or overtake, with due regard to the safety of persons and property, while en route to an emergency, other stopped or slow-moving vehicles, by going off the paved or main traveled portion of the roadway on the right. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, vehicles exempted in this instance will not be required to sound a siren or any device to give automatically intermittent signals. 
(b)  The exemptions granted to emergency vehicles by subsection (a) of this section shall apply only when the operator of such vehicle displays a flashing, blinking or alternating emergency light or lights as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1022 through 46.2-1024 and sounds a siren, exhaust whistle or air horn designed to give automatically intermittent signals, as may be reasonably necessary, and only when there is in force and effect for such vehicle either (i) standard motor vehicle liability insurance covering injury or death to any person in the sum of at least $100,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident and, subject to the limit for one person, to a limit of $300,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and to a limit of $20,000.00 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident, or (ii) a certificate of self-insurance issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-368. Such exemptions shall not, however, protect the operator of any such vehicle from criminal prosecution for conduct constituting reckless disregard of the safety of persons and property. Nothing in this section shall release the operator of any such vehicle from civil liability for failure to use reasonable care in such operation. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "emergency vehicle" shall mean: 
(1)  Any law enforcement vehicle operated by or under the direction of a federal, state or local law enforcement officer (i) in the chase or apprehension of violators of the law or persons charged with or suspected of any such violation, or (ii) in response to an emergency call; 
(2)  Any regional detention center vehicle operated by or under the direction of a correctional officer responding to an emergency call or operating in an emergency situation; 
(3)  Any vehicle used to fight fire, including publicly owned state forest warden vehicles, when traveling in response to a fire alarm or emergency call; 
(4)  Any ambulance, rescue or lifesaving vehicle designed or used for the principal purpose of supplying resuscitation or emergency relief where human life is endangered; 
(5)  Any department of emergency services vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or operating in an emergency situation; and 
(6)  Any department of corrections vehicle designated by the director of the department of corrections, when: 
a.  Responding to an emergency call at a correctional facility; 
b.  Participating in a drug-related investigation; 
c.  Pursuing escapees from a correctional facility; or 
d.  Responding to a request for assistance from a law enforcement officer. 
(d)  Any law enforcement vehicle operated by or under the direction of a federal, state or local law enforcement officer may disregard speed limits, while having due regard for safety of persons and property: 
(1)  In testing the accuracy of speedometers of such vehicles; or 
(2)  In testing the accuracy of speed measuring devices specified in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-882. 
(Code 1969, §§ 15-50, 15-76) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-920. 
Sec. 86-186. - Following or parking near fire apparatus or rescue squad vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow any fire apparatus or rescue squad vehicle traveling in response to a fire alarm or emergency call at any distance closer than 500 feet to such apparatus or rescue squad vehicle or to park such vehicle within 500 feet of where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1969, § 15-77) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-921. 
Sec. 86-187. - Driving over fire hose. 
    It shall be unlawful, without the consent of the fire department official in command, for the driver of any vehicle to drive over any unprotected hose of a fire department laid down for use at any fire or alarm of fire. 
(Code 1969, § 15-78) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-922. 
Sec. 86-188. - Vehicles, etc., on sidewalks, roadways, bicycle paths, etc. 
(a)  No person shall ride or drive any vehicle on the sidewalks of the city. A person riding a bicycle on a sidewalk or across a roadway on a crosswalk shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing any pedestrian. No person shall ride a bicycle on a sidewalk or across a roadway on a crosswalk where such use of bicycles is prohibited by official traffic control devices. A person riding a bicycle on a sidewalk or across a roadway on a crosswalk shall have all the rights and duties of a pedestrian under the same circumstances. 
(b)  Any person operating a bicycle or moped on a roadway shall ride as close as practicable to the right curb or edge of the roadway, except under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction; 
(2)  When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway; and 
(3)  When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right curb or edge. 
For purposes of this section, a "substandard width lane" is a lane too narrow for a bicycle or moped and another vehicle to pass safely side-by-side within the lane. 
(c)  Persons riding bicycles on a highway shall not ride two or more abreast, except on paths or parts of highways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(d)  Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(e)  No person operating a bicycle or moped on a highway shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand on the handlebars. 
(f)  A person riding a bicycle or moped may overtake and pass another vehicle on either the left or right side, staying in the same lane as the overtaken vehicle or changing to a different lane or riding off the roadway as necessary to pass with safety. A person riding a bicycle or moped may overtake and pass another vehicle only under conditions which permit the movement to be made with safety. 
(g)  A person riding a bicycle or moped shall not travel between two lanes of traffic moving in the same direction, except where one lane is a separate turn lane or a mandatory turn lane. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person riding a bicycle or moped shall comply with all rules applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle when overtaking and passing. 
(i)  Any person residing in the city who owns a bicycle may register its serial number with the police department. 
(Code 1969, § 15-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-903-46.2-908. 
Sec. 86-189. - Requirement of safety equipment for mopeds. 
(a)  Any person who operates a moped as defined in the 1950 Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, as amended, on a public street or highway shall wear a face shield, safety glasses, or goggles of a type approved by the Superintendent of the Virginia State Police, or have the moped equipped with safety glass or a windshield at all times while operating such moped, and operators and passengers thereon, if any, shall wear a protective helmet of a type approved by the superintendent. 
(b)  Any person who knowingly violates this section shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall not constitute negligence, be considered in mitigation of damages of whatever nature, be admissible in evidence or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising out of the operation, ownership, or maintenance of a moped, nor shall anything in this section change any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining to any civil action. 
(Ord. of 7-10-00(1)) 
Sec. 86-190. - Bicycle helmet requirements. 
(a)  Every person 14 years of age or younger shall wear a protective helmet that meets the standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute or the Snell Memorial Foundation whenever riding or being carried on a bicycle on any highway as defined in Code of Virginia (1950), § 46.2-100, as amended, sidewalk, or public bicycle path. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $25.00. However, such fine shall be suspended (i) for first-time violators, and (ii) for violators who, subsequent to the violation but prior to imposition of the fine, purchase helmets of the type required herein. 
(c)  Violation of the section shall not constitute negligence, or assumption of the risk, be considered in mitigation of damages of whatever nature, be admissible in evidence, or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising out of the operation of any bicycle, nor shall anything in this section change any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining to any civil action. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be deemed or interpreted to permit bicycle riding on sidewalks or other public areas where prohibited by the laws and ordinances otherwise in effect. 
(Ord. of 7-10-00(2)) 
Secs. 86-191-86-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ONE-WAY STREETS 

Sec. 86-206. - Established. 
(a)  The following streets are hereby established and designated as one-way streets, and, except as provided in section 86-207, it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven or moved on such streets in a direction other than as set forth in this section: 
(1)  Clay Street, between Market Street and Academy Street, for vehicles moving in a westerly direction. 
(2)  Colorado Street, from East Main Street to East Calhoun Street, for vehicles moving in a southerly direction. 
(3)  Colorado Street, from East Main Street to East Clay Street, for vehicles moving in a northerly direction. 
(4)  Colorado Street, from King Street to Riverland Drive, for vehicles moving in a southerly direction. 
(5)  King Street, from Colorado Street to Front Avenue, for vehicles moving in a southerly direction. 
(b)  This section shall become effective as to any one-way street when signs have been provided therefor as set out in section 86-207. 
(Code 1969, § 15-86) 
Sec. 86-207. - Erection of signs; powers of city manager to vary. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized and directed to provide signs on the one-way streets designated in section 86-206 as will apprise an ordinarily observant person of such one-way streets. 
(b)  When it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager that the strict enforcement of section 86-206 will cause an unreasonable hardship on some particular person relative to the loading or unloading of trucks or other vehicles on such one-way streets, then in such event the city manager may issue a special permit to such person permitting a variance from the provisions of section 86-206. Any such special permit shall be in writing and shall specify the nature of such variance and the place and period of time when such variance shall be permitted. Such permit shall only be issued when it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager that the granting of such permit will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience to the person who seeks such permit. 
(Code 1969, § 15-87) 
Secs. 86-208-86-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - THROUGH TRUCKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate trucks and carriers, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1304. 

Sec. 86-226. - Route to be used. 
    All motor trucks passing through the city shall be driven upon Alternate Route 460, as such route exists through the city, from the point where Alternate Route 460 intersects with Main Street on the west at the city water filtration plant; thence, extending in an easterly direction, on Fourth Street to a point where Fourth Street intersects with Boulevard-Roanoke near the municipal athletic field; thence on Boulevard-Roanoke to a point where Boulevard-Roanoke intersects with Texas Street; thence on Texas Street to a point where Texas Street intersects with Electric Road east of Masons Creek; thence on Electric Road to a point where Electric Road intersects with East Main Street (U.S. Route 460); and thence on East Main Street (U.S. Route 460), continuing in a generally easterly direction, to a point where East Main Street (U.S. Route 460) intersects with the easterly corporate limits of the city; provided, however, that the driver of a motor truck upon such route intending to go south may turn off at Colorado Street or College Avenue. 
(Code 1969, § 15-88) 
Sec. 86-227. - Operation on Main Street prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor truck passing through the city to drive such motor truck on Main Street (U.S. Route 460) in the city, from the point where Main Street (U.S. Route 460) intersects with Electric Road (Alternate Route 460) on the east to the intersection of Main Street (U.S. Routes 460 and 11) and Fourth Street (Alternate Routes 460 and 11) on the west; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be so construed as to: 
(1)  Prohibit the use of Main Street between such designated points by motor trucks receiving loads or making deliveries in the course of which it shall be necessary to make use of Main Street between such designated points. 
(2)  Prohibit the use of Main Street between such designated points by motor trucks entering or leaving the city upon that portion of State Route 311 in the city known as Craig Avenue. 
(Code 1969, § 15-89) 
Sec. 86-228. - Operation on Boulevard-Roanoke prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor truck passing through the city to drive such motor truck on Boulevard-Roanoke in the city, from the intersection of Boulevard-Roanoke and Texas Street (Alternate Route 460) to the intersection of Boulevard-Roanoke and Electric Road (Virginia Route 119); provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to prohibit the use of Boulevard-Roanoke between such designated points by motor trucks receiving loads or making deliveries in the course of which it shall be necessary to make use of Boulevard-Roanoke between such designated points or by motor trucks having their points of origin and destination wholly within the city. 
(Code 1969, § 15-90) 
Sec. 86-229. - Detours. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, the city manager shall have full power and authority to detour motor trucks over any city street when, in his judgment, such detour is necessitated by construction or repair of any city street or bridge or by any emergency. 
(Ord. of 12-14-98) 
Secs. 86-230-86-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Powers as to parking or storage of vehicles (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-884) adopted, § 2.2. 
Cross reference- Standing vehicles on railroad tracks, etc., § 23-4; limitations on parking of trailers, § 29-7. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 4-11-2011(1) repealed the former Div. 1, §§ 86-246-86-260, and enacted a new Div. 1 as set out herein. The former Div. 1 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 8-10-98; Code 1969. 

Sec. 86-246. - Parking tickets. 
    The chief of police shall prepare an appropriate parking ticket for use in enforcing the provisions of this article. Any law enforcement officer or other appointed police department personnel charged with enforcing this article shall attach, in plain view, to any vehicle parked in violation of this article, a parking ticket notifying the owner or operator of such vehicle of the violation and instructing such owner or operator when and where to report with reference to the violation. The date and time of the violation shall be noted on the parking ticket. The original law enforcement agency copies of the parking ticket issued by a law enforcement officer or appointed police department employee shall be submitted forthwith to the Office of the Treasurer of the City of Salem. The law enforcement agency copies shall have a number that corresponds with the copy that is attached to the vehicle or left with the vehicle operator. The parking ticket itself shall have printed upon its face the following statement: 
"NOTICE: You may pay this by appearing at the Office of the City of Salem Treasurer at 114 N. Broad Street, Salem, Virginia, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. If you prefer you may mail the parking ticket and fine to the aforementioned office at P.O. Box 869, Salem, Virginia 24153. Checks should be made payable the Treasurer of the City of Salem. Failure to make such payment within 5 days will require further action which could result in your having to appear in court and pay additional costs." 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
Sec. 86-247. - Parking prohibited in specified places and fines for such violations. 
    No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; provided, however, that where there is no crosswalk at an intersection, no person shall so park a vehicle within 20 feet from the intersection of curblines or, if none, then within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines. 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by official signs or markings. 
(9)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing, subject to section 86-253. 
(10)  Within 15 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance when properly signposted. 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such parking would obstruct traffic. 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or within a tunnel. 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
(15)  In any designated fire lane upon any parking lot open to the public and designed to accommodate 50 or more vehicles. 
a.  Designation. The chief of police, after consultation with the fire chief, or his designee, shall designate fire lanes and fire department connections on public streets and within private parking lots open to the public designed to accommodate 50 or more vehicles and/or where necessary for the purpose of preventing parking in front of or adjacent to fire hydrants and fire department connections and to ensure access to buildings and structures for firefighting and rescue apparatus. 
b.  Signs, markings and barriers. Signs, markings and barriers to delineate fire lanes and fire department connections, as designated by the chief of police after consultation with the fire chief, shall be provided, installed and maintained at the expense of the owner, or his agent, of the property involved. 
c.  If the owner of the premises fails to delineate the fire lanes and fire department connections by signs, markings and barriers within 30 days after designation by the chief of police, then the owner may be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00. After the expiration of the time allowed for such signs, markings and barriers to be made, they shall be made by the city and the cost thereof shall thereupon be chargeable to and be collected from the owner of the premises in question, as other taxes and levies are or may be collected. 
(16)  Any parking space reserved for persons with disabilities on a public street unless there is displayed, on said vehicle, disabled parking license plates, organizational removable windshield placards, permanent removable windshield placards or temporary removable windshield placards issued under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1241, or DV disabled parking license plates issued under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-739(B). 
(17)  Any parking space reserved for persons with disabilities on privately owned parking areas unless there is displayed, on said vehicle, disabled parking license plates, organizational removable placards, permanent removable windshield placards or temporary removable windshield placards issued under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1241, or DV disabled parking license plates issued under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-739(B). For any violation of this subsection, a summons or parking ticket may be issued by a police officer or other uniformed personnel of the city employed to enforce parking regulations without the necessity of a warrant being obtained. 
(18)  Any parking lot, area or space where parking is restricted or reserved and signs or other markers to that effect have been erected or installed and are clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person; unless such person is the owner, operator or lessee of such parking lot, area or space, or unless such person has permission of the owner, operator or lessee. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
Sec. 86-248. - Voluntary payment or contest of parking ticket. 
(a)  Within five days of the time when a ticket is attached to a vehicle pursuant to section 86-246, the owner or operator of such vehicle may appear in the treasurer's office, during regular business hours, and waive his right to be formally tried for the violation indicated on the ticket, by paying the fine prescribed by section 86-246 as penalty for, and in full satisfaction of, such violation. The owner or operator of such vehicle may also mail payment to the treasurer's office in the pre-addressed envelope provided by law enforcement. 
(b)  In lieu of payment of the fine in accord with subsection (a) above, such owner or operator may contest the parking ticket, within the time prescribed in subsection (a), by presenting it to the treasurer's office, who shall certify such contest, in writing, on an appropriate form, to the office of the chief of police, or his designee, within two business days. 
(c)  The officer who issued the parking ticket will obtain the appropriate summons in lieu or warrant within 30 days scheduling a court date and time for the parking violation to be heard by the City of Salem General District Court. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
State Law reference- Uncontested payment of parking tickets and certification of contest of such tickets, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1225. 
Sec. 86-249. - Procedure for delinquent parking tickets. 
(a)  If the owner or operator of the motor vehicle to which a ticket is attached pursuant to this article does not appear in the treasurer's office and pay the fine or present the parking ticket for certification within the time prescribed in section 86-248, the treasurer shall, in order to secure the collection of city funds, notify the owner or operator of the vehicle in question, by mail directed to his last known address or his address as shown on the records of the department of motor vehicles, that he may pay the fine provided by section 86-265 for such violation, plus a penalty in the sum of $20.00 within five days of the receipt of the notice, at the treasurer's office. Such notice shall be contained in an envelope with the words "Law Enforcement Notice" stamped or printed on the face thereof in type at least one-half inch in height. The notice shall be mailed within two weeks of the final day on which payment is due. 
(b)  If a person, to whom the notice provided for in subsection (a) above, fails to pay the fine and penalty within the time prescribed in the notice, the treasurer shall notify the office of the chief of police within two weeks after the notice is mailed. The chief of police or his designee will then direct the officer who issued the parking ticket to obtain a warrant or summons in lieu regarding the delinquent parking ticket within 30 days. The owner or operator of the vehicle in question may pay the fine to the clerk of the general district court prior to the date he is to appear in court, provided he also pay necessary court costs and the penalty referred to in subsection (a) above. The general district court's receipt therefore shall be conclusive evidence of such payment. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
State Law reference- Issuance of complaint, summons or warrant for delinquent parking tickets generally, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1225; requirement for notice as provided for in subsection (a) above, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-941. 
Sec. 86-250. - Presumption in prosecutions for parking violations. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of any provision of this article or any regulation or rule established pursuant hereto, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons, parking ticket or warrant was parked in violation of such provision, together with proof that the defendant was, at the time of such parking violation, the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-600, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked the vehicle at the place where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Code 1969, § 15-91; Ord. of 8-10-98; Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
State Law reference- Parking prohibited in designated places, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1239. 
Sec. 86-251. - Moving vehicle into prohibited area, etc. 
    No person other than a police officer shall move a vehicle into any area where parking is prohibited or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1969, § 15-92; Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
Sec. 86-252. - Stopping on highways, general rule. 
    No person shall stop a vehicle in such manner as to impede or render dangerous the use of the highway by others, except in the case of an emergency, an accident, or a mechanical breakdown. In the event of such an emergency, accident or breakdown, the emergency flashing lights of such vehicle shall be turned on if the vehicle is equipped with such lights and such lights are in working order. A report of the vehicle's location shall be made to the nearest law enforcement officer as soon as practicable and the vehicle shall be moved from the roadway to the shoulder as soon as possible and removed from the shoulder without unnecessary delay. If the vehicle is not promptly removed, such removal may be ordered by a law enforcement officer at the expense of the owner if the disabled vehicle creates a traffic hazard. 
(Code 1969, § 15-93(a); Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-888. 
Sec. 86-253. - Location of parked vehicles. 
    No vehicle shall be stopped except close to and parallel to the right edge of the curb or roadway, except that a vehicle may be stopped close to and parallel to the left curb or edge of the roadway on one-way streets or may be parked at an angle where permitted by the state transportation board or the city manager with respect to highways under their jurisdiction. 
(Code 1969, § 15-93(b); Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-889. 
Sec. 86-254. - Stopping in vicinity of fire or emergency. 
    No vehicle shall be stopped at or in the vicinity of a fire, vehicle or airplane accident, or other area of emergency, in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard or interfere with law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue workers, or others whose duty it is to deal with such emergencies. Any vehicle found unlawfully parked in the vicinity of a fire, accident or area of emergency may be removed by order of a law enforcement officer or, in the absence of a law enforcement officer, by order of the uniformed fire or rescue officer in charge, at the risk and expense of the owner, if such vehicle creates a traffic hazard or interferes with the necessary procedures of law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue workers, or others whose assigned duty it is to deal with such emergencies. The charge for such removal shall not exceed the actual and necessary cost. Vehicles being used by accredited information services, such as press, radio and television, when being used for the gathering of news, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, except when actually obstructing the law enforcement officers, firefighters, and rescue workers dealing with such emergencies. 
(Code 1969, § 15-93(c); Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-890. 
Sec. 86-255. - Exemption for highway construction and maintenance vehicles. 
    The provisions of sections 86-248 to 86-250 shall not apply to any vehicle owned or controlled by the state department of transportation or counties, cities or towns while actually engaged in the construction, reconstruction or maintenance of highways. 
(Code 1969, § 15-93(c); Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-891. 
Sec. 86-256. - Parking of passenger buses, trucks, etc., between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or driver of any motor passenger bus or the owner, operator or driver of any truck, trailer or semitrailer to park such bus, truck, trailer or semitrailer or permit such bus, truck, trailer or semitrailer to be parked on any street or public place between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. following of any day; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to apply to trucks not exceeding half-ton capacity. 
(Code 1969, § 15-94; Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
Sec. 86-257. - Permit for parking truck beside railroad car standing on public right-of-way. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any truck beside a railroad car standing on any public right-of-way without a special permit from the chief of police, which permit shall be issued only in cases of extreme hardship and physical necessity for the purpose of loading or unloading. 
(Code 1969, § 15-95; Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
Sec. 86-258. - Where school bus to be stopped. 
    Every school bus shall stop as far to the right of the street as possible before discharging or loading passengers and, when possible, shall not stop where the visibility is obscured for a distance of 200 feet either way from the bus. 
(Code 1969, § 15-96; Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
Sec. 86-259. - Leaving vehicle standing for more than four days on street, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any street or within any city parking lot and leave such vehicle standing for a period of more than four consecutive days. 
(Code 1969, § 15-97; Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
Sec. 86-260. - Blocking driveways of filling stations, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle so as to block any driveway of any filling station or other like establishment. 
(Code 1969, § 15-98; Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
Cross reference- Chapter 34 of Salem City Code. 
Sec. 86-261. - Removal and disposition of certain unattended vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof: 
(1)  Is left unattended on a public highway or other public property and constitutes a traffic hazard; 
(2)  Is illegally parked; 
(3)  Is left unattended for more than four days on public property without the permission of an agent of the city. 
(b)  It shall be presumed that a vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof is abandoned on a public highway if: 
(1)  It lacks either: 
a.  A current license plate; or 
b.  A current city license plate or sticker; or 
c.  A valid state safety inspection certificate or sticker; or 
(2)  It has been in a specific location for four days without being moved. 
(c)  Each vehicle removal under this section shall be reported to the police department, and notice thereof given to the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as promptly as possible. The owner of such vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay to the persons entitled thereto all costs incidental to the removal, storage and locating the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof. Should such owner fail or refuse to pay the cost or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be unknown and unascertainable after a diligent search has been made, and after notice to him at his last known address and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the state department of motor vehicles against the motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof, the vehicle shall be treated as an abandoned vehicle under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200 et seq. 
(Code 1969, § 15-99; Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1213. 
Sec. 86-262. - Leaving vehicles on private property prohibited; removal and disposition; notice of disposition. 
(a)  No person shall leave any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof on the private property of any other person without his consent. On complaint of the owner of the property on which such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof has been left for more than four days, such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof may be removed by or under the direction of a law enforcement officer to a storage area. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a property owner from removing a vehicle in accordance with Virginia state law. 
(b)  Any such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof may be removed for safekeeping by or under the direction of a police officer to a storage area; provided, however that no such vehicle or part thereof shall be so removed from privately owned premises without the written request of the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises. The person at whose request such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof is removed from private property shall indemnify and hold harmless the city against any loss or expense incurred by reason of removal, storage or sale thereof. 
(c)  In the case of the removal of a motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof from private property, when it cannot be readily sold, the motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof may be disposed of in whatever manner the council may provide. In all other respects, the provisions of section 86-261 and Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1217 shall apply to these removals. Disposal of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer may at the option of the council be carried out under either the provisions of section 86-261 or under the provisions of this section after a diligent search for the owner, after notice to him at his last known address, and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the department against the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, and after the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer has been held at least 60 days. The department shall be notified of the disposition of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer under section 86-261 or the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1969, § 15-100; Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1215. 
Sec. 86-263. - Notice of disposition of vehicle under section 86-261 or 86-262. 
    The state department of motor vehicles shall be notified of the disposition of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer under section 86-261 or 86-262. 
(Code 1969, § 15-101; Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1215. 
Sec. 86-264. - Keeping inoperative motor vehicles on residential, commercial or agricultural property. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, except within a fully enclosed building or structure or otherwise shielded or screened from view, on any property zoned for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which is inoperative. As used in this section, an "inoperative motor vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle which is not in operating condition; or which for a period of 60 days or longer has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine, or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle; or on which there are displayed neither valid license plates nor valid inspection decal. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business which is regularly engaged in business as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. 
(b)  Removal and disposition of inoperative vehicles on property zoned for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes; costs. 
(1)  The owners of property zoned for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes shall, at such time as the council may prescribe, remove therefrom any such inoperative motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers that are not kept within a fully enclosed building or structure. 
(2)  The council, through its agents or employees, may remove any such inoperative motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers whenever the owner of the premises, after 15 days' notice, has failed to do so. 
(3)  If the council, through its agents or employees, removes any such motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers after having given such notice, such motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers may be disposed of after giving an additional 15 days' notice to the owner of the vehicle. 
(4)  The cost of any such removal or disposal shall be chargeable to the owner of the vehicle or premises and may be collected as taxes and levies are collected. 
(5)  Every cost authorized by this section with which the owner of the premises shall have been assessed shall constitute a lien against the property from which the vehicle was removed, the lien to continue until actual payment of such cost shall have been made. 
(Code 1969, § 15-101.1; Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
Sec. 86-265. - Penalties for parking violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a traffic infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the following table: 
Table of Parking Offenses and Penalties 
Overtime parking ..... $20.00 
No parking zone ..... $20.00 
Handicapped parking space ..... $100.00 
Fire lane ..... $50.00 
Restricted parking area ..... $20.00 
No city tag or decal ..... $25.00 
No valid state tags ..... $20.00 
No stopping or standing zone ..... $20.00 
Blocking traffic ..... $20.00 
Parking within 15 ft. of a fire hydrant ..... $20.00 
Parking on a crosswalk ..... $20.00 
Parking within 20 ft. of a crosswalk at an intersection ..... $20.00 
Parking within a tow away zone ..... $20.00 
Blocking public or private driveway ..... $20.00 
Parking in wrong direction ..... $20.00 
No valid state inspection decal ..... $20.00 
Parking in designated space on city property ..... $20.00 
Other violation not specified ..... $20.00 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(1)) 
Secs. 86-266-86-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL PERMIT 

Sec. 86-276. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Resident means any person who owns and occupies any dwelling along with the members of his household, or any person who rents on a predetermined basis any apartment or room within the area outlined in section 86-277. 
(Code 1969, § 15-94.5) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-277. - Residential permit parking. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle without a valid permit parking sticker, except emergency or commercial vehicles loading or unloading, on the west side of North Market Street from its intersection with Clay Street northward to its intersection with McClung Street. 
(Code 1969, § 15-94.1) 
Sec. 86-278. - Issuance of permits. 
    Residential parking permits shall be issued to those residents of the area designated in section 86-277 wishing to park motor vehicles at curbside on the streets within such area. 
(Code 1969, § 15-94.2) 
Sec. 86-279. - Permits issued by city treasurer; expiration. 
    Residential parking permits shall be issued by the city treasurer. Such permits shall be valid and shall expire on the same annual basis as city license decals. 
(Code 1969, § 15-94.3) 
Sec. 86-280. - Sale or transfer of vehicle; issuance of duplicate permit. 
    Upon the sale or transfer of the motor vehicle for which a parking permit has been issued, the owner shall remove such permit. Upon application for a permit to replace the one so removed, such owner shall present the original permit, or enough of the mutilated permit to identify it, and a duplicate permit shall be issued by the treasurer. 
(Code 1969, § 15-94.4) 
Sec. 86-281. - Proof of residency. 
    Any person who is not a permanent resident of the city shall show to the treasurer a receipt for rent paid for an apartment or room within the area outlined in section 86-277 or a signed statement from his landlord that he is a tenant within such area. 
(Code 1969, § 15-94.6) 
Sec. 86-282. - Guest cards. 
    Each dwelling house or apartment in which there is a household living on a yearround basis shall be issued three guest cards at the time of the issuance of the parking permit to be used by visitors at such household, and no more than two guest cards shall be in use at any one time. 
(Code 1969, § 15-94.7) 
Sec. 86-283. - Placement of stickers and guest cards. 
    The stickers issued under section 86-278 shall be affixed to the inside of the windshield of the vehicle in the lower righthand corner next to the city decal. Guest cards when in use shall be placed in the same position. 
(Code 1969, § 15-94.9) 
Sec. 86-284. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    Any person convicted of violating the terms of this division shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Each day a vehicle is parked in violation of this division shall constitute a separate offense. Any vehicle parked in violation of this division for more than three days will be subject to being towed away at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1969, § 15-94.8) 
Secs. 86-285-86-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLARES AND OTHER SIGNALS WHEN VEHICLE IS DISABLED ON STREET AFTER DARK 

Sec. 86-301. - Required generally. 
    Whenever any bus, truck, trailer, house trailer or mobile home is disabled and stops on any portion of any interstate highway at any time during which lights are required on motor vehicles by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1030, the operator of such vehicle shall place or cause to be placed on the roadway three red flares or torches of a type approved by the superintendent of state police. One of the flares or torches shall be placed in the center of the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle and not less than 100 feet therefrom in the direction of traffic approaching in that lane, a second not less than 100 feet from such vehicle in the opposite direction, and a third at the traffic side of such vehicle not closer than ten feet from its front or rear. However, if such vehicle is disabled within 500 feet of a curve or crest of a hill or other obstruction to view, the flares or torches in that direction shall be so placed as to afford ample warning to other users of the highway, but in no case less than 500 feet from the disabled vehicle. Red reflectorized triangular warning devices of a type approved by the superintendent of state police may be used in lieu of flares or torches. 
(Code 1969, § 15-103) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-111(A). 
Sec. 86-302. - When red reflector flares or red lanterns required. 
    If any vehicle referred to in section 86-301 is used for the transportation of inflammable liquids in bulk, whether loaded or empty, or for transporting inflammable gases, red reflector flares or red electric lanterns of a type approved by the superintendent of state police shall be used. Such reflectors or lanterns shall be lighted and placed upon the roadway in the manner provided in section 86-301. 
(Code 1969, § 15-104) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-111(B). 
Sec. 86-303. - When red flags required. 
    During such time as lights on motor vehicles are not required, red flags not less than 12 inches both in length and width shall be used in the place of flares, torches or lanterns. The flags shall be placed on the roadway in the manner prescribed in sections 86-301 and 86-302 for flares, torches and lanterns; except that no flag shall be required to be placed at the side of such vehicle. If the disablement of such vehicle continues into the period when lights on motor vehicles are required, flares, torches, reflectors or lanterns shall be placed as required by sections 86-301 and 86-302. Red reflectorized triangular warning devices of a type approved by the superintendent may be used in lieu of flags. 
(Code 1969, § 15-105) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-111(C). 
Secs. 86-304-86-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDESTRIANS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-321. - How and where pedestrians to cross highways. 
    When crossing highways, pedestrians shall not carelessly or maliciously interfere with the orderly passage of vehicles. They shall cross, wherever possible, only at intersections or marked crosswalks. Where intersections contain no marked crosswalks, pedestrians shall not be guilty of negligence as a matter of law for crossing at any such intersection or between intersections when crossing by the most direct route. Pedestrians may cross an intersection diagonally when all traffic entering the intersection has been halted by lights, other traffic control devices, or by a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1969, § 15-106) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-923. 
Sec. 86-322. - Right-of-way of pedestrians. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle on a highway shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian crossing such highway: 
(1)  At any clearly marked crosswalk, whether at midblock or at the end of any block. 
(2)  At any regular pedestrian crossing included in the prolongation of the lateral boundary lines of the adjacent sidewalk at the end of a block. 
(3)  At any intersection when the driver is approaching on a highway or street where the legal maximum speed does not exceed 35 miles per hour. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, at intersections or crosswalks where the movement of traffic is being regulated by law enforcement officers or traffic control devices, the driver shall yield according to the direction of the law enforcement officer or device. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall enter or cross an intersection in disregard of approaching traffic. 
(c)  The drivers of vehicles entering, crossing or turning at intersections shall change their course, slow down, or stop if necessary to permit pedestrians to cross such intersections safely and expeditiously. 
(d)  Pedestrians crossing highways at intersections shall at all times have the right-of-way over vehicles making turns into the highways being crossed by the pedestrians. 
(Code 1969, § 15-107) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-924. 
Sec. 86-323. - Pedestrians stepping into highway where they cannot be seen. 
    No pedestrian shall step into a highway open to moving vehicular traffic at any point between intersections where his presence would be obscured from the vision of drivers of approaching vehicles by a vehicle or other obstruction at the curb or side. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to a pedestrian stepping into a highway to board a bus or to enter a safety zone, in which event he shall cross the highway only at right angles. 
(Code 1969, § 15-108) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-926. 
Sec. 86-324. - Boarding or alighting from buses. 
    When actually boarding or alighting from buses, pedestrians shall have the right-of-way over vehicles, but shall not, in order to board or alight from buses, step into the highway sooner or remain there longer than is absolutely necessary. 
(Code 1969, § 15-109) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-927. 
Sec. 86-325. - Pedestrians not to use roadway except when necessary; keeping to left. 
    Pedestrians shall not use the roadways for travel, except when necessary to do so because of the absence of sidewalks which are reasonably suitable and passable for their use. If they walk on the hard surface or the main travelled portion of the roadway, they shall keep to the extreme left side or edge thereof, or where the shoulders of the highway are of sufficient width to permit, they may walk on either shoulder thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 15-110) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-928. 
Sec. 86-326. - Playing on highways; roller skates, skateboards, toys or other devices on wheels or runners; persons riding bicycles, mopeds, etc., not to attach to vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall play on a highway, other than on the sidewalks thereof. No person shall use roller skates, skateboards, toys or other devices on wheels or runners, except bicycles, mopeds and motorcycles, on highways where play is prohibited. The council may designate areas on highways under its control where play is permitted and may impose reasonable restrictions on play on such highways. If the highways have only two traffic lanes, persons using such devices, except bicycles, mopeds and motorcycles, shall keep as near as reasonably possible to the extreme left side or edge of the left traffic lane so that they will be facing oncoming traffic at all times. 
(b)  No person riding on any bicycle, moped, roller skates, skateboards, toys or other devices on wheels or runners shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle on a roadway. 
(Code 1969, § 15-111) 
State Law reference- Playing on highways, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-932. 
Sec. 86-327. - Penalty for violating division. 
    Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this division shall be fined not more than $200.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1969, § 15-112) 
State Law reference- Localities imposing penalties for certain offenses not to exceed penalty for traffic infraction, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-935. 
Sec. 86-328. - Solicitation of transportation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while upon any street or the right-of-way of any street, to endeavor by words, gestures or otherwise to beg, invite or secure transportation in any motor vehicle not engaged in passenger carrying for hire, unless such person knows the driver thereof or any passenger therein; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the solicitation of aid in the event of accidents or by persons who are sick or seeking assistance for the sick in cases of bona fide sickness in which an emergency exists. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
(Code 1969, § 15-117) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-929. 
Secs. 86-329-86-345. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BLIND OR INCAPACITATED PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 86-346. - When vehicles to stop for pedestrian guided by dog or carrying white, red-tipped white, or metallic cane. 
(a)  Whenever a totally or partially blind pedestrian crossing or attempting to cross a highway in accordance with the provisions of section 86-321 is guided by a guide dog or carrying a cane which is predominantly metallic or white in color, with or without a red tip, the driver of every vehicle approaching the intersection or place of crossing shall bring his vehicle to a full stop before arriving at such intersection or place of crossing, unless such intersection or place of crossing is controlled by a law enforcement officer or traffic light. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 15-113) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-933. 
Sec. 86-347. - Construction of preceding section; failure to use cane or guide dog not contributory negligence. 
    Nothing contained in section 86-346 shall be construed to deprive any totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated person not carrying such a cane or walking stick or not being guided by a dog of the rights and privileges conferred by law upon pedestrians crossing streets. Nor shall the failure of such totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated person to carry a cane or walking stick or to be guided by a guide dog upon the streets or sidewalks of the city be held to constitute or be evidence of contributory negligence. 
(Code 1969, § 15-116) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-934. 
Sec. 86-348. - Unlawful for person not blind or incapacitated to carry white, white tipped with red or metallic cane. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, unless totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated, while on any public street or highway to carry in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick which is metallic or white in color or white tipped with red. 
(b)  Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 15-114) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212.1. 
Secs. 86-349-86-365. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ACCIDENTS 

Sec. 86-366. - Duty of driver to stop, etc., in event of accident involving injury or death, or damage to attended property. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident in which a person is killed or injured or in which an attended vehicle or other attended property is damaged shall immediately stop as close to the scene of the accident as possible without obstructing traffic and report his name, address, driver's license number and vehicle registration number forthwith to the state police or local law enforcement agency, to the person struck and injured if such person appears to be capable of understanding and retaining the information, to the driver or some other occupant of the vehicle collided with, or to the custodian of other damaged property. The driver shall also render reasonable assistance to any person injured in such accident, including taking such injured person to a physician, surgeon or hospital if it is apparent that medical treatment is necessary or is requested by the injured person. 
(b)  Where, because of injuries sustained in the accident, the driver is prevented from complying with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the driver shall, as soon as reasonably possible, make the required report to the state police or local law enforcement agency and make a reasonable effort to locate the person struck, or the driver or some other occupant of the vehicle collided with, or the custodian of the damaged property, and report to such person his name, address, driver's license number and vehicle registration number. 
(Code 1969, § 15-118(a)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-894. 
Sec. 86-367. - Duty of certain persons accompanying driver to report accidents involving injury or death, or damage to attended property. 
    If the driver fails to stop and make the report required by section 86-366, every person 16 years of age or older in the vehicle with the driver at the time of the accident who has knowledge of the accident shall have a duty to ensure that a report is made within 24 hours from the time of the accident to the police department. The report shall include his name, address, and such other information within his knowledge as the driver is required to report pursuant to section 86-366. 
(Code 1969, § 15-118(b)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-895. 
Sec. 86-368. - Duties of driver in event of accident involving damage only to unattended property. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident in which no person is killed or injured, but in which an unattended vehicle or other unattended property is damaged, shall make a reasonable effort to find the owner or custodian of such property and shall report to the owner or custodian the information which the driver is required to report pursuant to section 86-366 if such owner or custodian is found. If the owner or custodian of such damaged vehicle or property cannot be found, the driver shall leave a note in a conspicuous place at the scene of the accident and shall report the accident in writing within 24 hours to the police department. Such note and written report shall contain the information which the driver is required to report pursuant to section 86-366 and such written report shall state in addition the date, time and place of the accident and the driver's estimate of the property damage. 
(b)  Where, as a result of injuries sustained in the accident, the driver is prevented from complying with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the driver shall, as soon as reasonably possible, make the required report to the police department and make a reasonable effort to find the owner or custodian of the unattended vehicle or property and report to such person such information as is required to be reported pursuant to section 86-366. 
(Code 1969, § 15-118(c)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-896. 
Sec. 86-369. - Duty of certain persons accompanying driver to report accidents involving damage only to unattended property. 
    If the driver fails to stop and make a reasonable search for the owner or custodian of an unattended vehicle or property or to leave a note for such owner or custodian as required by section 86-368, every person 16 years of age or older in the vehicle with the driver at the time of the accident who has knowledge of the accident shall have a duty to ensure that a report is made within 24 hours from the time of the accident to the police department. The report shall include his name, address, and such other facts within his knowledge as are required by section 86-368 to be reported by the driver. 
(Code 1969, § 15-118(d)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-897. 
Sec. 86-370. - Reports are in addition to others. 
    The reports required by sections 86-366-86-369 are in addition to other accident reports required by Code of Virginia, title 46.2, and shall be made irrespective of the amount of property damage involved. 
(Code 1969, § 15-118(e)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-898. 
Sec. 86-371. - Article applies to accidents on private or public property. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply irrespective of whether such accident occurs on the public streets or highways or on private property. 
(Code 1969, § 15-118(f)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-899. 
Sec. 86-372. - Penalty for violation of sections 86-366-86-369. 
    Any person convicted of violating the provisions of sections 86-366-86-369 shall, if such accident results in injury to or the death of any person, be guilty of a class 6 felony. If such accident results only in damage to property, the person so convicted shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor; however, if the vehicle or other property struck is unattended and such damage is less than $250.00, such person shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. A motor vehicle operator convicted of a class 4 misdemeanor under this section shall be assigned three demerit points by the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1969, § 15-119(a)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-900. 
Sec. 86-373. - Suspension of driver's license for failure to report certain accidents. 
    Any person convicted of violating the provisions of sections 18-366 to 18-369 may be punished, in addition to the penalties provided in section 86-372, if such accident resulted only in damage to property and such damage exceeded $500.00, by suspension of his license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the highways of the state for a period not to exceed six months by the court. This section shall in no case be construed to limit the authority or duty of the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles with respect to revocation of licenses for violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-894-46.2-897, as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-364 et seq. Any license revoked under the provisions of this section shall be surrendered to the court to be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-398. 
(Code 1969, § 15-119(b)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-901. 
Sec. 86-374. - Leaving scene of accident when directed to do so by officer. 
    A person shall leave the scene of a traffic accident when directed to do so by a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1969, § 15-120) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-902. 
Sec. 86-375. - Temporary removal and disposition of vehicles involved in accidents. 
    Whenever a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer involved in an accident is so located as to impede the orderly flow of traffic, the police may: 
(1)  At no cost to the owner or operator remove the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to some point in the vicinity where it will not impede the flow of traffic; or 
(2)  Have the vehicle removed to a storage area for safekeeping and shall report the removal to the department of motor vehicles and to the owner of the vehicle as promptly as possible. If the vehicle is removed to a storage area under this subsection, the owner shall pay to the parties entitled thereto all costs incidental to its removal and storage. 
(Code 1969, § 15-121; Ord. of 4-26-93(1)) 
Cross reference- Removal of glass, etc., of damaged vehicle from street, § 70-4. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt provisions relative to temporary removal and disposition of vehicles involved in accidents, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1212. 
Secs. 86-376-86-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 86-391. - Tire chains or snow tires required under certain conditions. 
(a)  Whenever snow, sleet, hail or freezing rain has caused slippery or hazardous conditions on any of the public streets of the city, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to obstruct or impede other vehicular traffic on any such street by reason of failure to have the driving wheels of the vehicle operated by him equipped by tire chains or snow tires. 
(b)  Every person violating this section shall be fined not exceeding $25.00. 
(Code 1969, § 15-122) 
State Law reference- Regulation of operation of vehicles in snow, sleet, etc., Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1302. 
Sec. 86-392. - Illegal sirens, whistles, etc.; unlawful use of warning devices; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be equipped with or for any person to use on any vehicle any siren or exhaust, compression or spark plug whistle, or horn, except as may be authorized in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle operated on a public highway to be equipped with any warning device that is not of a type that has been approved by the superintendent. It shall further be unlawful for any person at any time to use a horn otherwise than as a reasonable warning or to make any unnecessary or unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of a horn or other warning device. However, vehicles of common carriers or extraordinarily large and heavy vehicles may be equipped with such type of warning device as the superintendent may require or permit. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a siren, bell or supplemental horn may be used on a vehicle as a noisemaker for an alarm system if the device is installed so as to prohibit actuation of the system by the driver while the vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1969, § 15-123) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1060. 
Sec. 86-393. - Exhaust system in good working order. 
(a)  No person shall drive and no owner of a motor vehicle shall permit or allow the operation of any vehicle on a highway unless it is equipped with an exhaust system of a type installed as standard factory equipment, or comparable to that designed for use on the particular vehicle as standard factory equipment, in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise. An exhaust system shall not be deemed to prevent excessive or unusual noise if it permits the escape of noise in excess of that permitted by the standard factory equipment exhaust system of private passenger motor vehicles or trucks of standard make. 
(b)  The term "exhaust system," as used in this section, means all the parts of a motor vehicle through which the exhaust passes after leaving the engine block. 
(c)  Chambered pipes are not an effective muffling device to prevent excessive or unusual noise. 
(Code 1969, § 15-124(a), (b)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1049. 
Sec. 86-394. - Mufflers on motorcycles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any motorcycle not equipped with a muffler or other sound dissipative device in good working order and in constant operation. 
(b)  No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed or rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement, any muffler or sound dissipative device on a motorcycle. 
(Code 1969, § 15-124(c)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1050. 
Sec. 86-395. - Muffler cutouts, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale a muffler without interior baffle plates or other effective muffling device or any gutted muffler, muffler cutout or straight exhaust. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate on the streets of the city a motor vehicle equipped with a gutted muffler, muffler cutout or straight exhaust. 
(Code 1969, § 15-125) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1047. 
Sec. 86-396. - Construction, maintenance and loading must prevent escape of contents; exemptions. 
    No vehicle shall be operated or moved on any highway unless it is so constructed, maintained, and loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping. No provision of this section, however, shall apply to any: 
(1)  Motor vehicle which is used exclusively for agricultural purposes and which is not operated on any public highway for any purpose other than moving it across a highway or along a highway from one part of the owner's land to another, irrespective of whether the tracts adjoin; 
(2)  Agricultural vehicle, tractor, or other vehicle exempted from registration and licensing requirements pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-662 et seq.; or 
(3)  Motor vehicle transporting poultry or livestock. 
(Code 1969, § 15-126) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1156. 
Sec. 86-397. - Fastening load of logs, barrels, etc. 
(a)  No vehicle which is designed or used for the purpose of hauling logs, poles, lumber, barrels, hogsheads, or other materials or containers which by their nature may shift or roll shall be operated or moved on any highway unless its load is securely fastened by adequate log chains, metal cables, nylon webbing, steel straps or other restraining devices so as to prevent the load from shifting or falling from the vehicle. Tobacco hogsheads may, however, be secured by manila or hemp rope, at least five-eighths inch in diameter, of sufficient strength securely to fasten the hogshead against shifting, falling or rolling. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall release the owner or operator of any vehicle as described in subsection (a) from liability for failure to use reasonable care to prevent its load from shifting or falling. 
(Code 1969, § 15-127) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1155. 
Sec. 86-398. - Flag or light at end of load. 
    Whenever the load on any vehicle extends more than four feet beyond the rear of the bed or body thereof, there shall be displayed at the end of the load, in such a position as to be clearly visible at all times from the rear of the load, a red flag, not less than 12 inches, both in length and width. Between sunset and sunrise, however, there shall be displayed at the end of the load a red light plainly visible in clear weather at least 500 feet to the sides and rear of the vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 15-128) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1121. 
Secs. 86-399-86-415. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - LICENSE FEE FOR MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAILERS, AND SEMITRAILERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 3-25-2013 changed the title of Art. IX from "License Tax for Motor Vehicles and Carriers" to read as set out herein. 
Cross reference- Payment for motor vehicle decals, § 82-5. 

Sec. 86-416. - Ambulances, hearses, etc. 
    On every ambulance, hearse or other like conveyance used in connection with the conducting of funeral services, the license fee shall be $25.00 per year for each vehicle, which shall be in addition to the automobile license fee as prescribed and required by section 86-417. 
(Code 1969, § 15-129; Ord. of 6-10-02(2); Ord. of 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 86-417. - Automobiles. 
    On every passenger automobile, the license fee shall be $20.00. 
(Code 1969, § 15-130; Ord. of 6-10-02(2); Ord. of 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 86-418. - Automobiles for hire. 
    On every public vehicle, taxicab or for-hire car, there shall be a license fee of $25.00 on each vehicle, in addition to the automobile license fee as prescribed and as required by section 86-417. 
(Code 1969, § 15-131; Ord. of 6-10-02(2); Ord. of 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 86-419. - Baggage transportation and trucks for hire. 
    On every vehicle used in transporting baggage, merchandise or material of any kind or character on a for-hire basis, the license fee shall be $25.00 for each vehicle, in addition to the license fee as prescribed and as required by section 86-417. This license fee shall apply to all vehicles whether the owner thereof maintains a place of business in the city or not or whether the owner thereof makes a regular business of transporting baggage, material or merchandise or not, so long as such vehicle uses the streets of the city for the transportation of baggage, merchandise or other material of any kind or character. 
(Code 1969, § 15-132; Ord. of 6-10-02(2); Ord. of 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 86-420. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of 6-10-02(2), repealed § 86-240 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained to buses and common carriers. See the Code Disposition Table. 
Sec. 86-421. - Motorcycles. 
    On every motorcycle, there shall be a license fee of $16.00. 
(Code 1969, § 15-134; Ord. of 6-10-02(2); Ord. of 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 86-422. - Automobile trailers. 
(a)  On every one- or two-wheel trailer with a body length of not more than nine feet and width not greater than the width of the motor vehicle to which it is attached at any time of operation, which trailer is to be attached to the owner's own motor vehicle and used only for carrying property belonging to the owner of such trailer, not to exceed 1,000 pounds at any one time, the license fee shall be $3.00. 
(b)  On every one- or two-wheel trailer of a cradle flatbed or open pickup type, which has a body width not greater than the width of the motor vehicle to which it is attached at any time of operation, which is pulled or towed by a passenger car or station wagon or a pickup or panel truck, having an actual gross weight not exceeding 5,000 pounds at any one time, the license fee shall be $6.00. On all other trailers and semitrailers, the license fee shall be $12.00. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful, however, to operate any trailer so registered and licensed contrary to any restriction prescribed in this section. 
(Code 1969, § 15-135; Ord. of 6-10-02(2); Ord. of 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 86-423. - Trailers for hire. 
(a)  On every one- or two-wheel trailer for hire with a body length of not more than nine feet and a width not greater than the width of the motor vehicle to which it is attached at any time of operation, and used for carrying property not to exceed 1,000 pounds at any one time, there shall be a license fee of $5.00, in addition to the regular automobile trailer license fee required by section 86-422. This license fee shall apply to all vehicles whether the owner thereof maintains a place of business in the city or not or whether the owner thereof makes a regular business of transporting baggage, material or merchandise or not, so long as such vehicles use the streets of the city for such transportation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate any trailer so registered and licensed contrary to any restriction prescribed in this section. 
(Code 1969, § 15-136; Ord. of 6-10-02(2); Ord. of 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 86-424. - Trucks, tractors and tractor-trucks, etc. 
    On every truck, tractor and tractor-truck or other motor vehicle not licensed under any other provision of this chapter and not designed and used for the transportation of passengers, the license fee shall be determined by the combined gross weight of the vehicle when loaded to the maximum capacity for which it is registered and licensed, according to the schedule of fees set forth in this section; provided that the fee for a pickup or panel truck shall be $20.00 if the gross weight is 6,500 pounds or less, and in no case shall the fee be less than $24.00 for a motor vehicle with a gross weight of 6,501 pounds through 8,000 pounds. 
Gross Weight Groups 
(pounds) Fee 8,000 and less $24.00 8,001 to 11,500 32.00 11,501 to 15,500 40.00 15,501 to 19,500 56.00 19,501 to 29,500 80.00 29,501 to 39,500 100.00 Over 39,500 120.00  
(Code 1969, § 15-137; Ord. of 6-10-02(2); Ord. of 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 86-425. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Sections 86-417, 86-421, 86-422 and 86-424 shall not apply to any person not a resident of the city owning or operating a motor vehicle when the motor vehicle is used exclusively for pleasure or personal transportation. 
(b)  No person shall be required to obtain a license under this article on a vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer upon which the city is prohibited from imposing a vehicle license fee by Section 46.2-755 and Section 46.2-752(H) of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(c)  Local licenses shall be issued free of charge for the following: 
(1)  Vehicles owned by volunteer rescue squads; 
(2)  One vehicle owned by an active member or a life member of a voluntary rescue squad; 
(3)  One vehicle owned by persons qualified to receive special license plates under Section 46.2-739 of the Code of Virginia, as amended; 
(4)  One vehicle owned by an active member of the armed forces of the United States of America; and 
(5)  An "antique motor vehicle" as defined and licensed in Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(Code 1969, § 15-138; Ord. of 6-10-02(2); Ord. of 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 86-426. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of 3-25-2013 repealed § 86-426, which pertained to license to be displayed and derived from Code 1969, § 15-139. 
Sec. 86-427. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of 3-25-2013 repealed § 86-427, which pertained to prorating motor vehicle licenses and derived from Code 1969, § 15-140. 
Sec. 86-428. - Levy and reissuance of vehicle license. 
    There is hereby levied an annual license fee, as provided in this article, on every motor vehicle, trailer, and semitrailer required to be licensed hereunder. The annual vehicle license fee imposed by this article shall be in addition to any other city license tax or fees including personal property tax. A license fee shall be waived for a license for a vehicle which replaces a vehicle currently licensed in the city which has been sold or disposed of within 30 days of the application for such new license upon presentation of adequate written proof of sale or disposal of the currently licensed vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 15-141; Ord. of 2-10-92; Ord. of 6-10-02(2); Ord. of 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 86-429. - When tax payable. 
    When any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer, upon which an annual license fee is imposed pursuant to this article, has its situs in the city on January 1 of any year, the license fee imposed by this article shall be paid on or before May 31 of the same year. When any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer, upon which an annual license fee is imposed, acquires its situs in the city after January 1 of any year, the license fee imposed hereunder shall be paid within 30 days of acquisition of situs or by May 31 of the same year, whichever shall occur later. For purposes of this article, "situs" shall be determined pursuant to Section 46.2-752 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of the article, any vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer acquiring its situs in the city after January 15 of any year, shall be subject to a vehicle license fee in a sum equal to the pro-rated monthly amount of that license fee ordinarily required on an annual basis. 
(Code 1969, § 15-142; Ord. of 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 86-430. - Payment of personal property tax as a prerequisite to issuance of a motor vehicle license. 
    No certificate of registration and license to operate a motor vehicle shall be issued for any motor vehicle unless and until the applicant for such certificate of registration and license shall have first produced satisfactory evidence that all personal property taxes upon the vehicle to be licensed which have been properly assessed or are assessable against the applicant by the city have been paid. 
(Code 1969, § 15-143; Ord. of 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 86-431. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of having committed a class 4 misdemeanor. Each day any such person violates or fails to conform to such provision or requirement shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection and remittance of such tax as provided in this article. Unless otherwise ordered by the judge in whose court this violation is tried, or in which the same is cognizable, all fines and penalties arising under this section shall be paid unto the city treasurer. 
(Code 1969, § 15-144; Ord. of 3-25-2013) 
Sec. 86-432. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of 3-25-2013 repealed § 86-432, which pertained to regional enforcement of motor vehicle license requirements and derived from Ord. of 4-25-94; Ord. of 3-10-97(4). 
Secs. 86-433-86-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RAILROADS 

Sec. 86-451. - Blowing whistles or horns. 
    All blowing of whistles or horns attached or fixed to railroad engines and trains standing or passing within the city shall be unlawful, except the sounding of whistles or horns as may be reasonably necessary to signal trains and trainmen. 
(Code 1969, § 23-1) 
Cross reference- Noise prohibited generally, § 30-1. 
State Law reference- Bell and whistle or horn, when sounded, Code of Virginia, § 56-414 et seq. 
Sec. 86-452. - Bell to be rung upon approach of locomotive to street crossing. 
(a)  Upon the approach of any locomotive to any street crossing, it shall be the duty of every railway company, receiver or trustee operating such locomotive, as well as any person then having control, conduct and management of any such locomotive, to cause the engine bell to be rung. This section shall apply whether gates have been erected or not. 
(b)  Every officer or employee of any railway company whose duty it shall be to carry out the provisions of subsection (a) of this section and shall fail to do so shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $10.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1969, § 23-2) 
Cross reference- Noise prohibited generally, § 30-1. 
State Law reference- Bell and whistle or horn, when sounded, Code of Virginia, § 56-414 et seq. 
Sec. 86-453. - Railroad cars obstructing street or road; standing vehicle on railroad track. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, or any receiver or trustee operating a railroad, to obstruct for a longer period than five minutes the free passage on any street or road by standing cars or trains across such street or road, except a passenger train while receiving or discharging passengers, but a passway shall be kept open to allow normal flow of traffic. It shall be unlawful to stand any wagon or other vehicle on the track of any railroad which will hinder or endanger a moving train. Provided, that when a train has been uncoupled so as to make a passway, the time necessarily required, not exceeding three minutes, to pump up the air after the train has been recoupled shall not be included in considering the time such cars or trains were standing across such street or road. Any such railroad company, receiver or trustee violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00; provided that the fine may be $100.00 for each minute beyond the permitted time but the total fine shall not exceed $500.00. 
(b)  This section shall not apply when the train is stopped due to breakdown, mechanical failure or emergency. 
(Code 1969, § 23-4) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-412.1. 
Sec. 86-454. - Flying switches and cars not attached to or ahead of engine. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, receiver or trustee operating a railroad, or any person then having control, conduct and management of any locomotive or railway car to make flying switches over or upon any street, or to move any railway car over or upon any street without having an engine attached thereto, or to move any railway car over or upon any street when such car is moving ahead of the engine or locomotive, unless some employee of the receiver, trustee or railroad company shall be stationed thereat to give warnings of the approach of such car or cars. 
(Code 1969, § 23-5) 
Secs. 86-455-86-470. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- License of junk dealers, § 22-79. 
State Law reference- Ordinances taxing and regulating automobile graveyards and junkyards, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-28; junkyards, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-348. 

Sec. 86-471. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automobile graveyard means any lot or place which is exposed to the weather and upon which more than five motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, and which it would not be economically practical to make operative, are placed, located or found. 
(Code 1969, § 5-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-348. 
Sec. 86-472. - Certificate of approval-Generally. 
    No automobile graveyard shall be established and operated unless a certificate of approval shall first have been procured from the city manager. Any person proposing to establish and operate an automobile graveyard shall first make application to the city manager for a hearing thereon, who shall within ten days mail to such applicant notice of the time and place of hearing. The applicant shall, at his own expense, prior to making application, publish notice of proposal to file application, together with his name, address and proposed location of the automobile graveyard, once a week for two successive weeks in some newspaper published or having general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1969, § 5-2) 
Sec. 86-473. - Issuance or refusal of certificate-Generally. 
    At the hearing provided for in section 86-472, the city manager shall determine whether or not a certificate of approval shall be issued. In considering the application in question, the city manager shall take into account the nature and development of the surrounding property, the proximity of churches, schools, hospitals, public buildings or other places of public gathering and the health, safety and general welfare of the public. The applicant shall be notified within ten days from time of completion of the hearing as to the granting or refusal of the certificate of approval. 
(Code 1969, § 5-3) 
Sec. 86-474. - Same-Appeal to circuit court. 
    Any person aggrieved by the action taken pursuant to section 86-473 may, within 30 days from the date of the notice of the refusal or issuance of the certificate of approval, appeal by petition to the circuit court of the city. Upon any such appeal, such court shall enter such order in relation to the action appealed from as it may deem proper under all circumstances obtaining. 
(Code 1969, § 5-4) 
Sec. 86-475. - License tax; transfer of license. 
    Upon the grant of a certificate of approval, as provided in section 86-472, the person receiving the certificate of approval shall pay a license tax to the city in the amount of $500.00, which license tax shall thenceforth be paid on a per annum basis. The license in question shall be nontransferable. 
(Code 1969, § 5-5) 
Cross reference- Licensing, § 22-36 et seq. 
Sec. 86-476. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 5-6) 
Chapter 90 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; plumbing, § 18-261 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; planning, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78. 
State Law reference- Construction of dams, etc., for water supply purposes, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2134 et seq.; general local powers pertaining to public utilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2109 et seq.; local sewage disposal, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2122 et seq.; local water supply systems, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2134 et seq.; health regulations relating to sewage disposal, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-163 et seq.; State Water Control Law, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.2 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 90-1-90-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY ELECTRIC SYSTEM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Power to provide electric energy (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-877) adopted, § 2.2. 
Cross reference- Electricity, § 18-166 et seq.; discontinuance of electrical service for failure to comply with electrical regulations, § 18-196; electricity in mobile home parks, § 54-47; signs, ch. 66; polls and wires, § 74-136 et seq. 

Sec. 90-26. - Supervision of electric department. 
    The electric department shall be under the supervision of the city manager, who shall exercise immediate control of the electric department, which shall be taken to include the entire city electrical system, including the street lighting system and all lands, buildings, fixtures, wires, meters, poles, apparatus and equipment belonging and appertaining thereto. 
(Code 1969, § 16-1) 
Sec. 90-27. - Connecting wires with city electrical system-Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any wires with the city electrical system, whether within or without the limits of the city, without first having obtained a permit from the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1969, § 16-2) 
Sec. 90-28. - Same-Supervision. 
    All connections as referred to in section 90-27 shall be made only under the supervision of the city manager or duly authorized agent or employee of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 16-3) 
Sec. 90-29. - Same-Connection fee. 
    No charge shall be made as a prerequisite to any service connection as referred to in section 90-27. 
(Code 1969, § 16-4) 
Sec. 90-30. - Permit for cutting on electricity. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cut on electric current, whether within or without the limits of the city, without first having obtained a permit from the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1969, § 16-5) 
Sec. 90-31. - Injuring, etc., poles, wires, lamps, transformers, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to break, mark, deface, remove, injure or destroy any pole, wire, lamp, transformer, meter, or other apparatus or equipment belonging to the city or used by it in connection with its electrical system. 
(Code 1969, § 16-6) 
Cross reference- Injuring property generally, § 58-19. 
Sec. 90-32. - Tampering with meter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any city electric meter so as to injure such meter or to prevent or interrupt the proper and accurate registration by it of the quantity of electricity used by the consumer or supplied by the city. 
(Code 1969, § 16-7) 
Cross reference- Injuring property generally, § 58-19. 
Sec. 90-33. - Diversion, etc., of electric current. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to divert electric current from any wire connected with the electric system of the city. No person shall otherwise unlawfully use or cause to be used without the consent of the city any electricity manufactured or distributed by the city. 
(Code 1969, § 16-8) 
Sec. 90-34. - Doing of act tending to obstruct or impair intended use of part of electric system. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of any building, machinery, apparatus, wires, poles, meters, fixtures, attachments or appurtenances of the electric system or any part thereof without permission of the city manager, except as otherwise provided for by the provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 16-9) 
Sec. 90-35. - Duty of city manager as to placing, etc., of wires, etc. 
    The city manager, or any duly authorized representative, shall regulate and determine the placing of electric wires or other appliances for electric light, heat or power in the city, and shall cause all such wires or appliances to be placed, constructed and guarded so as not to cause fires or accidents endangering life or property. 
(Code 1969, § 16-10) 
Secs. 90-36-90-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Powers as to municipal water supplies and facilities (Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-854, 15.2-875) adopted, § 2.2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-51. - Supervision of water and sewer department; what included in water and sewer department. 
    The city water and sewer department shall be under the supervision of the city manager, who shall exercise immediate control over the water and sewer department, which shall be taken to include: 
(1)  The entire water supply system consisting of all plants, systems, facilities or properties used or useful or having the present capacity for future use in connection with the supply or distribution of water, and any integral part thereof, including water supply systems, water distribution systems, reservoirs, wells, intakes, mains, laterals, pumping stations, standpipes, filtration plants, purification plants, hydrants, meters, valves and equipment, appurtenances, and all properties, rights, easements and franchises relating thereto and deemed necessary or convenient by the council for the operation thereof. 
(2)  The entire sewage disposal system consisting of all sewers, pipelines, conduits, pumping stations, force-mains, treatment plants and works, and all other plants or structures necessary or suitable for the collection and disposal of sewage and waterborne wastes, and all properties, rights, easements and franchises relating thereto and deemed necessary or convenient by the council for the operation thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 16-11) 
Sec. 90-52. - Right of entry of water and sewer director to premises receiving city water. 
    Every person occupying a lot or tenement into which water is conveyed from the city water system shall permit the water and sewer director to enter such lot or tenement, at reasonable hours, to inspect the work therein, or to see if the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city pertaining to the water or sewer system are being, or have been, violated. 
(Code 1969, § 16-12) 
Secs. 90-53-90-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATERWORKS SYSTEM AND WATER SUPPLY[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Powers as to municipal water supplies and facilities (Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-854, 15.2-875) adopted, § 2.2. 
Cross reference- Water supply connection in mobile home parks, § 54-40. 
State Law reference- Powers of city council as to waterworks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-292; water supply systems generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-332.1 et seq.; State Water Control Law, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.2 et seq. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 90-71. - Permit prerequisite to alteration, etc., of fixtures used in connection with waterworks system. 
    No person shall make any addition to, or alteration of, fixtures used in connection with the waterworks system of the city without having first received a written permit from the city manager so to do. 
(Code 1969, § 16-13) 
Sec. 90-72. - Connections to city mains to be made under supervision of city manager or by authorized agent or employee of city. 
    All connections to the city water mains for supplying water for any purpose whatsoever shall be made only under the supervision of the city manager or a duly authorized agent or employee of the city. No person other than one duly authorized by the city manager shall introduce into any lot or tenement water from the city pipes, introduce any ferrule or other fixture into any of such pipes, construct or lay down or have constructed or laid down any pipes or other works for the purpose of introducing water into a lot or tenement, or break up any street, lane, alley or road for the purpose of constructing or laying down any such pipes or works. 
(Code 1969, § 16-14) 
Sec. 90-73. - Connection to city water mains-Approval. 
    All service connections to the city water mains shall be made only upon order of the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 16-15) 
Sec. 90-74. - Same-Charges. 
(a)  Generally. Before a service connection to a city water main is made for a consumer of water, the person desiring such connection shall pay to the city treasurer the following charges: 
(1)  Availability fees: 
?" or 3/4" water meter size $2,000.00 1" water meter size $4,000.00 11/2" water meter size $7,000.00 2" water meter size $13,000.00 3" water meter size $25,000.00 4" water meter size $40,000.00 6" water meter size $80,000.00 8" water meter size $155,000.00  
(2)  Connection fees: 
?" or 3/4" water meter size $1,500.00 1" water meter size $1,800.00 11/2" water meter size $2,700.00 2" water meter size $3,300.00 Larger than 2" water meter size Actual cost plus 29%  
(b)  Subdivisions. In a duly approved subdivision where the subdivider or property owner has installed water service laterals, as required under the provisions of chapter 78 of this Code as a part of the physical improvements within the subdivision, the amounts specified in subsection (a) of this section to be made shall be reduced by 40 percent. 
Connection fee for water service laterals installed by subdivider: 
?" or 3/4" water meter size $900.00 1" water meter size $1,080.00 11/2" water meter size $1,620.00 2" water meter size $1,980.00 Larger than 2" water meter size Actual cost plus 29%, whichever is greater  
(Code 1969, § 16-16; Ord. of 6-8-92(4); Ord. of 6-14-93(1); Ord. of 6-13-94(1); Ord. of 6-10-96(1); Ord. of 6-14-99(2); Ord. of 6-9-03(1); Ord. of 6-13-05(1); Ord. of 6-28-2010(1); Ord. of 11-14-2016(2)) 
Sec. 90-75. - Turning on water in house, etc. 
    Water shall not be turned on in any house or private water service except by order of the city manager or his duly authorized representative; provided, however, that this shall not be construed to prohibit a registered plumber from turning water into such pipes to test such pipes or for purposes of testing the plumbing connected thereto. 
(Code 1969, § 16-17) 
Sec. 90-76. - Cross connections. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to eliminate cross- connections and protect the public health. This article provides for establishment and enforcement of a program of cross-connection control and backflow prevention program (the program) in accordance with the Commonwealth of Virginia, State Board of Health, Waterworks Regulations 1991, as amended. This article is directed at total cross-connection control through service line protection (containment) and point of use protection or area confinement protection (isolation). 
(2)  Authority. The authority for this chapter is found in Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Health "Waterworks Regulations" Part II; Article 3, "Cross-Connection Control and Backflow Prevention in Waterworks;" Uniform Statewide Building Code, Volume I, and Uniform Statewide Building Code, Volume II, Note 1. 
(3)  Administration. 
(a)  The building official or his or her designated deputy shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section under the direction of the city manager. 
(b)  The building official shall cause inspections to be made of properties served by the waterworks where cross-connection with the waterworks is deemed possible. The method of determining potential cross-connection with the waterworks and the administrative procedures shall be established by the city manager in a cross-connection control and backflow prevention program approved by the Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Health, Division of Water Supply Engineering; and the city manager is authorized to prepare, implement, and amend the program. 
(c)  The responsibility to carry out the program lies with the building official. The program shall be carried out in accordance with the Uniform Statewide Building Code and the Commonwealth of Virginia, State Board of Health, "Waterworks Regulations" and shall be a continuing program. 
(4)  Enforcement. 
(a)  The building official shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time premises served by a connection to the waterworks for the purpose of inspecting, observing, sampling, and testing the water supply system of systems for a cross-connection. Upon request, the water supply system owner or occupants of property served shall furnish to the building official pertinent information regarding the water supply system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of a cross-connection. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Any water supply system owner/consumer found to be in violation of any provision of this ordinance shall be served a written notice of violation, to be sent by certified mail, to the water supply system owner's/consumer's last known address. This notice shall describe the nature of the violation, corrective action that is required and shall provide a feasible time limit for corrective action, not to exceed 20 days, from the sending date of the notice of violation. The owner/consumer shall bring the water supply system into compliance with this section, within the designated time limit or have the water service terminated. 
(c)  Penalties. Any owner of properties served by a connection to the waterworks, or any water supply system owner, found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article, or any written order of the building official, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 for each violation. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of this article shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purposes of this article. 
(5)  Water purveyor. The water purveyor has primary responsibility to prevent water from unapproved sources, or any other substance, entering the public water supply system. The water purveyor is prohibited by these regulations or rules from installing or maintaining a water service connection to consumer's water system within its jurisdiction where a health, system, plumbing or pollutional hazard exists, or will probably exist, unless the public potable water supply is protected against backflow by an approved backflow prevention assembly(s) installed at the service connection(s) (i.e., point of delivery). 
    The water purveyor's responsibility begins at the source and includes all of the public water distribution system, including the service connection, and ends at the point of delivery to the consumer's water system(s). In addition, the water purveyor shall exercise reasonable vigilance to insure that the consumer has taken the proper steps to protect the public potable water system. To insure that the proper precautions are taken the water purveyor is required to determine the degree of hazard to the public potable water system. When it is determined that a backflow prevention assembly is required for the protection of the public system the water purveyor shall require the consumer, at the consumer's expense, to install an approved backflow prevention assembly at each service connection, to test immediately upon installation and annually, or more often, to properly repair and maintain such assembly or assemblies and to keep adequate records of each test and subsequent maintenance and repair, including materials or replacement parts. 
(6)  Building official. The building official has the responsibility to not only review building plans and inspect plumbing as it is installed; but, he has the explicit responsibility of preventing cross-connections from being designed and built into the structures within the city. Where the review of building plans suggests or detects the potential for cross-connections being made as an integral part of the plumbing system the building official has the responsibility for requiring that such cross-connection practices be either eliminated or provided with approved backflow prevention equipment. 
    The building official's responsibility begins at the point of service (i.e., the downstream side of the water meter or service connection) and carries throughout the entire length of the consumer's water system. The building official should inquire about the intended use of water at any point where it is suspect that a cross-connection might be made or where one is actually called for by the plans. When such is discovered, a suitable approved backflow prevention assembly shall be required and be properly installed. 
(7)  Consumer. The consumer has the responsibility of preventing pollutants and contaminants from entering his/her potable water system(s) or the public potable water system. The consumer's responsibility starts at the point of delivery from the public potable water system and includes all of his/her water systems. The consumer, at his/her own expense, shall install, operate, test and maintain approved backflow prevention assemblies as directed by the building official. The consumer shall maintain accurate records of tests and repairs made to backflow prevention assemblies and provide the administrative authority having jurisdiction with copies of such records. The records shall be on forms approved by the building official and shall include the list of materials or replacement parts used. Following any repair, overhaul, repiping or relocation of an assembly the consumer shall have it tested to insure that it is in good operating condition and will prevent backflow. Tests, maintenance and repairs of backflow prevention assemblies shall be made by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester. 
    When requested by the water purveyor or health department, the consumer shall appoint a water supervisor who shall be responsible for conformance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to cross-connection control; for the installation, operation and use of all water piping systems, backflow prevention assemblies and water-using equipment on the premises; and for the avoidance of unprotected cross-connections. The water supervisor should be the consumer or any full-time employee appointed by the consumer who has a thorough knowledge of the installation, operation and maintenance of all water systems and backflow prevention assemblies on the consumer's premises. In the event of pollution or contamination of the public or the consumer's potable water system due to backflow on or from the consumer's premises, the owner or water supervisor shall promptly take steps to confine further spread of the pollution or contamination within the system and should notify the local health officer and the water purveyor of the condition. The person responsible for the consumer's water system(s) (consumer or water supervisor) shall take appropriate measures to free the water system(s) of any pollutants or contaminants. 
(8)  Certified backflow prevention assembly tester. When directed to test, repair, overhaul or maintain backflow prevention assemblies, a certified backflow prevention assembly tester will have the following responsibilities: 
    The tester will be responsible for performing accurate field tests and for repairing or overhauling backflow prevention assemblies and making reports of such repair to the consumer and responsible authorities on forms approved by the administrative authority having jurisdiction. The tester shall include the list of materials or replacement parts used. The tester shall be equipped with and be capable of using all the necessary tools, gages, and other equipment necessary to properly test, repair and maintain backflow prevention assemblies. It will be the tester's further responsibly not to change the design, material or operational characteristics of an assembly during repair or maintenance without prior approval of the approving authority. A certified tester shall perform the work and be responsible for the accuracy of all tests and reports. 
(9)  Responsibilities. 
(a)  General. Effective cross-connection control requires the cooperation of the water purveyor, the building official, the consumer, the Virginia Department of Health, and backflow prevention device tester. 
(b)  Water purveyor. 
1.  The purveyor shall establish or cause to be established and operate a cross-connection control and backflow prevention program consistent with the extent of the system and the type of consumer served. This program shall include at least one designated individual who shall be responsible for the inspection of the waterworks for cross- connection and backflow prevention control. This program shall be carried out in accordance with the Uniform Statewide Building Code and shall be a continuing program. 
2.  The purveyor has full responsibility for water quality for the construction, maintenance, and operation of the waterworks beginning at the water source and ending at the service connection. The purveyor's responsibly ends at the point of delivery to a consecutive waterworks. 
3.  The purveyor shall have thorough inspections and operational tests made at least annually of backflow prevention devices which are required and installed at the service connection. The purveyor has the option to require a containment device. 
4.  In the event of backflow of pollution or contamination into the waterworks, the purveyor shall promptly take or cause corrective action to confine and eliminate the pollution or contamination. The purveyor shall immediately notify the VDH-Office of Water Programs when backflow occurs. 
5.  The purveyor shall take positive action to ensure that the waterworks is adequately protected at all times. If a cross- connection exists or backflow occurs into a consumer's water system or if the pressure in the waterworks is lowered below ten psi gauge, the purveyor may discontinue the water service to the consumer and the water service shall not be restored until the deficiencies have been corrected or eliminated to the satisfaction of the purveyor. 
(10)  Determination or degree of hazard. Premises with one or more of the following conditions shall be rated at the corresponding degree of hazard: 
(a)  High hazard. 
1.  The contaminant would be toxic, poisonous, noxious or unhealthy. 
2.  A health hazard would exist. 
3.  A high probability exists of a backflow occurrence either by back pressure or by back siphonage. 
4.  The contaminant would disrupt the service of piped water for drinking or domestic use. 
5.  Examples: Sewage, used water, nonpotable water, auxiliary water systems, toxic or hazardous chemicals, etc. 
(b)  Moderate. 
1.  The contaminant would only degrade the hazard quality of the water aesthetically or impair the usefulness of the water. 
2.  A health hazard would not exist. 
(c)  Low hazard. 
1.  The contaminant would only degrade the quality of the water aesthetically. 
2.  A health hazard would not exist. 
3.  A low probability exists of the occurrence of backflow primarily by back siphonage. 
4.  The contaminant would not disrupt service of piped water. 
5.  Examples: Food stuff, nontoxic chemicals, nonhazardous chemicals, etc. 
(11)  Containment policy. 
(a)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed at each service connection to a consumer's water system where, in the judgment of the water purveyor or the VDH-Office of Water Programs, a health, pollution, or system hazard to the waterworks exists. 
(b)  When, as a matter of practicality, the backflow prevention device cannot be installed at the service connection, the device may be located downstream of the service connection but prior to any unprotected takeoffs. 
(c)  A backflow prevention device shall be installed at each service connection to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following conditions exist: 
1.  Premises on which any substance is handled in such a manner as to create an actual or potential hazard to a waterworks (this shall include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from a waterworks which are no longer under the control of the water purveyor); 
2.  Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of the water purveyor or the VDH-Office of Water Programs, may not be easily correctable or have intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impracticable to determine whether or not cross-connections exist; 
3.  Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-connection survey; 
4.  Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished; 
5.  Premises having fire protection systems utilizing combinations of sprinklers, fire loops, storage tanks, pumps antifreeze protection, or auxiliary water sources including siamese connections (fire loops and sprinkler systems with openings not subject to flooding, and containing no antifreeze or other chemicals, no separate fire protection storage, or auxiliary sources, will not normally require backflow prevention); and 
6.  Other premises specified by the VHD-Office of Water Programs or the purveyor when cause can be shown that a potential cross-connection hazard not enumerated above exists. 
(d)  Premises having booster pumps connected to the waterworks shall be equipped with a low-pressure regulating or cutoff device to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the waterworks drops to a minimum of ten psi gauge. 
(e)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed at each service connection to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities: 
1.  Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, veterinary establishments, nursing homes, and medical buildings; 
2.  Laboratories; 
3.  Piers, docks, and waterfront facilities; 
4.  Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, or storm water pumping stations; 
5.  Food and beverage processing plants; 
6.  Chemical plants, dyeing plants and pharmaceutical plants; 
7.  Metal plating industries; 
8.  Petroleum or natural gas processing or storage plants; 
9.  Radioactive materials processing plants or nuclear reactors; 
10.  Car washes and laundries; 
11.  Lawn sprinkler systems, and irrigation systems; 
12.  Fire service systems; 
13.  Slaughter houses and poultry processing plants; 
14.  Farms where the water is used for other than household purposes; 
15.  Commercial greenhouses and nurseries; 
16.  Health clubs with swimming pools, therapeutic baths, hot tubs, or saunas; 
17.  Paper and paper products plants and printing plants; 
18.  Pesticide or exterminating companies and their vehicles with storage or mixing tanks; 
19.  Schools or colleges with laboratory facilities; 
20.  Highrise buildings (four or more stories); 
21.  Multiuse commercial, office, or warehouse facilities; and 
22.  Others specified by the purveyor or the division when reasonable cause can be shown for a potential backflow or cross-connection hazard. 
(12)  Type of protection required. The type of protection required shall depend on the degree of hazard, which exists or may exist and on the method of potential backflow. Backflow occurs either by back pressure or by back siphonage. 
    The degree of hazard, either high, moderate, or low, is based on the nature of the contaminant; the potential of the health hazard; the probability of the backflow occurrence; and the effect on waterworks structures, equipment, and appurtenances used in the storage, collection, purification, treatment, and distribution of pure water. 
(a)  Air gaps give the highest degree of protection and shall be used whenever practical to do so in high hazard situations subject to back pressure. 
(b)  An air gap separation and a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device will protect against back pressure when operating properly. Vacuum breakers will not protect against back pressure, but will protect against back-siphonage when operating properly. 
(c)  Barometric loops are not acceptable. 
(d)  An interchangeable connection or change over device has limitations which prevent its use where back pressure is present or may occur, the auxiliary supply is not an approved source, or the waterworks line pressure is less than 20 psi. Since this type connection is one of the easiest to bypass, the use of this type device will be approved only as a temporary or continuously supervised arrangement. In most instances, an approved device or method must be included and approved by the purveyor and commissioner. 
(e)  Backflow prevention devices. 
1.  Any backflow prevention device shall be of the approved type and shall comply with the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
2.  Any backflow prevention device shall be installed in a manner approved by the water purveyor and in accordance with the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
3.  Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the purveyor and the commissioner prior to the effective date of this chapter shall, except for inspection, testing, and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the requirements of 12 VAC 5-590-600 A and B if the water purveyor and the commissioner are assured that the devices will protect the waterworks. 
(13)  Maintenance and inspection requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the water supply system owner/consumer to maintain all backflow prevention assemblies/devices or separation/air gaps, installed, in good working order and to make no piping or other arrangements for the purpose of bypassing or defeating the backflow prevention assemblies/devices or separations/air gaps. 
(b)  Operational testing and inspection schedules shall be established, by the building official, as outlined in the cross-connection control program, for all backflow prevention assemblies/devices and separation/air gaps, that are being installed or which have previously been installed. The interval between testing and inspection of each assembly/device and the assembly/device manufacturer's recommendations. The interval for testing a backflow prevention assembly/device and/or the inspection of a separation/air gap, shall not exceed one year. 
(c)  Backflow prevention assembly/device overhaul procedures and replacement parts shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(d)  Procedures for the testing of a backflow prevention assembly/device shall be in accordance with the American Society of Sanitary Engineers Standards for testing, with the optional test on check valve number two being included and/or the University of Southern California's, Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, Backflow Prevention Assembly Field Test Procedures along with a differential pressure test on check valve number two being included and with all of the testing being accomplished in combination with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(14)  Requirements for the installation of backflow preventers. Installation heights of all atmospheric vacuum breakers shall be minimum of six inches above highest outlet of the system, downstream of the vacuum breaker or the flood level rim of the receptor served. For testable backflow preventers there shall be a minimum height of 12 inches above the surrounding area or the highest outlet of the system, downstream of the backflow preventer. Testable backflow preventers shall not be installed, more than 48 inches above the surrounding area for accessibility for testing and maintenance. Backflow preventers shall not be installed in any area subjected to flooding such as a pit or basement. 
(15)  Definitions. 
    Air gap. The unobstructed vertical distance, through the free atmosphere, between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply and the flood level rim of an open receiving receptacle. 
    Assembly/device. An approved backflow preventer or a means intended to prevent backflow into the water supply system and/or the waterworks. 
    Atmospheric vacuum breaker assembly. An approved assembly used to protect against high or low health hazards under backsiphonage conditions only. The assembly shall be composed of one independently operating check valve, air inlet port(s) and one independently operating air-inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly shall be equipped with a tightly closing shutoff valve located on the inlet end of the assembly. The assembly shall not have any valves downstream or be subjected to continuous operating pressure for more than 12 hours in duration. 
    Backflow. The reversal of the flow of potable water, or water mixed with contaminates and/or pollutants in the form of liquids, solids or gases, into the waterworks or water supply system from any unacceptable source or sources. 
    Backflow preventer. Assembly, device or other means to prevent backflow. 
    Backpressure. A form of backflow due to the increase of pressure, created by any means, in the water supply system or the waterworks, which is in excess of the pressure of the waterworks and causes a reversal of the normal direction of flow. 
    Backsiphonage. A form of backflow due to the reduction of pressure, in any part of the water supply system or the waterworks, which falls below atmospheric pressure and causes a potential backflow condition. 
    Commissioner. The state health commission. 
    Consecutive waterworks. A waterworks which has no water production or source facility of its own and which obtains all of its water from another permitted waterworks. 
    Consumer. The building owner/occupant, that has a water supply system, receiving potable water from a waterworks. 
    Containment. The prevention of backflow into the waterworks from a consumer's water supply system by a backflow prevention assembly or by separation/air gap at the service connection. 
    Contamination. An impairment that degrades the quality of the water supply and creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids or wastes. 
    Cross-connection. 
(a)  Any unprotected physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other which contains a liquid of any unknown or of a questionable source, whereby a possibility exist for flow between the two systems. 
(b)  Any potable water supply outlet that is submerged, or can be submerged, in a system that is polluted or contaminated. 
    Degree of hazard. Either a contaminate which is a high hazard or a pollutant which is a low hazard based on the nature of the impairment to the quality of potable water, the degree of hazard to the public health and the potential effect on the water supply system and/or the waterworks distribution system. 
    Distribution systems. 
(a)  Waterworks. Includes all supply line piping to the service connection. 
(b)  Building. Includes all piping from the water service to the points of utilization. 
    Division. The Commonwealth of Virginia, Virginia Department of Health, Office of the Water Programs, Division of Water Supply Engineering. 
    Double check backflow prevention assembly. An approved assembly used to protect against low health hazards under backsiphonage or backpressure, composed of two independently operating, spring-loaded check valves, tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located test cocks. 
    Health hazard. Any condition in a water supply system or the waterworks and its operation that creates, or may create, a danger to the health and well being of the public. 
    Isolation. The prevention of backflow into the waterworks from a consumer's water supply system by the installation of the backflow prevention assembly/device or by a separation/air gap at the sources of potential contamination/pollution in the consumer's water supply system. This is also called point-of-use isolation. Isolation of a zone within a consumer's water supply system confines the potential source of backflow to that zone. 
    Plumbing fixture. A receptacle or device which is connected to the water distribution system of a premises and demands a supply of water therefrom, that discharges waste water, liquid-borne waste materials or sewage either directly or indirectly into the drainage system of the premise or requires both a water supply connection and discharge to the drainage system to that zone. 
    Pollution. An impairment that degrades the quality of potable water to a degree that it does not create a hazard to the public health but which does adversely affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable water for drinking or use. 
    Potable water. Water free from impurities being present, in the amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects, conforming in bacteriological and chemical quality to the requirements of the public health service drinking water standards or the regulations of the public health authority having jurisdiction. 
    Premise. Includes one or all of the following, but is not limited to, a piece of real estate, be it a house, structure, building or the land on which one is or is not located. 
    Pressure vacuum breaker assembly. An approved assembly used to protect against high or low health hazards under backsiphonage conditions only. The assembly shall be composed or one independently operating check valve spring loaded closed, one independently operating air-inlet valve springloaded open to atmosphere and located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly shall be equipped with tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and properly located test cocks. 
    Process fluids. Any kind of fluid or solution which contains a liquid of an unknown or questionable source and which would constitute a health, or a system hazard if introduced into the water supply system and/or the waterworks. This includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Polluted or contaminated water; 
(2)  Process water; 
(3)  Used water, originating from the waterworks which may have been deteriorated in sanitary quality; 
(4)  Cooling waters; 
(5)  Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or irrigation systems; 
(6)  Chemicals in solution or suspension; 
(7)  Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid or gaseous fluids used in industrial and other processes, or for fire fighting purposes. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer assembly. An approved assembly used to protect against high or low health hazards under backsiphonage or backpressure conditions. The assembly shall be composed of two, independently operating check valves, spring-loaded to a normally closed position, separated by an independent, hydraulically operated relief valve, spring loaded to a normally open position. During normal flow and at the conclusion of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. The assembly shall be equipped with two tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and properly located test cocks. 
    Separation/air gap. A means of preventing backflow by either an air gap or physical disconnection from the water supply system and/or the waterworks by the removal or absence of pipes, fittings, or fixtures that connect the water supply system and/or the waterworks directly or indirectly to a nonpotable system or a system of questionable quality. 
    Service connection. The point of delivery, of potable water, to the customer's water supply system as follows: 
(1)  If a meter is installed, the service connection is the outlet side of the meter; 
(2)  If a meter is not installed, the service connection is the point of connection to the waterworks; 
(3)  When the water purveyor is also the building owner, the service connection is the entry point to the building. 
    Spill-proof vacuum breaker assembly. An approved assembly used to protect against high or low health hazards under backsiphonage conditions only. The assembly shall be composed of one independently operating check valve, spring loaded closed, one independently operating air-inlet valve, springloaded open to atmosphere and located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly shall be equipped with tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and properly located test cocks. 
    System hazard. A condition that causes, or may cause, damage to the physical properties of the waterworks or a consumer's water supply system. 
    Water purveyor. The owner/operator of a public/private potable waterworks, comprised of an individual, a group of individuals, a partnership, a firm, an association, an institution, a corporation or any government entity which engages in, or offers to engage in, supply approved potable water to any person, within the city, from or by means of any waterworks or other methods. 
    Water service. The pipe from the meter, when the meter is at the public right-of-way, from the water main or other point of connection to the potable water supply, to the water distribution system of the building and/or structure being served. 
    Water supply system. All or any part of the water piping, fittings, control valves and appurtenances in or adjacent to a building and/or structure or on the premises, that are on the outlet side of the service connection. 
    Waterworks. A system that provides to any person, within the City of Salem, from or by means of any piping system, potable water for drinking or use to (1) the public, (2) at least 15 connections, or (3) an average of 25 individuals for at least 60 days out of the year. The term "waterworks" shall include all piping mains, structures, equipment and appurtenances used in the storage, collection, purification, treatment and distribution of potable water, ending at the service connection to a building and/or structure where such water is delivered. 
(Code 1969, § 16-18; Ord. of 9-13-99) 
Sec. 90-77. - Injuring, etc., curb cock, pipe, meter, etc., used in connection with water system. 
    No person shall remove, injure or destroy any curb cock, pipe, fire hydrant, meter, machinery, building or other apparatus, fixture or equipment belonging to the city, and used by it in connection with its water system, or tamper with a water meter, or use or cause to be used any device whatsoever so as to injure any water meter, or as to prevent or interrupt the proper and accurate registering by it of the quantity of water used or supplied. 
(Code 1969, § 16-19) 
Cross reference- Injuring property generally, § 58-19. 
Sec. 90-78. - Use or manipulation of fireplugs. 
    No person shall use or manipulate any of the fireplugs or hydrants of the city; provided, however, that this provision shall not be construed to apply to members of the fire department or to any person acting pursuant to an order of the city manager, chief of the fire department or water and sewer director. 
(Code 1969, § 16-20) 
Sec. 90-79. - Pollution of water supply; unauthorized entry of enclosure at lake, etc. 
(a)  No person shall bathe in any reservoir or lake of the city water supply; deposit any offensive matter or any stick, mud or rubbish in such reservoir or lake; without lawful authority climb over or get through or under, or break the enclosure around any such reservoir or lake; place any building material, rubbish, or other matter at the stopcock or street main or service pipe; obstruct access to any fixture connected with the waterworks or system; remove or injure any pipe, fireplug, hydrant or cock; or open any of them so as to waste water. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly or wilfully cast any dead animal or any other noxious substance or matter, or what is commonly known as bait, into any stream, spring, lake, reservoir or other source of the city water supply; drown and leave, or cause to be drowned and left, any animal therein; or do any other similar act by reason of which the health of any person is affected or the city water supply rendered is impure or offensive. 
(Code 1969, § 16-21) 
State Law reference- Prevention of pollution of water, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2109. 
Secs. 90-80-90-95. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Water Conservation 

Sec. 90-96. - "Water" defined. 
    For the purposes of this subdivision, unless the context clearly requires a contrary meaning, the term "water" means potable water from the city's public water distribution system. 
(Code 1969, § 16-21.1) 
Sec. 90-97. - Determination by council; use restrictions. 
    Whenever the council, by resolution duly adopted, deems that the city's public water supply may be jeopardized due to minimal rainfall and thus adversely affect the safety and welfare of the citizens, it shall be unlawful for such period as specified in the aforesaid resolution for any person to use water for any of the following purposes: 
(1)  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers or any other type of mobile equipment except in vehicle wash facilities operating with a water recycling system approved by the city with a prominently displayed sign in public view so stating. 
(2)  The washing of streets, driveways, parking lots, service station aprons, office buildings, exteriors of homes or apartments or other outdoor surfaces. 
(3)  Watering of outside shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants or any other vegetation, except from a watering can or other container not exceeding three-gallon capacity. This limitation shall not apply to greenhouse or nursery stocks which may be watered in the minimum amount required to preserve plant life before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. 
(4)  The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making a similar use of water. 
(5)  The filling of swimming or wading pools requiring more than five gallons of water, or the refilling of swimming or wading pools which were drained after the effective date of the order, except that pools may be filled to a level two feet below normal, or water may be added to bring the level to two feet below normal, or as necessary to protect the structure from hydrostatic damage, as to pools constructed or contracted for on or before July 1, 1981. 
(6)  The service of drinking water in restaurants except upon request. 
(7)  The use of water from fire hydrants for any purpose other than fire suppression unless otherwise specifically provided by the city manager. 
(8)  The operation of any water-cooled comfort air conditioning which does not have water-conserving equipment in operation. 
(Code 1969, § 16-21.2) 
Sec. 90-98. - Leakage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of any residential unit or units or any owner of any commercial or industrial establishment which is found to be an excessive user of water due to leakage from water lines or plumbing fixtures on the premises to fail to take immediate action to repair and stop such leakage after so ordered by the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 16-21.3) 
Sec. 90-99. - Compliance authority. 
    The city manager shall be authorized to issue orders to effect compliance with this subdivision. 
(Code 1969, § 16-21.4) 
Sec. 90-100. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Any person subject to an order from the city manager issued pursuant to section 90-99 may apply to the city council for an exemption. Such application shall be in writing and filed with the clerk of council. 
(b)  The city council may, upon written application, permit an exemption or less than full compliance with any order of the city manager issued pursuant to section 90-99 when, in its judgment, full compliance or compliance to any extent would create an unjust hardship. 
(Code 1969, § 16-21.5) 
Sec. 90-101. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by an order of the city manager issued pursuant to section 90-99 shall have the right of appeal to the city council. 
(b)  Notice of the appeal shall be in writing and filed in the office of the clerk of council within five days after the date of the order of the city manager. 
(c)  The city council shall grant the appellant, at his option, the opportunity for a public hearing on the appeal. The request for a public hearing shall be included in the written notice of appeal. The hearing, when requested, shall be held within ten days of the request. 
(d)  A decision shall be rendered by the city council within ten days after the hearing. If no hearing is requested, a decision shall be rendered within ten days after receipt of the notice of appeal. 
(e)  Every decision of the city council under this subdivision shall be final, subject to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Code 1969, § 16-21.6) 
Sec. 90-102. - Temporary waivers. 
    The city manager shall be authorized to issue temporary waivers or exemptions from the provisions of this subdivision for such periods of time as may be necessary for the city council to formally consider such or for the council to take appropriate action. 
(Code 1969, § 16-21.7) 
Sec. 90-103. - Penalty for violation of subdivision. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this subdivision or of an order of the city manager or of the city council shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 16-21.8) 
Secs. 90-104-90-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Powers as to sewers, drains and sewage disposal and treatment facilities (Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-855, 15.2-876, now repealed) adopted, § 2.2. 
State Law reference- Construction of drains and sewers, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2109; sewage disposal generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2122 et seq. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 90-121. - Connection of premises with public sewer required. 
    The owner of each occupied house shall connect his premises with a public sewer and discontinue the use of privies, septic tanks, cesspools and the like; provided that such connection will not require a private sewer line over 150 feet in length, in which event the property owner may be excused from the necessity of such connection, in the discretion of the council. 
(Code 1969, § 16-22) 
Sec. 90-122. - Permit prerequisite to connection with public sewer. 
    No person shall make connection of any kind with the public sewer without having first obtained a written permit from the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 16-23) 
Sec. 90-123. - Connection with public sewer to be in accordance with plans and specifications, etc. 
    Any connection with the public sewer shall be made in accordance with the plans and specifications of the city and in accordance with this article and with chapter 18, article IV. 
(Code 1969, § 16-24) 
Sec. 90-124. - Discretion of city manager as to sewer connections; who may make sewer connection. 
    All connections to the sewer mains for providing sewer service for any purpose whatsoever shall be made only at the discretion and under the supervision of the city manager or his duly authorized agent. No person other than one duly authorized by the city manager shall introduce any fixture, fitting or pipe into any public sewer pipe or sewer main, or construct in any street, alley or public way, or lay down or have constructed or laid down therein any sewer pipe or other works for the purpose of providing sewer service to any lot or structure, or dig in or break up any street, alley or public way for the purpose of constructing or laying down any such pipe or works. 
(Code 1969, § 16-25) 
Sec. 90-125. - Sewer service connection line from main to property, etc., line. 
    All sewer service connection lines from the city sewer main shall run from the sewer main to the property line, easement line or right-of-way line. 
(Code 1969, § 16-26) 
Sec. 90-126. - Connections to sewer mains generally. 
    Sewer service connections to the city sewer mains shall be made only upon order of the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 16-27) 
Sec. 90-127. - Buildings to be connected to public sewer separately. 
    The plumbing and drainage system of every building shall be separately connected with the public sewer at property lines, and in a row of tenements each tenement shall be deemed a separate house. The connection of more than one building to the same house sewer will not be allowed except by written permission of the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1969, § 16-29) 
Sec. 90-128. - Sewer connection charges generally. 
(a)  Before a sewer service connection is made to a city public sewer, the applicant therefor shall pay to the city treasurer the following charges: 
(1)  Availability fees: 
?" or 3/4" water meter size $1,000.00 1" water meter size $2,000.00 11/2" water meter size $3,500.00 2" water meter size $6,000.00 3" water meter size $12,000.00 4" water meter size $20,000.00 6" water meter size $40,000.00 8" water meter size $75,000.00  
(2)  Connection fees: 
6" sewer connection or smaller - based on lateral diameter The greater of $2,100.00 or actual cost plus 29% Larger than 6" sewer connection - based on lateral diameter The greater of $2,100.00 or actual cost plus 29%  
(b)  This section shall be subject to sections 90-129 and 90-130. 
(Code 1969, § 16-30; Ord. of 6-8-92(1); Ord. of 6-14-93(2); Ord. of 6-13-94(2); Ord. of 6-10-96(2); Ord. of 6-14-99(3); Ord. of 6-9-03(2); Ord. of 6-13-05(2); Ord. of 11-14-2016(2)) 
Sec. 90-129. - Sewer connections by subdivider. 
    When a subdivider installs sanitary sewers for a subdivision, as provided for in chapter 78, he may install the sewer service connections referred to in sections 90-123 to 90-126 and 90-128 at the same time such required sewer mains are laid; provided, however, that such installations shall be completed before grading and surfacing as required by chapter 78 are done. All sewer service connections, as provided for in sections 90-123 to 90-126 and 90-128, and required sewer mains, shall be constructed at the sole cost of the subdivider. There shall be no charge, however, levied under the provisions of section 90-123 when sewer service connections are constructed as provided for in this section. 
(Code 1969, § 16-31) 
Sec. 90-130. - Sewer connections in existing street. 
    When the construction of a sewer main in an existing street is authorized by the council, the cost of such sewer main shall be apportioned as the council shall fix in its order; provided, however, that all sewer service connections referred to in sections 90-123 to 90-126 and 90-128 shall be at the sole cost of the benefited party. There shall be no charge, however, levied under the provisions of section 90-128 when sewer service connections are constructed as provided for in this section. 
(Code 1969, § 16-32) 
Sec. 90-131. - Private sewer lines laid along street. 
    Any private sewer line which the council may authorize to be laid along any street or alley shall be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by the city manager, and under his supervision. 
(Code 1969, § 16-33) 
Sec. 90-132. - Discharges from sinks, bathrooms, etc. 
    No discharge from any sink, bathroom or other water fixture shall be permitted to flow into the street, upon the sidewalk or footway, or upon any premises; but all such discharges shall be connected to the sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1969, § 16-34) 
Sec. 90-133. - Injuring, etc., sewer line, etc.; obstructing or impairing use of sewer system. 
    It shall be unlawful to break, injure, mark, deface, remove, interfere with, or disturb any sewer line, manhole, building, machinery, apparatus or appurtenances of the sewer system or any part thereof belonging to the city, or to commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of the abovementioned property, without permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 16-35) 
Secs. 90-134-90-150. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Septic Tanks, Etc., Generally 

Sec. 90-151. - Permit for construction of septic tanks. 
    No septic tank shall be constructed within the city unless the person constructing it shall first have obtained a permit from the city manager so to do. Before any such permit shall be issued, the city manager shall determine that the public health and general welfare of the community will not be unreasonably endangered by the granting of such permit. Any such septic tank shall be constructed according to plans and specifications approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 16-36) 
Charter reference- Powers as to septic tanks (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-856) adopted, § 2.2. See Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2157. 
Sec. 90-152. - Privies generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any property holder or his authorized agent, servant or employee to permit a privy of any nature or kind, for the reception of human excreta, to exist or remain upon his property within the city which can be served by a public sewer, as provided for in section 90-121, or a septic tank. If a privy is permitted, it shall be built in accordance with the specifications of the state board of health. 
(Code 1969, § 16-37) 
Secs. 90-153-90-170. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Sanitary Privies and Closets 

Sec. 90-171. - Prerequisite to occupation, etc., of building as human habitation. 
    In the city and for a radius of one-half mile beyond the corporate limits thereof, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any house or other building to be used as a human habitation to occupy or to rent or lease such house or other building for occupancy by any person, or for any person to occupy such house or other building until such house or other building shall have been supplied with a sanitary privy or closet of such form as to comply with this subdivision. If any landlord shall fail to supply any house or other building of his with a sanitary privy or closet as required by this subdivision, his tenant shall supply such sanitary privy or closet in conformity with the orders of the officer having jurisdiction and the applicable standards and specifications and may deduct the cost thereof from any sum due the landlord for rent. 
(Code 1969, § 16-38) 
Sec. 90-172. - Required for recreation or construction camp, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful, within the city and for a radius of one-half mile thereof, to maintain, rent or lease any recreation or construction camp, camping place for tourists, amusement camp, any kind of tent show, or to use any building for educational purposes, or to permit the use of any building or tent for protracted meetings, until such camps or buildings, etc., are supplied with sanitary closets or privies as provided for in section 90-171. 
(Code 1969, § 16-39) 
Sec. 90-173. - Neglect by tenant or lessor. 
    It shall be unlawful for any tenant or lessor of premises properly supplied with a sanitary privy or closet to neglect it or to allow it to cease to be sanitary within the meaning of section 90-174. 
(Code 1969, § 16-40) 
Sec. 90-174. - Definition of "sanitary closet or privy." 
    For the purpose of sections 90-171-90-173, a "sanitary closet or privy" is deemed to be any one which provides for the disposal of human wastes or excrements in such a manner that they shall not be accessible to flies or obviously endanger a source of drinking water. 
(Code 1969, § 16-41) 
Sec. 90-175. - Penalty for violation of subdivision. 
    Any person violating any provision of this subdivision shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor, and each week's failure to comply with any provision of this subdivision shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 16-42) 
Secs. 90-176-90-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SEWER USE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 4-11-2011(2) repealed the former Div. 4, §§ 90-191-90-216, and enacted a new Div. 4 as set out herein. The former Div. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 1-23-06(2); Ord. of 4-28-03; Ord. of 7-23-01(2); Ord. of 8-23-99; Ord. of 2-12-96; Ord. of 9-27-93(2); Ord. of 10-28-91; Code 1969. 

Sec. 90-191. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and policy. The sewer use ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for users of the City of Salem sewage collection system and the Publicly Owned Treatment Works for the Western Virginia Water Authority and enables the Western Virginia Water Authority to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the City of Salem sewage collection system and the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with their operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the City of Salem sewage collection system and the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To protect both City of Salem and the Western Virginia Water Authority personnel who may be affected by wastewater and biosolids in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and biosolids from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the City of Salem sewage collection system and the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(6)  To enable the Western Virginia Water Authority to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, biosolids use, disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
    The sewer use ordinance shall apply to all users of the City of Salem sewage collection system and the publicly owned treatment works. The sewer use ordinance authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits, provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities, establishes administrative review procedures, requires user reporting and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(b)  Administration. The director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of the sewer use ordinance, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-192. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in the sewer use ordinance, shall have the designated meanings: 
ADMI - Adams Nickerson color difference units BMP - Best management practices BMR - Baseline monitoring report BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand CFR - Code of Federal Regulations CIU - Categorical industrial user COD - Chemical oxygen demand DEQ - Department of Environmental Quality EPA - Environmental Protection Agency gpd - gallons per day IU - Industrial user mg/L - milligrams per liter NAICS - North American Industrial Classification System NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System POTW - Publicly owned treatment works RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act SIC - Standard industrial classification SIU - Significant industrial user SNC - Significant noncompliance TSS - Total suspended solids USC - United States Code VPDES - Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System WVWA - Western Virginia Water Authority  
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-193. - Definitions. 
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in the City of Salem's Sewer Use Ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
    Act or "the Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., as amended. 
    Approval authority means Virginia DEQ. 
    Authorized or duly authorized representative of the user means: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiating and directing other comprehensive measures to assure long term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; the manager can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater permit application requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: A general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a local, state or federal governmental facility: A director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in the above subsections (1) through (3) may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing. The authorization must specify the individual or the position the discharge originates or as to whom has the overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company. The written authorization must be submitted to the City of Salem. 
    Best management practices or BMPs mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in subsections 90-194(a) and (b) [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant site run-off, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Centigrade (ºC), usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/L). 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC section 1317), that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    Categorical industrial user means an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. 
    Chemical oxygen demand or COD means a measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water. 
    Composite sample means a sample that is collected over time, formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples. The sample may be composited either as a time composite sample : Composed of discrete sample aliquots collected in one container at constant time intervals providing representative samples irrespective of stream flow; or as a flow proportional composite sample : Collected either as a constant sample volume at time intervals proportional to stream flow or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while maintaining a constant time interval between aliquots. 
    Control authority means the Western Virginia Water Authority. 
    Daily maximum means the arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day. 
    Daily maximum limit means the maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. 
    Director means the director of the water and sewer department or his designee for the City of Salem. 
    Director of the WVWA means the person designated by the Executive Director of the WVWA to direct the operations of the POTW. The term also means a duly authorized representative of the Executive Director of the WVWA (the director of wastewater operations). 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Existing source means any source of discharge that is not a "new source." 
    General prohibitions means local remarks that apply to all users of the POTW. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
    Instantaneous limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its biosolids processes, use or disposal; and therefore, causes a violation of the WVWA's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage biosolids use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued there under, or any more stringent local or state regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as RCRA; any state regulations contained in any state biosolids management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Local limit means specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the WVWA upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). 
    Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
    Monthly average means the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
    Monthly average limit means the highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
    NAICS Code means North American Industry Classification System. This system will eventually replace the SIC Code. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining, whether these are substantial independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. above built otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment. 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts, which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
    Non-contact cooling water means water used for cooling, which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the WVWA's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all local, state and federal governmental entities. 
    pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage biosolids, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment requirements mean any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standards or standards mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits. 
    Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges mean absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 90-194 of the sewer use ordinance. 
    Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means a "treatment works," as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the WVWA; includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
    Septic tank waste means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks. 
    Sewage means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
    Significant industrial user (SIU) (except as provided in subsections (3) and (4) of this section) means: 
(1)  An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  An industrial user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blow down wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; 
c.  Is designated as such by the WVWA on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the WVWA may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
    Slug load or slug discharge means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 90-194 of the sewer use ordinance. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the WVWA's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. 
    Standard Industrial Classification Code means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
    Storm water means any flow occurring, during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
    Total suspended solids (TSS) means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    User or industrial user means a source of indirect discharge. 
    Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
    Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
    Water authority means the Western Virginia Water Authority. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-194. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the City of Salem public sewers or POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other local, state or federal pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the City of Salem public sewers or POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the public sewers or POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140;deg;F (60;deg;C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.5, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the public sewers, POTW or equipment; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the City of Salem public sewers or the POTW resulting in interference such as, ashes cinders, sand, mud, straw, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, underground garbage, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails, paper products, slops, paint or paint residues or bulk solids; 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference in the City of Salem public sewers or with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150;deg;F (65.5;deg;C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the POTW to exceed 104;deg;F (40;deg;C); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes in the City of Salem public sewers or within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director or by the Director of the WVWA; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the POTW's effluent, thereby violating the WVWA's NPDES permit; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes, except in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations; 
(12)  Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Director of the WVWA; 
(13)  Sludge, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by Director of the WVWA in an individual wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the POTW's effluent to fail toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(17)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 200 mg/L, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32;deg;F (0;deg;C) and 150;deg;F (65;deg;C); 
(18)  Discharges of antifreeze from vehicle servicing operations or other glycols must be approved by the Director of the WVWA; 
(19)  Toxic materials, including but not limited to: herbicides, fungicides and pesticides unless approved/permitted for use by the Director of the WVWA; 
(20)  Hazardous waste pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the City of Salem public sewers and to the POTW. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-195. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
    The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the Director of the WVWA may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c); 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Director of the WVWA shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e); 
(3)  When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the Director of the WVWA may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharge per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users [40 CFR 403.6(c)(2)]. 
(4)  A CIU may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with the following paragraphs of this section [40 CFR 403.15]. 
a.  Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the presence of pollutants in the industrial user's intake water in accordance with this section. Any industrial user wishing to obtain credit for intake pollutants must make application to the WVWA. Upon request of the industrial user, the applicable standard will be calculated on a "net" basis (i.e. adjusted to reflect credit for pollutants in the intake water) if the requirements of subsection b. of this section are met. 
b.  Criteria. 
1.  Either the applicable categorical pretreatment standards contained in 40 CFR subchapter N specifically provide that they shall be applied on a net basis, or the industrial user demonstrates that the control system it proposes or uses to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards would, if properly installed and operated, meet the standards in the absence of pollutants in the intake waters. 
2.  Credit for generic pollutants such as BOD, TSS and oil and grease should not be granted unless the industrial user demonstrates that the constituents of the generic measure in the user's effluent are substantially similar to the constituents of the generic measure in the intake water or unless appropriate additional limits are placed on process water pollutants either at the outfall or elsewhere. 
3.  Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standard(s), up to a maximum value equal to the influent value. Additional monitoring may be necessary to determine eligibility for credits and compliance with standard(s) adjusted under this section. 
4.  Credit shall be granted only if the user demonstrates that the intake water is drawn from the same body of water as that into which the POTW discharges. The WVWA may waive this requirement if they find that no environment degradation will result. 
(5)  When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the Director of the WVWA convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the Director the WVWA. The Director of the WVWA may establish equivalent mass limits only if the industrial user meets all the conditions set forth in subsection 90-195(5)a.1.-5. 
a.  To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the industrial user must: 
1.  Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation methods and technologies that substantially reduce water usage during the term of its individual wastewater discharge permit; 
2.  Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment; 
3.  Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's actual average daily flow rate for all waste streams, based on data from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility's long-term average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-term average production rate must be representative of current operating conditions; 
4.  Not have daily flow rates, production levels or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not appropriate to control the discharge; and 
5.  Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards during the period prior to the industrial user's request for equivalent mass limits. 
b.  An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must: 
1.  Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits; 
2.  Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use of a continuous effluent monitoring device; 
3.  Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify the Director of the WVWA whenever production rates are expected to vary by more than 20 percent from its baseline production rates. Upon notification of a revised production rate, the Director of the WVWA will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and, 
4.  Continue to employ the same or comparable water observation methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to subsection 90-195(5)a.1. as long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit. 
c.  When developing equivalent mass limits, the Director of the WVWA: 
1.  Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of the regulated processes of the industrial user by the concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit conversion factor; 
2.  Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and 
3.  May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit terms if the industrial user's actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water conservation methods and technologies and the actual average daily flow rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to section 90-199. The industrial user must also be in compliance with subsection 90-210(c) regarding the prohibition of bypass. 
(6)  The Director of the WVWA may convert the mass limits of the categorical pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419 and 455 to concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to individual industrial users. The conversion is at the discretion of the Director of the WVWA. 
(7)  Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply with the equivalent limitations developed in this section in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived [40 CFR 403.6(c)(7)]. 
(8)  Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for calculating maximum monthly average are four-day average, limitations. Where such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitation [40 CFR 403.6(c)(8)]. 
(9)  Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based standard shall notify the Director the WVWA within two business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the Director of the WVWA of such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original estimate of the long term average production rate [40 CFR 403.6(c)(9)]. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-196. - State pretreatment standards. 
    The State of Virginia Pretreatment Standards located at 9 VAC 25-31-10, et seq. is hereby incorporated. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-197. - Local limits. 
(a)  The Director of the WVWA is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c). The following pollutant limits are established for the WVWA's Regional Water Pollution Control Plant. These limits were developed to protect against pass through, interference and violation of water quality standards. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following: 
Parameter Limit Arsenic 0.18 mg/L BTEX (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene) 5.0 mg/L Cadmium 0.03 mg/L Chromium, total 1.95 mg/L Hexavalent chromium (Cr VI) 0.06 mg/L Color (due to dyes and inks) 750 ADMI Copper 0.50 mg/L Cyanide 0.06 mg/L Dissolved solids: Total chlorides and total sulfates 500 mg/L Fluoride (other than contained in the public water supply) 12.0 mg/L Lead 0.3 mg/L Mercury 0.003 mg/L Molybdenum 1.0 mg/L Nickel 0.23 mg/L Oil and grease, total* 200 mg/L pH = 5.0 & = 12.5 Selenium 0.02 mg/L Silver 0.32 mg/L Total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH), non-polar** 200 mg/L Temperature 104°F (40°C) Zinc 0.8 mg/L  
* Applies to food services discharges and other discharges as deemed applicable by the WVWA where fats, oils, and greases are primarily from animal and vegetable origins. 
** Normally used for petroleum products. 
Note: The WVWA reserves the right to establish a limit for any conservative parameter that may result in problems for the plant. 
_____
(b)  The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metals unless indicated otherwise. The Director of the WVWA may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above. 
(c)  The Director of the WVWA may develop BMP's, by rules and regulations or in individual wastewater discharge permits to implement local limits and the requirements of section 90-194. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-198. - Right of revision. 
    The WVWA reserves the right to establish in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-199. - Dilution. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The Director of the WVWA may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitation is appropriate. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-200. - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
(a)  Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with the sewer use ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in section 90-194 of this division within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, the City of Salem or the WVWA, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City of Salem for review, and shall be acceptable to the City of Salem and the WVWA before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City of Salem and the WVWA under the provisions of the sewer use ordinance. 
(b)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  Whenever deemed necessary, the City of Salem may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate, and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this sewer use ordinance; 
(2)  The City of Salem may require that any person discharging into the sanitary sewer install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization; 
(3)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City of Salem, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, oil or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interceptor units shall be of type and capacity approved by the director and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense; and 
(4)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(c)  Accidental discharge/slug control plans. The City of Salem shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan or other action to control slug discharges. The City of Salem may require any user to develop, submit for approval and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the City of Salem and the WVWA of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by subsection 90-203(f) of the sewer use ordinance; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-201. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
(a)  Wastewater analysis. When requested by the City of Salem, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within ten days of the request. The City of Salem is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(b)  Individual wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(1)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the sanitary sewer without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the City of Salem's pretreatment office except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to subsection 90-201(c), of the sewer use ordinance may continue to discharge for the time periods specified therein; 
(2)  The City of Salem may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this sewer use ordinance; and 
(3)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of the sewer use ordinance and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in section 90-207 through section 90-209 of the sewer use ordinance. Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all state and federal pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of local, state or federal law. 
(c)  Individual wastewater discharge permitting: Existing connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the sanitary sewer prior to the effective date of this sewer use ordinance who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 30 days after said date, apply to the pretreatment office of the City of Salem for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with subsection 90-201(e), and shall not cause or allow discharges to the sanitary sewer to continue after 90 days of the effective date of this sewer use ordinance except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the City of Salem or the WVWA. Any existing permits for discharge into the sanitary sewer will remain in full force and in effect for 90 days after the effective date of the sewer use ordinance or until a permit is issued under the sewer use ordinance, whichever occurs first. 
(d)  Individual wastewater discharge permitting: New connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the sanitary sewer must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with subsection 90-201(e) of the sewer use ordinance, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(e)  Individual wastewater discharge permit application contents. 
(1)  All users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The City of Salem may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
a.  Identifying information: 
1.  The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner; 
2.  Contact information, description of activities, facilities and plant production processes on the premises; 
b.  Environmental permits: A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility; 
c.  Description of operations: A brief description of the nature, average rate of production (including each product produced by type, amount, processes and rate of production) and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates: 
1.  Types of waste generated and a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the sanitary sewer; 
2.  Number and type of employees, hours of operation and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
3.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
4.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size, location, elevation and all points of discharge. 
d.  Time and duration of discharges; 
e.  The location for monitoring all waste covered by the permit; 
f.  Flow measurement: Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow (gpd) to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set on in subsection 90-195(2) [40 CFR 403.6(e)]; 
g.  Measurement of pollutants: 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing sources; 
2.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the Director of the WVWA of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process; 
3.  Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported; 
4.  The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection 90-203(i) of the sewer use ordinance. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the City of Salem or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard; 
5.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsections 90-203(i) and 90-203(j) of the sewer use ordinance. 
h.  Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge based on subsection 90-203(d)(4) [40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)]. 
i.  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the City of Salem to evaluate the permit application. 
(2)  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(f)  Application signatories and certification. 
(1)  All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and certifications must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the certification statement in subsection 90-203(m)(1). 
(2)  If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the City of Salem prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(g)  Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The City of Salem will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the City of Salem will determine whether to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The City of Salem may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-202. - Wastewater discharge permit issuance. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the City of Salem. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the City of Salem to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate biosolids management and disposal and protect against damage to the sanitary sewer and the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit issuance date, expiration date and effective date; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the City of Salem in accordance with subsection 90-202(e) of the sewer use ordinance, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on local, state and federal law; 
e.  The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with subsection 90-203(d)(2). 
f.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable local, state and federal law. 
g.  Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the director to be necessary. 
h.  Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the director (subsection 90-203(d)(2)) must be included as a condition in the users permit. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the pretreatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or non-routine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the sanitary sewer and the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer and the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable state and federal pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City of Salem to ensure compliance with this sewer use ordinance, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(c)  Permit modification. The City of Salem may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised local, federal or state pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the sanitary sewer, the POTW, City of Salem personnel, WVWA personnel or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with subsection 90-202(d). 
(d)  Individual wastewater discharge permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days advance notice to the City of Salem, and the Director of the WVWA approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the City of Salem must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator have no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing individual wastewater discharge permit. 
    Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(e)  Wastewater discharge permit revocation. The director may revoke an individual wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the City of Salem of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the City of Salem of changed conditions pursuant to subsection 90-203(e) of the sewer use ordinance; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the City of Salem and the WVWA timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or the sewer use ordinance. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new individual wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(f)  Individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing individual wastewater discharge permit. 
(g)  Interjurisdictional agreement with the WVWA. 
(1)  If a municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW of the WVWA, the Director of the WVWA shall enter into an interjurisdictional agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(2)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (1), above, the Director of the WVWA shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
a.  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
b.  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
c.  Such other information as the Director of the WVWA may deem necessary. 
(3)  An interjurisdictional agreement, as required by subsection (1), above, shall contain the following conditions: 
a.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance, which is at least as stringent as the WVWA's Rules and Regulations and local limits. The requirement shall specify that such ordinances and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the WVWA's Rules and Regulations and local limits; 
b.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
c.  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including individual wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling and enforcement will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the WVWA; and, which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the WVWA; 
d.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the WVWA with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
e.  Limits on the nature, quality and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
g.  A provision ensuring the WVWA access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the WVWA; and 
h.  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the interjurisdictional agreement. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-203. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the City of Salem a report which contains the information listed in subsection (2), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the City of Salem a report which contains the information listed in subsection (2), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below: 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and the owner; 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility; 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production (including each product produced by type, amount, processes and rate of production) and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes; 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e); 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The user shall provide the information required in subsection 90-201(e)(1)g.1.-4.; 
2.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph; 
3.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the City of Salem; 
4.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with subsection 90-203(j) of the sewer use ordinance; 
5.  The director may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; and 
6.  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
f.  Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative as defined in section 90-193 and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment information or O & M manual must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection 90-203(b) of this sewer use ordinance; and 
h.  Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with subsection 90-203(m)(1) of the sewer use ordinance and signed by an authorized representative as defined in section 90-193. 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection 90-203(a)(2)g. of the sewer use ordinance. 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the City of Salem no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the City of Salem. 
(c)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the City of Salem a report containing the information described in subsection 90-201(e)(1)f. and g. and subsection 90-203(a)(2)e. of this sewer use ordinance. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 90-203(m)(1) of the sewer use ordinance. 
(d)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the City of Salem, but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the City of Salem or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. 
(2)  The City of Salem my authorize an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the industrial user [40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)]. This authorization is subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater; 
b.  The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case longer than five years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit [subsection 90-201(e)(1)h.]; 
c.  In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes; 
d.  The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance with section 90-193 and include the certification statement in subsection 90-203(m)(1) [40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii)]; 
e.  Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis; 
f.  Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the director must be included as a condition in the user's permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the City of Salem for three years after expiration of the waiver; 
g.  Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user's permit by the director, the industrial user must certify on each report with the statement in subsection 90-203(m)(1) that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of the industrial user; 
h.  In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present because of changes that occur in the user's operation, the user must immediately comply with the monitoring requirements of subsection 90-203(d)(1) or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the director, and notify the director. 
i.  This provision does not supersede certification processes and requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(3)  All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 90-203(m)(1) of the sewer use ordinance. 
(4)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the City of Salem, using the procedures prescribed in subsection 90-203(j) of the sewer use ordinance, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report [40 CFR 403.12(g)(6)]. 
(e)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the Director of any significant changes to the user's operations or system, which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change. 
(1)  The City of Salem may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under subsection 90-201(e) of the sewer use ordinance; 
(2)  The City of Salem may issue a wastewater discharge permit under subsection 90-202(f) of the sewer use ordinance or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under subsection 90-202(c) of the sewer use ordinance in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions; and 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases or decreases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(f)  Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug discharge or slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the City of Salem and the WVWA of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user; 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the City of Salem and the WVWA, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability, which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to the sewer use ordinance; 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (1), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(4)  Significant industrial users are required to notify the director immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
(g)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users who are not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the City of Salem as required. 
(h)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the City of Salem within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall order repeat sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the City of Salem within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the City of Salem monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the City of Salem samples between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and time when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
    If the City of Salem performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of industrial user, the City of Salem will perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling and analysis [40 CFR 403.12(g)(2)]. 
(i)  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the director or other parties approved by the EPA. 
(j)  Sample collection. Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsections (2) and (3), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the City of Salem. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the City of Salem, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: 
For cyanide, total phenols and sulfides, the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters, unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies, may be authorized by the director, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. 
In the event that flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the City of Salem may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(3)  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in subsection 90-203(a) and (c) [40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and greases, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data does not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data is available, the director may authorize a lower minimum number of grab samples. For the reports required by subsection 90-203(d) [40 CFR 403.12(e) and (h)], the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(k)  Date of receipt of reports. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed or postage prepaid into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(l)  Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of the sewer use ordinance shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by the sewer use ordinance, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements and documentation associated with BMPs established under subsection 90-197(c). Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples, the dates analyses were performed, who performed the analyses, the analytical techniques or methods used and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user, the City of Salem or the WVWA, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. 
(m)  Certification statements. 
(1)  Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial monitoring waiver. The following certification statement is required to be signed and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance with subsection 90-201(f); users submitting BMRs under subsection 90-203(a)(2)h. [40 CFR 403.12(l); users submitting reports on compliance with the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under subsection 90-203(c) [CFR 401.12(d)]; users submitting periodic compliance reports required by subsection 90-203(d) (1) and (3) [40 CFR 403.12(e) and (h)], and users submitting an initial request to forego sampling of a pollutant on the basis of subsection 90-203(d)(2)d. [CFR 403.12 (e)(2)(iii)]. The following certification statement must be signed by an authorized representative as defined in section 90-193: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(2)  Certifications of pollutants not present. Users that have an approved monitoring waiver based on subsection 90-203(d)(2) must certify on each report with the following statement that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of the user [40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)(v)]. 
"Based on my inquiry of the person or person directly responsible for managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR [specify applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of [list pollutant(s)] in the waste waters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report under Section 90-203(d)." 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-204. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right of entry: Inspection and sampling. The City of Salem and WVWA shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of the sewer use ordinance and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the City of Salem and the WVWA ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, copying and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premise, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the City of Salem and WVWA will be permitted to enter immediately for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities; 
(2)  The City of Salem and WVWA shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations; 
(3)  The City of Salem and the WVWA may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at least annually to ensure their accuracy; 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the City of Salem and the WVWA and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user; and 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the City of Salem and the WVWA access to the user's premises shall be a violation of the sewer use ordinance. 
(b)  Search warrants. If the City of Salem and the WVWA has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of the sewer use ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City of Salem designed to verify compliance with the sewer use ordinance or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the director may seek issuance of a search warrant. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-205. - Confidential information. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, monitoring programs and from the City of Salem's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City of Salem, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection, as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the VPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents, characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302, will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-206. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
    The WVWA shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by POTW, a list of the users, which, during the previous 12 months, were in SNC with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term SNC shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates subsection (3), (4), or (8) of this section) and shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in section 90-193 and section 90-194; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by section 90-193 and section 90-194 multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by section 90-194 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit or narrative standard) that the City of Salem and WVWA determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of the City of Salem or WVWA personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that have caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the City of Salem or the WVWA's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone continued in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of BMPs, which the City of Salem or WVWA determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-207. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation [NOV]. When the City of Salem finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City of Salem may serve upon that user a written NOV. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the City of Salem. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the NOV. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the City of Salem to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a NOV. 
(b)  Consent orders. The City of Salem may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections 90-207(d) and 90-207(e) of the sewer use ordinance and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The City of Salem may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of the sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing date. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user as defined in section 90-193 and required by subsection 90-201(f). A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(d)  Compliance orders. When the City of Salem finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of the sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City of Salem may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sanitary sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. When the City of Salem finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of the sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the City of Salem may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(f)  Administrative fines. 
(1)  When the City of Salem finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of the sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City of Salem may fine such a user in an amount not to exceed $2,500.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation; 
(2)  Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after ten calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty based on unpaid balances, and interest shall accrue thereafter per month, in accordance with the City of Salem's rates and fees. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and penalties; 
(3)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the City of Salem to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the amount within ten calendar days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the director may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The City of Salem may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine; and 
(4)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(g)  Emergency suspensions. The City of Salem may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The City of Salem may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sanitary sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the sanitary sewer, the POTW, its receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City of Salem that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings under subsection 90-207(h) of the sewer use ordinance are initiated against the user; and 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the City of Salem prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsection 90-207(c) or subsection 90-207(h) of the sewer use ordinance. 
    Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(h)  Termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions in subsection 90-202(e) of the sewer use ordinance, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 90-194 through section 90-199 of the sewer use ordinance. 
    Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection 90-207(c) of the sewer use ordinance why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the City of Salem shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-208. - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. When the City of Salem finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of the sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City of Salem may petition the Commonwealth of Virginia Courts through the City of Salem's Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by the sewer use ordinance on activities of the user. The City of Salem may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of the sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable to the City of Salem for a maximum civil penalty of $2,500.00 per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation; 
(2)  The City of Salem may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling an monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City of Salem; 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstance, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor as justice requires; and 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of the sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500.00 per violation per day, or imprisonment for not more than for not more than 12 months, or both; 
(2)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the sanitary sewer or the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall be subject to a penalty of at least $2,500.00, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law; 
(3)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to the sewer use ordinance, wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under the sewer use ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00 per violation per day, or imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or both; and 
(4)  In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00 per violation per day, or imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or both. 
(d)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in the sewer use ordinance are not exclusive. The City of Salem may take any or all combinations of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the City of Salem's enforcement response plan. However, the City of Salem may take other actions against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the City of Salem is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-209. - Supplemental enforcement action. 
(a)  Performance bonds. The City of Salem may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of the sewer use ordinance, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the City of Salem, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the City of Salem to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(b)  Liability insurance. The City of Salem may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of the sewer use ordinance, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the sanitary sewer or the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(c)  Payment of outstanding fees and penalties. The director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of the sewer use ordinance, a previous individual waste water discharge permit, or order issued hereunder. 
(d)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of the sewer use ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(e)  Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of the sewer use ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the sewer use ordinance of the City of Salem and Salem City Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the City of Salem for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance. 
(f)  Contractor listing. Users, which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the City of Salem. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the City of Salem held by a user found to be in SNC with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the City of Salem. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-210. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Upset. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, "upset," means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation; 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (3), below, are met; 
(3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed contemporaneous logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
c.  The user has submitted the following information to the City of Salem and WVWA within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days: 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof; 
(5)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards; and 
(6)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(b)  Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in subsection 90-194(a) of the sewer use ordinance or the specific prohibitions in subsection 90-194(b)(3) through subsection 90-194(b)(7) or subsection 90-194(b)(9) through subsection 90-194(b)(20) of the sewer use ordinance if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents, from the user's prior discharge when the WVWA was regularly in compliance with its VPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(c)  Bypass. 
(1)  For the purpose of this section: 
a.  Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
b.  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities, which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources, which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (3) and (4) of this section. 
(3)  Bypass notifications. 
a.  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the City of Salem and the WVWA, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible; and 
b.  A user shall submit oral notice to the City of Salem and the WVWA of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause, the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The City of Salem may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(4)  Bypass. 
a.  Bypass is prohibited, and the City of Salem and the WVWA may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless, 
1.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage; 
2.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
3.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (3) of this section. 
b.  The City of Salem and the WVWA may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the City of Salem and the WVWA determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (4)a. of this section. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-211. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Pretreatment charges and fees. The City of Salem may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the City of Salem's Pretreatment Program, which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(5)  Other fees the City of Salem may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by the sewer use ordinance and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the City of Salem. 
(b)  Severability. If any provision of the sewer use ordinance is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2011(2)) 
Sec. 90-212. - Payment of costs for work required by prohibited deposits. 
    In any case where a sewer main or pipe connection is stopped or choked by any materials or rubbish deposited therein contrary to the provisions of this article, by any tenant or property owner, upon due ascertainment by the city manager, such city manager shall cause the main or pipe connection to be opened, cleared or repaired, and shall cause the cost for doing such work to be collected from the property owner. The payment of such cost shall not relieve any person from the provisions of the judicial enforcement remedies as provided in section 90-208 herein. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2016(2)) 
Secs. 90-213-90-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RATES AND CHARGES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-236. - Application for electric current, water or sewer services furnished by city; charge for meter. 
(a)  Before any electric current, water or sewer service is furnished to any consumer, he shall make written application to the city manager requesting to be furnished such electric current, water or sewer services and shall agree in writing to pay the regular charges therefor. 
(b)  A meter service charge of $10.00 per service shall be paid before any electric current or water is furnished or transferred to a consumer applying therefor. 
(Code 1969, § 16-43; Ord. of 11-14-2016(2)) 
Sec. 90-237. - Deposits for electricity, water and sewer services generally. 
(a)  The city manager shall require of any prospective consumer of electric, water and sewer services to provide adequate assurance of the individual's, firm's or corporation's ability to pay for services provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  This assurance may be made by any of the following methods: 
(1)  Ownership of the land and buildings receiving such service; 
(2)  Monetary deposit; 
(3)  Bank letter of credit; 
(4)  Utility bond issued by an approved insurance company or other financial institution; 
(5)  Contract in writing by which the owner of the property agrees to become liable for such utility services; 
(6)  Letter of recommendation from another electric or gas utility, stating that the individual making application for service has made payment on all obligations to such company in a timely fashion; 
(7)  If a consumer of services leaves the city in good standing and later returns to reestablish service, the city may waive other requirements listed in this section if city records are readily available to confirm the prior status; and 
(8)  Other arrangement approved by the city manager. 
(c)  The amount of such deposit or other assurance for residential customers shall be in the amount of $250.00. The amount of such deposit or other assurance for nonresidential customers shall be in the amount equal to two times the total cost for such electric, water and sewer services for the two highest previous bills. If the actual usage of electric, water, and sewer services exceeds the established deposit or other assurance given by more than 20 percent, the city reserves the right to increase the amount of assurance provided. 
(d)  Deposits or other assurances shall remain in effect for a period of two years. Upon satisfactory completion of this period, deposits, along with accrued interest if any or other such assurances shall be returned or released provided that the individual, firm, or corporation has paid all of his or its obligations in a timely fashion. Interest is re-evaluated annually and based on the SCC reported rate. "Timely" means that no more than three payments over the 24 months have been subject to penalty for late payment and that none of the payments were more than 30 days past due. The city reserves the right to continue to require assurances as long as may be necessary. 
(Code 1969, § 16-44; Ord. of 11-9-92; Ord. of 11-14-2016(2)) 
Sec. 90-238. - Payment of bills for electricity, water and sewer generally. 
(a)  All meters for both water and electric current shall be read monthly, except that readings may be estimated on occasion as necessary, and each bill therefor shall be paid on or before the last payment date as shown on the bill, and if not paid by such date, a penalty of $5.00 shall be added to the amount of the bill for each service, except in the case of commercial or industrial consumers, where a penalty in the amount of five percent of the current amount due shall be added. If any consumer shall continue in default for an additional 25 days after such bill becomes due and payable, the residential or small general service electric, water or sewer service of the defaulting consumer shall forthwith be cut off, and an additional $25.00 shall be added to the total bill, except for commercial and industrial consumers, whereas the actual cost of making the reconnection will be charged, with a minimum of $250.00 shall be added to the total bill, and paid in addition to the amount then due before such services shall again be restored. In addition, the city may, at its option, require a deposit from the customer prior to reconnecting the service in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The reconnection charge for all customers, where service has been disconnected for fraudulent use of electricity or where access to the meter has been denied, will be the actual cost of the reconnection, with a minimum of $250.00. 
(b)  Nothing contained in subsection (a) of this section shall prevent the council from authorizing the city manager to enter into a different arrangement with a consumer who applies for and uses total quantities of water in excess of 50,000 gallons for a total period not exceeding four months and for a specified stated purpose, to furnish such water at the prescribed rates, billing such consumer at the end of such period for the total quantity of water used; provided, that such water is measured through one meter installed for that purpose only; provided, further, that the city reserves the right to furnish water at such times as will be most convenient to the city; provided, still further, that the city reserves the right to discontinue the furnishing of water if for any reason there is an insufficient supply of water, any breakdown in pumping equipment, filtration facilities, storage facilities or for any reason deemed necessary by the city manager. The director of finance shall require of any such prospective consumer, not a real property owner in the city, a monetary deposit of such an amount as will be at least equal to the probable total consumption of water for the period such water is to be consumed. 
(Code 1969, § 16-45; Ord. of 11-14-2016(2)) 
Secs. 90-239-90-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER 

Sec. 90-256. - Meters and metering; separate connections, etc. 
    All water furnished by the city shall be, wherever practicable, measured by meters furnished and installed by the city for that purpose. The water meters shall be the property of the city and shall be, unless otherwise authorized by the city manager, placed as near the curbline as possible and on property owned by the city. Each individual residence or property shall be required to have a separate connection and meter unless otherwise authorized by the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1969, § 16-46) 
Sec. 90-257. - Rates within city. 
    There are hereby established the following customer classes and rates for consumers of water within the city effective July 1, 2010. The following consumer classes are: 
Residential -Generally characterized as serving single family residential household regardless of the level of consumption; 
Small commercial -A business entity that generally uses less than 75,000 gallons of water per month; 
Large commercial -Business entities both commercial or industrial using in excess of 75,000 gallons of water per month; 
Multi-unit -Those customers both residential and small commercial with more than one housing unit or business location receiving water through one meter; 
Fire service -The connections that are for metered fire suppression systems. 
_____
    The following base charges are hereby established and effective as noted: 
Water Base Service Fee July 2010 Jan. 2011 Jan. 2012 Jan. 2013 Jan. 2014 Residential $8.50 $8.50 $9.35 $10.29 $11.31 Small Commercial $17.00 $17.00 $18.70 $20.57 $22.63 Large Commercial $35.00 $35.00 $38.50 $42.35 $46.59 Multi-Unit $26.00 $26.00 $28.60 $31.46 $34.61 Fire Service $17.00 $17.00 $18.70 $20.57 $22.63  
    The following volume charges are hereby established and effective as noted: 
Water Volume Rate (GPM = Gallons Per Month) July 2010 Jan. 2011 Jan. 2012 Jan. 2013 Jan. 2014 First 5,000 GPM $2.95 $3.65 $4.02 $4.42 $4.86 5,000-10,000 GPM $3.60 $3.80 $4.18 $4.60 $5.06 10,000-75,000 GPM $3.80 $4.10 $4.51 $4.96 $5.46 75,000-1,000,000 GPM $4.00 $4.31 $4.73 $5.21 $5.73 1,000,000 GPM and over $3.30* $3.35 $3.40  
* Effective with all bills rendered on or after March 1, 2012. 
    Non-user fees are fees charged to customers if service is available to the property whether or not they use this utility. 
Water Non-User Fees July 2010 Jan. 2011 Jan. 2012 Jan. 2013 Jan. 2014 32% of 5,000 GPM 
Residential Rate $7.44 $8.56 $9.42 $10.36 $11.40  
(Code 1969, § 16-47; Ord. of 6-8-92(3); Ord. of 6-9-97; Ord. of 8-28-00; Ord. No. 6-25-01(1); Ord. No. 6-13-05(3); Ord. of 6-28-2010(2); Ord. of 2-13-2012, eff. 3-1-2012) 
Sec. 90-258. - Rates, etc., outside city. 
    The rates for all water used by consumers of water outside the city shall be the rates prevailing within the city and applicable to users of water residing within the city. In all other respects the provisions of this Code applicable to the city municipal water system and methods of metering the water, collecting therefor, rate scales, advance deposits for water consumers under certain conditions, water connection charges, penalties, etc., shall be and are hereby made applicable to consumers of water outside the city. 
(Code 1969, § 16-48) 
Sec. 90-259. - Credits for leakage. 
    A user of water may be entitled to a credit for leakage against the user's water/sewer bill upon the following conditions: 
(a)  The leak is in a waterline on the property of the user; and 
(b)  The average cost of water and/or sewer to such user, during one monthly billing period of such leakage, shall be at least double the monthly average cost of such water/sewer for the preceding 12 months; and 
(c)  No such credit shall be allotted to the user until the leak is repaired by a plumbing contractor and said plumbing contractor certifies, in writing, such repair to the utility billing department; and 
(d)  The amount of such credit for the benefit of a user shall be one-half of such excess over and above the average water/sewer charge for the 12 preceding months and the remaining one-half of such excess shall be paid by the user; and 
(e)  Such credit shall be made no more than once to a user during a 12-month period. 
    Should the certification required in subsection (c) above not be submitted, such credit as hereinabove provided shall not be made until the fourth monthly billing period thereafter upon the determination by the city that the leakage repair has been completed. 
(Code 1969, § 16-49; Ord. of 2-27-2012, eff. 3-8-2012) 
Secs. 90-260-90-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - METERS AND RATES FOR ELECTRICITY 

Sec. 90-276. - Use of meter, etc., in taking electricity. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to take any electricity from the city electric system except through a meter or as otherwise provided for, or from any premises not owned by him, without the permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1969, § 16-50) 
Sec. 90-277. - Separate connection and meter for each residence. 
    With reference to the supply of electricity by the city, each individual residence shall have a separate connection and meter. 
(Code 1969, § 16-51) 
Sec. 90-278. - Metering of electricity. 
    All electricity furnished by the electric department shall be measured by meters furnished, located, and installed by the city for that purpose, and shall remain the property of the city; provided, however, that no meters shall be required, in the judgment of the city manager, as to windows, outside decorative lighting or transient consumers, when the wiring furnishing such service is equipped with a proper device, or other methods are used, whereby a true measure can be taken of the electricity so sold, or when a special contract is entered into with the consumer for a temporary period that would make the installation of meters impracticable. 
    Whenever any metering installation loses its effectiveness or accuracy, as determined by the city, due to equipment condition or damage, it shall be reworked or replaced. The city shall provide the metering equipment and the owner of such premises shall bear the cost of any service reconfiguration that is required to comply with city standards as determined from time to time. 
(Code 1969, § 16-52; Ord. of 2-26-2018(1)) 
Sec. 90-279. - Rates for electricity. 
    The rates for electricity sold by the city to consumers, as may be shown by the meter or as otherwise provided, shall be as provided by the council by ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1969, § 16-53) 
Sec. 90-280. - Modifications to metering. 
    Upon application for an electrical permit under section 18-192 herein, the city shall review the existing metering at the premises to determine whether modifications to that metering shall be required. Any metering modifications so required shall be completed pursuant to the requirements of the electrical permit and the applicant shall bear the costs of such modifications. 
(Ord. of 2-26-2018(1)) 
Secs. 90-281-90-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SEWER SERVICE CHARGES IN CITY; PROHIBITED DISCHARGES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 90-296. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD means biochemical oxygen demand. 
    Domestic sewage means sewage or wastes of a character not in excess of 300 parts per million (ppm) of BOD or not in excess of 300 ppm of suspended solids, either or both. 
    Individual residential domestic consumer means a domestic consumer of water residing in a private residence. 
    Industrial sewage means sewage or wastes of a character in excess of 300 ppm of BOD or in excess of 300 ppm of suspended solids, either or both. 
    ppm means parts per million gallons. 
    Regular customer or regular consumer means a consumer in the city who purchases from the city all water used by him. 
(Code 1969, § 16-54) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-297. - Application of division. 
    This division shall be construed to apply to persons inside the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 16-55) 
Sec. 90-298. - Establishment and imposition of charges generally. 
    Upon every person inside the city discharging water, sewage or other effluent into the city's sanitary sewer system through facilities owned or controlled by such person, or permitting others so to do, the charges set forth in this division for the collection, treatment and disposal of such sewage are hereby fixed and imposed. 
(Code 1969, § 16-56) 
Sec. 90-299. - Installation of metering station in lieu of water meter. 
    Any person who discharges domestic sewage or industrial sewage into the sanitary sewer system of the city may, in lieu of installing water meters of a type currently used by the city's water and sewer department, install a metering station, in accordance with plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the city, for the purpose of determining the volume of the sewage or effluent so discharged into the city's sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1969, § 16-57) 
Sec. 90-300. - When charges payable; penalty for late payment. 
    All charges imposed under this division upon persons shall be due and payable on the same day as their respective water bills are due and payable and shall be an integral part thereof, and if not paid when such persons' water bills are payable or would be payable if such persons purchased from the city all or a portion of the water used by them, then the same penalty shall be added as is provided for upon persons delinquent in the payment of their water bills, as set forth and provided for in section 90-238. Every person shall pay the combined charges for water purchased, and the sewer charges and surcharges, as provided for in this division, at one and the same time; and further, the city treasurer is instructed not to receive payment of any water charges unless the sewer charges and surcharges are paid at the same time, or vice versa. 
(Code 1969, § 16-58) 
Sec. 90-301. - Prohibited discharges generally. 
    No person shall discharge into the city's sanitary sewer system any sewage, waste or effluent containing oils, hair from tanneries, paunch contents, grit from packing plants, chrome-plating wastes or other substances not normally regarded as sewage, in such quantities and concentrations as would adversely affect the operations of the sewage treatment plant of the City of Roanoke, the discharge of which, into the city's sanitary sewer system, is expressly forbidden and prohibited by subsection A of section III of the contract entered into by and between the City of Roanoke and the City of Salem under date of February 29, 1972. Any person so discharging into the city's sanitary sewer system any substance, as set out and referred to in this section, shall be liable in damages to the city for the full amount, inclusive of principal, interest and costs, that the city in turn may have to pay to the City of Roanoke, as provided in subsection C of section III of such contract. 
(Code 1969, § 16-59) 
Sec. 90-302. - Further limitation on discharge of sewage, etc., into city's sanitary sewer system. 
    No person shall, at any time, discharge into the sanitary sewer system of the city any sewage, waste or effluent of such a character or strength as would cause the average strength of the city's general sewage effluence to exceed 300 ppm of BOD, or suspended solids to exceed 300 ppm, either or both, based on any 24-hour composite sample. Any person discharging sewage, waste or other effluent into the city's sanitary sewer system, of an average BOD in excess of 300 ppm, or of an average suspended solids in excess of 300 ppm, either or both, based on any 24-hour composite sample, shall, if the city's general sewage effluence exceeds an average BOD of 300 ppm, or an average suspended solids in excess of 300 ppm, either or both, be conclusively presumed to be discharging sewage, waste or other effluence into the city's sanitary sewer system, which causes the same to exceed the maximum BOD content and the maximum suspended solids content prohibited in the contract entered into by and between the City of Roanoke, of the first part, and the City of Salem, of the second part, under date of February 29, 1972, by virtue of which contract the City of Roanoke has agreed to treat the sewage or waste originating within the city, which maximum is a BOD content not in excess of 300 ppm, and suspended solids content not in excess of 300 ppm, based on any 24-hour composite sample. 
(Code 1969, § 16-60) 
Sec. 90-303. - Domestic and industrial sewage; charges for disposal. 
(a)  There are hereby established the following customer classes and rates for the consumption of sewer utility services within the City of Salem effective July 1, 2010: 
Residential -Generally characterized as serving single-family residential households regardless of the level of consumption; 
Small commercial -A business entity that utilizes less than 75,000 gallons per month; 
Large commercial -Businesses entities both commercial or industrial using in excess of 75,000 gallons per month; 
Multi-unit -Those customers both residential and small commercial with more than one housing unit or business location served by a single meter. 
    The following base charges are hereby established and effective as noted: 
Sewer Base Service Fee July 2010 Jan. 2011 Jan. 2012 Jan. 2013 Jan. 2014 Residential $16.00 $16.00 $17.92 $20.07 $22.48 Small commercial 32.00 32.00 35.84 40.14 44.96 Large commercial 64.00 64.00 71.68 80.28 89.92 Multi-unit 48.00 48.00 53.76 60.21 67.44  
    The following volume charges are hereby established and effective as noted: 
Sewer Volume Rate (GPM = Gallons Per Month) July 2010 Jan. 2011 Jan. 2012 Jan. 2013 Jan. 2014 First 5,000 GPM $2.63 $3.80 $4.26 $4.77 $5.34 5,000-10,000 GPM 2.63 3.80 4.26 4.77 5.34 10,000-75,000 GPM 2.63 3.80 4.26 4.77 5.34 All over 75,000 GPM 2.63 3.80 4.26 4.77 5.34  
  
    Non-user fees are fees charged to customers if service is available to the property whether or not they use this utility: 
Sewer Non-User Fees July 2010 Jan. 2011 Jan. 2012 Jan. 2013 Jan. 2014 29% of 5,000 GPM Residential Rate $8.45 $10.15 $11.37 $12.73 $14.26  
(b)  All consumers who purchase from the city only a part of the water consumed or used by them and all persons who purchase or acquire water from any other source, regardless, shall pay based on such volume as set forth in subsection (a) as would have been assessed against such consumers had they been furnished all their water from the city's water system for disposal of industrial sewage. In order to determine the amount of water used by such consumers, regardless of its source, when less than the entire amount of water so used is furnished through the city's water system, such consumers shall install water meters of a type currently used by the city's water and sewer department, so that the same may be read in like manner as the city water meters are now read, and the proper charge for industrial sewage can be fixed and determined on a monthly basis as if such water had actually been purchased each month from the city at the city's prevailing rates, and in addition thereof, the surcharges as are provided for in this subdivision. 
(Code 1969, § 16-61; Ord. of 6-8-92(5), § 16-61; Ord. of 6-14-93(3); Ord. of 6-12-95(2); Ord. of 6-9-03(3); Ord. of 6-13-05(4); Ord. of 6-12-06; Ord. of 6-28-2010(3)) 
Editor's note- The sewer rates herein established shall apply to all bills rendered after July 1, 2010. 
Secs. 90-304-90-320. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Industrial Sewage 

Sec. 90-321. - Establishment and imposition generally. 
    Upon every person discharging industrial sewage into the city's sanitary sewer system, through facilities owned or controlled by such person, or permitting others so to do, the charges set forth in this subdivision for the treatment and disposal of such sewage are hereby established and imposed in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision. 
(Code 1969, § 16-62) 
Sec. 90-322. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of 6-28-2010(3), repealed § 90-322, which pertained to charges for disposal and derived from Code 1969, § 16-63; Ord. of 6-8-92(5); Ord. of 6-14-93(3); Ord. of 6-12-95(2); Ord. of 6-9-03(3); Ord. of 6-13-05(4); and Ord. of 6-12-06. 
Sec. 90-323. - Sampling stations. 
    Any person discharging industrial sewage into the city's sanitary sewer system shall install and constantly maintain a sampling station and adequate accompanying facilities, the plans and specifications of which shall be submitted to and approved by the city, and of such kind and character as will permit the taking of composite samples at any time so desired by the city, in order that the strength and character of such industrial sewage can be accurately determined. 
(Code 1969, § 16-64) 
Sec. 90-324. - Imposition of surcharges. 
    In addition to the monthly charge provided for in this subdivision, there shall be an additional charge based upon the surcharges payable by the city to the City of Roanoke, for all BOD and suspended solids content in excess of the minimum strength of 300 ppm of BOD and 300 ppm of suspended solids, either or both, as provided for in the contract entered into by the City of Roanoke, of the first part, and the City of Salem, of the second part, under date of February 29, 1972, such surcharges to be apportioned among the respective industrial consumers in accordance with the volume and characteristics of the sewage and wastes of such industries causing a surcharge payment to the City of Roanoke, based upon the characteristics of their effluence discharged in the city's sanitary sewer system, at the industry's point of delivery, the computation of the volume of sewage or effluence to be determined in accordance with the methods set out for the primary charge. 
(Code 1969, § 16-65) 
Sec. 90-325. - Charges for taking samples. 
    Regardless of, and in addition to, the other charges set forth in this subdivision, there shall be a charge based on the actual cost for each sewage sample collected and analyzed by the city. All charges imposed under this section shall be due and payable as set out in section 90-300. 
(Code 1969, § 16-66) 
Sec. 90-326. - Determination of average BOD, etc., by sampling. 
    The average BOD and the average suspended solids strength referred to in this subdivision shall be determined by composite samples taken hourly, for 24 hours, at eight-day intervals. The average strength of the wastes shall then be the basis for determining the average strength of the wastes to be paid for each current month; or the average BOD and the average suspended solids strength may be determined by composite samples, taken hourly for 24 hours every third day of any one or more calendar months in the year; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the taking of samples at any time for determining the character of the sewage or effluence at any given time. 
(Code 1969, § 16-67) 
Sec. 90-327. - When discharge of sewage, etc., to be stopped or measures taken to reduce strength of sewage, etc. 
    Any person discharging sewage, waste or other effluent into the city's sanitary sewer system of such a character and strength as to be a contributing factor, as set out in this division, in causing the city's general sewage effluence to exceed a maximum BOD content in excess of 300 ppm, and suspended solids content in excess of 300 ppm, either or both, based on any 24-hour composite sample, shall at once either cease to discharge such sewage, waste or effluent into the city's sanitary sewer system, or shall immediately take such measures as may be necessary to reduce the strength of its sewage, waste or effluence. 
(Code 1969, § 16-68) 
Sec. 90-328. - Procedure when a portion of volume of water used is unpolluted and not discharged into city's sanitary system. 
    Persons not discharging the entire volume of water used by them into the city's sanitary sewer system, but discharging unpolluted water other than in the city's sanitary sewer system, shall not be charged therefor; provided, that such persons shall, at their own expense, and under the supervision of the water and sewer department, install and maintain satisfactory facilities and metering devices, approved by the water and sewer department, for the purpose of measuring and determining the volume of such water not discharged into the city's sanitary sewer system. In such event, such persons shall make application to the city for a separate water connection, in accordance with the charges provided for in section 90-74. 
(Code 1969, § 16-69) 
Secs. 90-329-90-345. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SEWER SERVICE CHARGES OUTSIDE CITY; PROHIBITED DISCHARGES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 90-346. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD means biochemical oxygen demand. 
    Domestic sewage means sewage or wastes of a character not in excess of 300 ppm of BOD, or not in excess of 300 ppm of suspended solids, either or both. 
    Industrial sewage means sewage or wastes of a character in excess of 300 ppm of BOD or in excess of 300 ppm of suspended solids, either or both. 
    ppm means parts per million gallons. 
    Regular customer or regular consumer means a consumer outside of the corporate limits of the city who purchases from the city all water used by him. 
(Code 1969, § 16-70) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-347. - Application of division. 
    This division shall be construed to apply to persons outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 16-71) 
Sec. 90-348. - Establishment and imposition of charges generally. 
    Upon every person outside of the city who has first obtained the consent, expressed in the form of a resolution, of the council of the City of Roanoke to discharge water, sewage or other effluence into the city's sanitary sewer system through facilities owned or controlled by such person, or permitting others so to do, the charges set forth in this division for the collection, treatment and disposal of such sewage are hereby fixed and imposed. 
(Code 1969, § 16-72) 
Sec. 90-349. - When charges payable; penalty for late payment. 
    All charges imposed by this division upon regular customers outside of the city shall be due and payable on the same day as their respective water bills are due and payable, and shall be an integral part thereof, and if not paid when such persons' water bills are payable, then the same penalty shall be added as is provided for upon persons delinquent in the payment of their water bills, as set forth and provided for in section 90-238. Every person shall pay the combined charges for water purchased and the sewer charges and surcharges, as provided for in this division, at one and the same time, and the city treasurer shall not receive payment of any water charges unless the sewer charges and surcharges are paid at the same time, or vice versa. 
(Code 1969, § 16-73) 
Sec. 90-350. - Prohibited discharges generally. 
    No person shall discharge outside of the city into the city's sanitary sewer system any sewage, waste or other effluent containing oils, hair from tanneries, paunch contents, grit from packing plants, chrome-plating wastes or other substances not normally regarded as sewage, in such quantities and concentrations as would adversely affect the operations of the sewage treatment plants of the City of Roanoke, the discharge of which into the city's sanitary sewer system is expressly forbidden and prohibited by subsection A of section III of the contract entered into by and between the City of Roanoke and the City of Salem, under date of February 29, 1972. Any person so discharging into the city's sanitary sewer system any substance, as set out and referred to in this section, shall be liable in damages to the city for the full amount, inclusive of principal, interest and cost; provided, that the city in turn may have to pay the amount of such damages to the City of Roanoke, as provided in subsection C of section III of such contract existing between the City of Roanoke and the City of Salem. 
(Code 1969, § 16-74) 
Sec. 90-351. - Further limitation on discharge of sewage, etc., into city's sanitary sewer system. 
    No person shall, at any time, discharge outside of the city into the sanitary sewer system of the city any sewage, waste or other effluent of such a character or strength as would cause the average strength of the city's general sewage effluent to exceed 300 ppm of BOD, or suspended solids to exceed 300 ppm, either or both, based on any 24-hour composite sample. Any person discharging sewage, waste or other effluent into the city's sanitary sewer system of an average BOD in excess of 300 ppm, or an average suspended solids in excess of 300 ppm, either or both, shall be conclusively presumed to be discharging sewage, waste or other effluent into the city's sanitary sewer system which causes the same to exceed the maximum BOD content and the maximum suspended solids content prohibited in the contract entered into by and between the City of Roanoke, of the first part, and the City of Salem, of the second part, under date of February 29, 1972, by virtue of which contract such maximum is a BOD content not in excess of 300 ppm, and suspended solids content not in excess of 300 ppm, based on any 24-hour composite sample. 
(Code 1969, § 16-75) 
Secs. 90-352-90-370. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Industrial Sewage 

Sec. 90-371. - Establishment and imposition generally. 
    Upon every person outside of the corporate limits of the city who has first obtained the consent, expressed in the form of a resolution of the council of the City of Roanoke, to discharge industrial sewage into the city's sanitary sewer system through facilities owned or controlled by such person, or permitting others so to do, the charges set forth in this subdivision for the collection, treatment and disposal of such sewage are hereby established and imposed in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision. 
(Code 1969, § 16-77) 
Sec. 90-372. - Sampling stations. 
    Any person discharging industrial sewage into the city's sanitary sewer system shall install and constantly maintain a sampling station and adequate accompanying facilities, the plans and specifications of which shall be submitted to and approved by the city, and of such kind and character as will permit the taking of composite samples at any time so desired by the city, in order that the strength and character of such industrial sewage can be accurately determined. 
(Code 1969, § 16-79) 
Sec. 90-373. - Imposition of surcharges. 
    In addition to the monthly charge provided for in this subdivision, there shall be an additional charge based upon the surcharge payable by the city to the City of Roanoke for all BOD and suspended solids content in excess of the minimum strength of 300 ppm of BOD and 300 ppm of suspended solids, either or both, as provided for in the contract entered into by the City of Roanoke, of the first part, and the City of Salem, of the second part, under date of February 29, 1972; such surcharges to be apportioned among the respective industrial customers, both within and outside of the city, in accordance with the volume and characteristics of the sewage and wastes of such industries causing a surcharge payment to the City of Roanoke, based upon the characteristics of their effluence discharged into the city's sanitary sewer system, at the industry's point of delivery, the computation of the volume of sewage or effluence to be determined in accordance with the methods set out in this division for the primary charge. 
(Code 1969, § 16-80) 
Sec. 90-374. - Determination of average BOD, etc., by sampling. 
    The average BOD and the average suspended solids strength referred to in this subdivision shall be determined by composite samples taken hourly for 24 hours. The average strength of the wastes shall then be the basis for determining the average strength of the wastes to be paid for each current month; or the average BOD and the average suspended solids strength referred to in this division may be determined by composite samples taken hourly for 24 hours every third day of any one or more calendar months in the year; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the taking of samples at any time for determining the character of the sewage or effluence at any given time. 
(Code 1969, § 16-81) 
Sec. 90-375. - When discharge of sewage, etc., to be stopped or measures taken to reduce strength of sewage, etc. 
    Any such person discharging sewage, waste or other effluence into the city's sanitary sewer system, of such character and strength as to be a contributing factor, as set out in this division, in causing the city's general sewage effluent to exceed a maximum BOD content in excess of 300 ppm, and suspended solids content in excess of 300 ppm, either or both, based on any 24-hour composite sample, shall at once either cease to discharge such sewage, waste or effluent into the city's sanitary sewer system, or shall immediately take such measures as may be necessary to reduce the strength of its sewage, waste or effluent. 
(Code 1969, § 16-82) 
Sec. 90-376. - Charges for taking samples. 
    Regardless of, and in addition to, the other charges and surcharges set forth in this subdivision, there shall also be a charge based on the actual cost for each and every sewage sample collected and analyzed by the city. All charges imposed under this section shall be due and payable as set out in section 90-349. 
(Code 1969, § 16-83) 
Secs. 90-377-90-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER EMERGENCIES 

Sec. 90-391. - Authority to declare water emergencies. 
    During the continued existence of climatic, hydrological and other extraordinary conditions the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Salem may require that certain uses of water, not essential to public health, safety and welfare, be reduced, restricted or curtailed. As the shortage of raw or potable water becomes increasingly more critical, conservation measures to reduce consumption or curtail nonessential water use may be necessary. The definitions, water emergency criteria, and water use restrictions referenced in this ordinance are presented in greater detail in the City of Salem Drought Response and Contingency Plan, dated June 30, 2010, and its amendments, which is incorporated herein by reference. 
    The city manager or his designee is authorized to declare a water emergency in the city restricting the use of water in any area of the city. All water stages are built upon and require compliance with previous water stages. For example, when a drought emergency is declared all provisions of a drought warning are in effect. Also the city manager or his designee may declare any of the three states [stages]; as they do not have to be declared sequentially. 
(Ord. of 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 90-392. - Publication of declaration. 
    Upon the declaration of a water emergency, the city manager or his designee shall immediately post a written notice of the emergency at the front door of the city hall building and shall place a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in which such emergency has been declared. 
(Ord. of 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 90-393. - Water use considerations. 
    Upon the declaration of a water shortage or emergency, the city manager or his designee is authorized and directed to implement conservation measures by ordering the restricted use or absolute curtailment of the use of water for certain nonessential purposes for the duration of the water shortage or emergency in the manner hereinafter set out. In exercising this discretionary authority, and making the determinations set forth hereof, the city manager or his designee shall give due consideration to stream flow conditions, water levels, available/usable storage on hand, draw down rates and the projected supply capability in the city; system purification and pumping capacity; daily water consumption and consumption projections of the system's customers; prevailing and forecast weather conditions; fire service requirements; pipeline conditions including breakages, stoppages and leaks; supplementary source data; estimates of minimum essential supplies to preserve public health and safety and such other data pertinent to the past, current and projected water demands. 
(Ord. of 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 90-394. - Limitation of restrictions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any governmental activity, institution, business or industry which shall be declared by the city manager or their designee, upon a proper showing, to be necessary for the public health, safety and welfare or the prevention of severe economic hardship or the substantial loss of employment. Any activity, institution, business or industry aggrieved by the finding of the city manager or their designee may appeal that decision to the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 90-395. - Water conservation measures. 
    Upon a determination by the city manager or his designee of the existence of the following conditions, the city manager shall take the following actions that shall apply to all water users in the city: 
(1)  Drought watch. When moderate but implied supplies of water are available and a drought watch is declared in accordance with the drought response and contingency plan, the city manager or their designee shall, through appropriate means, call upon the general population to employ prudent restraint in water usage. Public outreach activities shall be identified to inform the general population of the potential for drought conditions to intensify and potential water conservation activities that may be utilized. 
(2)  Drought warning. The drought warning stage includes voluntary water conservation actions due to the imminent onset of a significant drought event. Customers will be asked to reduce outdoor water use by only using water before 10:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m. and by: 
 Reducing turf watering; 
 Using a broom, not a hose, to clean driveways and sidewalks; 
 Reducing vehicle washing; 
 Using bucket watering instead of hose watering when possible; and 
 Turning off ornamental fountains. 
Customers will be asked to reduce indoor water use by: 
 Identifying and repairing leaks; 
 Turning off water while shaving, brushing teeth, etc.; 
 Reducing shower time to five minutes or taking baths with less water; 
 Only using the clothes washer or dishwasher machines when there are full loads; 
 Storing water in the refrigerator instead of running it to get it cold; and 
 Installing water-saver devices in the home, such as low-flow toilets and shower heads. 
(3)  Drought emergency. As drought conditions continue to worsen, a drought emergency may be declared by the city manager or their designee. When a drought emergency is declared, the following mandatory water restrictions are imposed: 
 All public water uses not required for health or safety will be prohibited; 
 Watering outdoor vegetation will be prohibited, except from a watering can or other container not exceeding three gallons in capacity or with recycled water. Any person regularly engaged in the sale of plants will be permitted to irrigate only in amounts necessary to prevent the loss of nursery stock; 
 Washing vehicles except from a bucket or other container not exceeding three gallons in capacity or with recycled water will be prohibited; 
 Washing driveways, sidewalks, exteriors of homes or other outdoor surfaces will be prohibited; however, any person regularly engaged in the business of washing such areas shall be permitted to use water for such purposes as long as the amount of water being used is minimized; 
 The operation of any ornamental fountain or similar structure using water will be prohibited; 
 The filling or refilling of swimming pools or wading pools will be prohibited; 
 Restaurants and similar establishments will be prohibited from serving water unless specifically requested by the customer; 
 Fire hydrant use will only be permitted for fire protection; and 
 Golf courses. Watering of tees and greens is permitted daily between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. All other watering is prohibited at all times, except that new and refurbished fairways may be watered for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(Ord. of 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 90-396. - Penalty and enforcement. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  In lieu of a criminal prosecution for violation of any provision of this article, the city may impose a civil penalty against any person who violates any provision of this article as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, violators shall receive a written warning delivered in person or posted by a representative of the city. 
(2)  For the second offense, violators shall be fined $50.00, the fine to be imposed on the violator's next water bill, or, in the case of violators not on the public water system, in a written notice. 
(3)  For the third and each subsequent offense, violators shall be fined $100.00 for each offense, the fine to be imposed on the violators next water bill, or in the case of violators not on the public water system, in a written notice. 
(4)  Each violation by a person shall be counted as a separate violation by that person, irrespective of the location at which the violation occurs. 
(c)  Persons who have been assessed a penalty shall have the right to challenge the assessment by providing a written notice to the city manager within ten days of the date of the assessment of the penalty. The city manager or their designee shall determine that the penalty was properly assessed and notify the complaining person in writing of their determination. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee may waive the penalty if he determines that the violation occurred due to no fault of the person. 
(Ord. of 10-24-2011) 
Sec. 90-397. - Notification of end of water emergency. 
    The city manger or his designee shall notify the city council when, in his opinion, the water emergency situation no longer exists. Upon concurrence of the city council, the water emergency shall be declared to have ended. When this declaration is made, the information shall be conveyed to the general public through the news media. 
(Ord. of 10-24-2011) 
Chapter 94 - VEGETATION[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to compel the removal of weeds from private and public property (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-867) adopted, § 2.2. 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 30; health and sanitation, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Removal of weeds and other foreign growth, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-11; planting of trees destroyed during construction, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-14.1; replacement of trees during development process in certain localities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-14.2; local authority to control Johnson grass and multiflora rose, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-28.4. 

Sec. 94-1. - Cutting grass, weeds, etc. 
    All persons shall keep their premises, whether owned, leased, occupied, or in their charge, clear of grass, weeds and other foreign growth and, if after written notice from the city manager or the building official, such grass, weeds and foreign growth are not cut within a period of 15 days from such notice, then the person in question shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. After the expiration of such 15 days, the city manager or the building official may cause such grass, weeds and other foreign growth to be cut and removed, where necessary, and the cost thereof shall thereupon be chargeable to and be collected from the owner of the premises in question, or the person leasing, occupying or having such premises in his charge, as taxes or levies are or may be collected. 
(Code 1969, § 24-28; Ord. of 3-10-97(5)) 
Chapter 95 - PUBLIC TREES 

Sec. 95-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have these meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Beautification division. The division of the street and general maintenance department responsible for the master planning of public trees under this chapter. 
    City horticulturist. The person within the beautification division, or his/her representative, assigned to carry out certain duties of the chapter. 
    Park. All public parks, or public open spaces having individual names. 
    Property line. The right of way line of a street or highway. 
    Property owner. The person owning real property as shown by the records in the clerk's office of the circuit court for the city. 
    Public trees. All shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing on any public areas including but not limited to parks, city buildings and facilities, and public rights-of-way. 
    Street or highway. The entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
    Treelawn. That part of a street or highway, not covered by a sidewalk or other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. of 1-10-00) 
Sec. 95-2. - Master street tree plan. 
(a)  The city horticulturist shall have the authority to formulate, administer, and amend a master street tree plan. The master street tree plan shall specify the species of trees to be planted on each of the streets or other public sites of the city. From and after the effective date of the master street tree plan, or any amendment thereof, all planting shall conform thereto whenever possible. 
(b)  The horticulturist shall consider all existing and future utility and environmental factors when recommending a specific species for each of the streets and other public sites of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-10-00) 
Sec. 95-3. - Obstruction. 
    Duty of occupant. It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real property bordering on any street upon whose property there may be trees or other vegetation, to prune such trees or vegetation in such manner that they will not interfere with utility lines on the city right-of-way, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct the view of any street or alley intersection, or obstruct view of any traffic control devices (including but not limited to signs and traffic signals). Suggested minimum vertical clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be eight feet over sidewalks, and 16 feet over all streets. Suggested minimal horizontal distance to any traffic signal equipment, traffic control signs, or utility lines should be ten feet. If the occupant fails to perform these duties, city maintenance crews or other tree maintenance crews authorized by the city shall have the right to prune for such clearance over city rights-of-way for safety and accessibility as needed. City maintenance crews or other tree maintenance crews authorized by the city shall have the right to maintain public trees located in the city right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 1-10-00) 
Sec. 95-4. - Abuse or mutilation of public trees. 
    Unless specifically authorized by the city horticulturist, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any public tree; nor attach any rope, wire, nails, staples, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any public tree; nor allow any gas, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; nor set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any public tree. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor and, in addition thereto, shall be responsible for the cost of repair or replacement of any public tree so damaged. 
    It shall be unlawful as a normal practice to top any public tree. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wire or other obstruction where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this ordinance at the determination of the city horticulturist. 
(Ord. of 1-10-00) 
Sec. 95-5. - Protection of trees. 
    All public trees near any excavation or construction of any building structure, or street work, shall be guarded with a fence, frame, or box not less than four feet high and eight feet square or at a distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches (diameter measured at breast height), whichever is greater, and all building material, dirt, or other debris be kept outside the barrier. 
    No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, or trenches within a distance of ten feet from a public tree without first obtaining written approval from the beautification division. 
(Ord. of 1-10-00) 
Sec. 95-6. - Placing materials on public property. 
    No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain upon any public place of the city, any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing thereon, except by written permit of the beautification division. In the event of an emergency or in order to repair existing utilities, these written permits may be waived. 
(Ord. No. 1-10-00) 
Sec. 95-7. - Removal, planting, replanting, and replacement. 
    Whenever practical, the city shall replace a tree or trees in a treelawn when such trees are removed for street or highway paving. 
    No person, other than the city, shall remove a tree from the treelawn for the purpose of construction, or for any other reason, without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the city horticulturist, and without replacing the removed tree or trees to the satisfaction of the horticulturist. The person or property owner shall bear the cost of removal and replacement of all trees removed. 
    No person shall plant a tree on city property or right of way contrary to the master street tree plan. Any such planting may be removed by the city at the cost of such person. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 1-10-00) 
Sec. 95-8. - Timing of application for permits. 
    Application for permits required by the provisions of this article shall be made at the office of the city horticulturist not less than 72 hours in advance of the time the work is to be done. 
(Ord. of 1-10-00) 
Sec. 95-9. - Decision review. 
    The director of streets and general maintenance shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, masterplanning, and decisions of the city horticulturist. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the city horticulturist to this director. If not satisfied by the decision of this director, the city manager shall review the matter and his/her decision shall be final. 
(Ord. of 1-10-00) 
Chapter 98 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Signs, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Shared ride taxi systems, etc., in counties and certain cities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-37.3:3; local licensing of drivers of taxicabs and similar for-hire passenger vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-310; regulation of taxicab service by localities, Code of Virginia, § 56-291.3:1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 98-1-98-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-36. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certificate means the certificate of public convenience and necessity granted by the council to persons in the business of operating taxicabs as provided in this article. 
    Driver means any person in charge of or driving any taxicab. 
    Owner means any person having control of the operation or maintenance of taxicabs, including any person having control of the collection of revenue derived from the operation of taxicabs and including the purchaser of any taxicab under a conditional sales contract or other title reserving agreement. 
    Taxicab means any motor-driven vehicle used for the transportation, for hire or reward, of passengers upon the streets of the city, except buses being operated under franchise or by the city and over fixed routes between fixed termini and except ambulances and conveyances used in connection with the conducting of funeral services. 
(Code 1969, § 28-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-37. - Purpose and intent. 
    This article is adopted under the general police and Charter powers of the city. It is intended to regulate the operation of taxicabs in the city. 
(Code 1969, § 28-22) 
Sec. 98-38. - Insurance. 
(a)  Every owner of any taxicab operated in the city shall file with the clerk of council and keep in effect at all times a policy, or a duly certified certificate thereof, of casualty insurance with some reputable insurance company duly licensed to do business in the state, insuring against any liability incurred on account of the death or injury to any person or damage to property resulting from the operation of such taxicab, in the following amounts: For death or injury to one person in any one accident, $50,000.00; for death or injury to two or more persons in any one accident, $100,000.00; for property damage in any one accident, $20,000.00. 
(b)  If any policy of insurance required by this section is cancelled as provided in this section, the owner shall not operate or cause to be operated any vehicle covered by such policy until other like insurance is obtained. 
(c)  Each policy of insurance filed under the provisions of subsection (a) shall contain a clause to the effect that the insurance carrier may not cancel the policy until 30 days' written notice has been given to the clerk of council, in addition to such other notice as may be required by law to be given prior to the cancellation of such policy. 
(d)  If judgment is rendered against the owner or driver, or both, in any court of competent jurisdiction by reason of any accident for which the insurance policy or surety or cash bond is provided in this section, the owner shall, within 24 hours after the rendition of such judgment, whether appealed from or not, increase the total amount of insurance or the amount of the surety or cash bond, so that there shall be kept in effect in the manner contemplated by law and by this article, insurance or bond upon which there has been no recovery of not less than the minimum provided in this section. 
(Code 1969, § 28-2) 
State Law reference- Coverage of owner's motor vehicle liability insurance policy, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-472. 
Sec. 98-39. - Rules and regulations. 
    The council may from time to time, by resolution, promulgate such rules and regulations applicable to the safe and efficient operation of taxicabs on the streets of the city as in their discretion are necessary for the public safety and convenience, which shall be in addition to the provisions of this article relating to such operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such rules and regulations. 
(Code 1969, § 28-3) 
Sec. 98-40. - Duty of owner or certificate holder to provide depot or terminal. 
    Each owner or holder of a certificate issued under this article shall provide a depot or terminal at his place of business for offstreet parking or garage space of sufficient size to accommodate each vehicle authorized by the certificate in question. For the purpose of this section, 200 square feet of lot or floor area, together with means of ingress and egress thereto, shall be deemed to be a minimum parking area or garage space for one vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 28-4) 
Sec. 98-41. - Accident reports. 
    Every accident, however slight, in which any taxicab is involved shall be immediately reported to the police department. Such report shall not be used against the owner or driver making it in any criminal proceeding. Such report shall be available to any person, or his attorney, injured in any accident or by reason thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 28-5) 
Sec. 98-42. - Records required. 
    Every owner shall keep and maintain a clear, neat, written record, in a form prescribed by the chief of police, showing for each day the number of taxicabs, the driver of each such vehicle, the origin and destination of all calls and by whom received, and each trip made by such vehicle, the amount charged therefor, and such other information as the chief of police may require. Such records shall be open at all times to inspection by any member of the police department and shall be preserved for a period of not less than 12 months. No person shall knowingly make a record of a fictitious call or use any fictitious name in reporting a bona fide call, nor shall a fictitious or false address of the point of origin or destination be knowingly reported. 
(Code 1969, § 28-6) 
Sec. 98-43. - Nonpaying passengers. 
    No nonpaying passenger shall be transported in a taxicab with a paying passenger, except bona fide officers or employees of the owner or police officer or firefighters engaged in the performance of duty and unable to obtain other adequate means of transportation. 
(Code 1969, § 28-7) 
Sec. 98-44. - Carrying more than one passenger. 
    Not more than one passenger shall be transported at one time in a taxicab without the consent of the person first engaging the vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 28-8) 
Sec. 98-45. - Drivers to attend vehicles. 
    Every taxicab, while in operation for the solicitation or transportation of passengers, shall be attended by the driver at all times, except when such driver is actually engaged in loading and unloading. 
(Code 1969, § 28-9) 
Sec. 98-46. - Completion of accepted calls. 
    No taxicab driver shall fail or refuse to complete accepted calls as promptly as possible. 
(Code 1969, § 28-10) 
Sec. 98-47. - Cruising. 
    Taxicabs shall not be permitted to cruise seeking employment. 
(Code 1969, § 28-11) 
Sec. 98-48. - Maintenance of adequate public service. 
    Adequate and efficient public taxicab service shall at all times be maintained by holders of certificates issued as provided in this article and holders of licenses. 
(Code 1969, § 28-12) 
Sec. 98-49. - Solicitation of patronage. 
    No person shall solicit patronage for any taxicab by word, signal or otherwise on any street or public property in the city, other than at such stands as may be designated and assigned by the city manager under chapter 86 or at the depot or terminal. 
(Code 1969, § 28-13) 
Sec. 98-50. - Type of vehicle required. 
    Every taxicab operated in the city pursuant to a certificate issued as provided in this article shall be of the enclosed or sedan type with four doors, at least two seats and of not less than five-passenger capacity. 
(Code 1969, § 28-14) 
Sec. 98-51. - Condition of vehicles. 
    Every taxicab operated in the city pursuant to a certificate issued as provided in this article shall be, at all times, in good order and repair, safe, in a clean condition and well-ventilated when in operation. 
(Code 1969, § 28-15) 
Sec. 98-52. - Inspection of vehicles; correction of defects. 
    The city manager shall, from time to time, cause to be made an inspection of each taxicab within the city. If any such taxicab shall be found to be unsafe, unfit or in an unclean condition, the owner thereof shall be notified at once that such taxicab shall not be operated thereafter until such defective or unclean condition has been remedied. 
(Code 1969, § 28-16) 
Sec. 98-53. - Information displayed on taxicabs. 
    Every taxicab operated in the city pursuant to a certificate issued as provided in this article shall bear on the outside on at least two sides the name of the owner in letters not less than two inches high and plainly visible at a distance of 100 feet; and on two sides and the back the owner's telephone number in letters three inches high and plainly visible at a distance of 100 feet. 
(Code 1969, § 28-17) 
Sec. 98-54. - Radios. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate any taxicab along the streets in which a radio is installed which is capable of receiving police calls. It shall not be unlawful, however, for a taxicab to be equipped with a radio capable of receiving only a standard broadcast. 
(Code 1969, § 28-18) 
Sec. 98-55. - Disposition of money or other property left in taxicab. 
    The person in charge of any taxicab shall carefully preserve any money or other property left in such vehicle by any passenger and such money or other property shall be promptly deposited with the owner of such vehicle, who shall immediately turn over to the police department such money or other property, where such money or other property may be called for by the owner. The police department shall keep a record of all such money or other property. When such money or property shall have been identified and ownership established, the same shall be promptly delivered to such owner. Any property, whether money or other thing, which shall not be called for within 60 days shall be disposed of according to law. 
(Code 1969, § 28-19) 
State Law reference- Disposal of unclaimed property in possession of police, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-133.01. 
Sec. 98-56. - Application of article; compliance with article. 
    The operation of taxicabs in the city shall be subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth in this article, and it shall be unlawful to operate, or cause to be operated, within the city any taxicab unless the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth and prescribed by this article have been complied with by the owner in question. 
(Code 1969, § 28-21) 
Secs. 98-57-98-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Power to issue permits for use of streets by taxicabs (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-892) adopted, § 2.2. 

Sec. 98-81. - Prerequisite to operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, within the city any taxicab until a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued to the owner thereof as provided in this division. 
(Code 1969, § 28-24) 
Sec. 98-82. - Prerequisite to licensing. 
    No license for the operation of a taxicab shall be issued unless and until the council has issued a certificate to the owner thereof as provided in this division. 
(Code 1969, § 28-25) 
Cross reference- Licensing, § 22-36 et seq. 
Sec. 98-83. - Filing of application; contents. 
(a)  Application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity, as required by this division, shall be made by the owner or proposed owner to the council and shall furnish, under oath of the applicant, the following information: 
(1)  The full name and the home and business address of the applicant. 
(2)  The trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business. 
(3)  The financial status and responsibility of the applicant. 
(4)  The name and address of any person lending money or furnishing capital to the applicant where the operation or proposed operation is to be financed wholly or in part by means of borrowed money or capital in any form furnished by any person other than the owner. 
(5)  The number and kind of vehicles, showing seating capacity, design and color scheme of each and the lettering and marking to be used thereon. 
(6)  The character and location of the depots, terminals and stands to be used. 
(7)  Each conviction or plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere for the violation of any criminal law, whether such violation is of a city or town ordinance, state law, federal law or other criminal law. 
(8)  The specific experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers for hire. 
(9)  All facts or circumstances upon which the applicant bases his belief that the public convenience and necessity require the granting of his application. 
(10)  Any other information deemed proper by the council. 
(b)  An application, as provided for in subsection (a), shall be filed, in duplicate, with the clerk of council at least ten days prior to the regular council meeting at which such application is to be acted upon. 
(Code 1969, § 28-26) 
Sec. 98-84. - Copy of application to chief of police. 
    Upon the filing of an application provided for in section 98-83 with the clerk of council, the chief of police shall be immediately furnished with a copy of the application. 
(Code 1969, § 28-27) 
Sec. 98-85. - Investigation of applicant; report. 
(a)  Upon the receipt of a copy of an application, as provided in section 98-84, it shall be the duty of the chief of police promptly to make an investigation as to the suitable character and qualification of the applicant to conduct the business in question and, in the case of corporations, to investigate the fitness of the officers, directors and stockholders. 
(b)  Upon the completion of the investigation provided for in subsection (a), the chief of police shall report his findings, in writing. Such report shall be filed with the clerk of council prior to the regular council meeting at which the application in question is to be acted upon. 
(Code 1969, § 28-28) 
Sec. 98-86. - Authority of council to issue, refuse, etc. 
    The council shall have the authority to grant a certificate as applied for or to grant a certificate as applied for under this division for a lesser number of vehicles than that specified in the application or to deny the application in the exercise of sound discretion, after a consideration of the factors prescribed by section 98-87. 
(Code 1969, § 28-29) 
Sec. 98-87. - Determination of public convenience and necessity. 
    The council shall determine whether the public convenience and necessity require the operation of the taxicabs for which application has been filed under section 98-83. In making this determination, the following shall be considered: 
(1)  The adequacy, efficiency and safety of existing taxicab service and other forms of transportation for passengers already in existence. 
(2)  The probable permanence and quality of the services offered by the applicant. 
(3)  The financial status, character, qualifications and responsibility of the applicant. 
(4)  The number and character of vehicles and the character and location of the depots, terminals and stands proposed to be used. 
(5)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers for hire in taxicabs. 
(Code 1969, § 28-30) 
Sec. 98-88. - Responsibility of applicant. 
    When the council considers an application for a certificate, filed as provided in section 98-83, the burden shall be upon the applicant to establish the existence of public convenience and necessity for the operation of the taxicabs designated in his application and all other facts required for the granting of such application. 
(Code 1969, § 28-31) 
Sec. 98-89. - Issuance; contents. 
    Upon determination by the council that any application, filed as provided in section 98-83, shall be granted, a certificate shall be issued to the applicant by the city clerk and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner. 
(2)  The number, kind and description of vehicles the operation of which is authorized by the certificate. 
(3)  The date of issuance and the date of expiration. 
(4)  The fact that the certificate is being issued subject to the provisions of this article and all other laws and ordinances governing the operation of taxicabs in the city. 
(Code 1969, § 28-32) 
Sec. 98-90. - Term. 
    Every certificate issued under this division shall be good and valid, unless revoked or suspended as provided for in this division, from the date of issuance until the following March 31 of each year. 
(Code 1969, § 28-33) 
Sec. 98-91. - Application for renewal. 
    Applications for renewal certificates similar to original applications shall be filed with the clerk of council at least ten days prior to the regular council meeting at which such applications are to be acted upon. 
(Code 1969, § 28-34) 
Sec. 98-92. - Transfer. 
    Any certificate issued under this division shall be transferable only by and with the consent of the council. Application for any such transfer shall be filed with the clerk of council and upon the filing of such application for transfer, the person to whom the transfer is to be made shall file an application as if an original application were being made. The proceedings upon such transfer shall be the same as upon an original application. 
(Code 1969, § 28-35) 
Sec. 98-93. - Revocation or suspension. 
    The council may, for cause, cancel, suspend or revoke any certificate issued pursuant to this division after due notice to the certificate holder. 
(Code 1969, § 28-36) 
Sec. 98-94. - Council's annual hearing. 
    The council shall conduct a hearing each year between January 1 and March 31 for the purpose of determining the number of taxicabs for which certificates shall be issued during the next year and for the purpose of determining to which persons such certificates shall be issued, after a consideration of the factors prescribed in section 98-87. No certificate shall be renewable as a matter of right, but the council shall decide in the exercise of its sound discretion and after consideration of the factors prescribed in section 98-87 to which persons such certificates shall be issued for the next certificate year. Such hearing shall be public, after notice thereof has been given by mail to all holders of certificates and applicants for certificates, at the address shown on such certificates and applications and after notice thereof by publication at least once and not less than ten days prior to the hearing in some newspaper published or having a general circulation in the city. Any such hearing may be continued from time to time without further notice. 
(Code 1969, § 28-37) 
Sec. 98-95. - Substitution of equipment. 
    No equipment shall be substituted for that described in a certificate until it has been inspected and approved by the chief of police and the substitution has been endorsed on the certificate by the chief of police and attested to by the clerk of council. 
(Code 1969, § 28-38) 
Secs. 98-96-98-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Local licensing of drivers of taxicabs and similar for-hire passenger vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-310. 

Sec. 98-116. - Required. 
    No person shall drive a taxicab within the city unless he shall have obtained a special license to be known as a "taxicab driver's license," which shall be in addition to any other license required of such person. 
(Code 1969, § 28-39) 
Sec. 98-117. - Application-Filing generally; contents. 
    Application for a taxicab driver's license under this division shall be made in writing under oath to the chief of police and shall show the following: 
(1)  Full name of applicant. 
(2)  Present address. 
(3)  Age. 
(4)  Place of birth. 
(5)  Places of previous address and employment for the past five years. 
(6)  Height. 
(7)  Weight. 
(8)  Race. 
(9)  Color of eyes. 
(10)  Color of hair. 
(11)  Sex. 
(12)  Whether married, single, or divorced; and, if married, whether living with spouse or contributing to spouse's support or the support of his children, if any, or both. 
(13)  Whether or not the applicant is in good physical condition. 
(14)  Whether or not the applicant has good hearing and good eyesight. 
(15)  Whether or not the applicant uses, or has used within the past five years, intoxicating liquors, drugs or any other form of narcotic, and, if so, to what extent. 
(16)  Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of, pled guilty to or entered the plea of nolo contendere to the violation of any city, town, state or federal or other criminal law and, if so, the number of times and the kind of offenses and such other information as may be required by the chief of police. 
(17)  Whether or not the applicant has previously been employed or licensed as a driver or chauffeur and, if so, whether or not his license has ever been revoked or suspended for any reason. 
(18)  What experience, if any, the applicant has had in the operation of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1969, § 28-40) 
Sec. 98-118. - Same-To be made in person; fingerprints. 
    Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license under this division shall apply for his license in person and have his fingerprints taken, which fingerprints shall constitute a part of his application. 
(Code 1969, § 28-41) 
Sec. 98-119. - Same-Photographs. 
    Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license under this division shall file with his application two recent photographs of himself of a size designated by the chief of police, one of which shall be attached to and become a part of the application. 
(Code 1969, § 28-42) 
Sec. 98-120. - Physical examination of applicant. 
    The chief of police shall require of an applicant for a taxicab driver's license under this division such medical examination as he may deem proper. 
(Code 1969, § 28-43) 
Sec. 98-121. - Investigation; memorandum of findings. 
    The chief of police shall promptly make an investigation of the facts stated in an application, filed as provided in section 98-117, and shall make a written memorandum of his findings, which shall be kept on file in his office for the benefit of any interested party. 
(Code 1969, § 28-44) 
Sec. 98-122. - Issuance or refusal generally. 
    If the chief of police finds, upon investigation made as provided in section 98-121, that the applicant is duly qualified and of good moral character, and at least 18 years of age, he shall issue him a taxicab driver's license. If the chief of police is not satisfied of the qualifications and fitness of the applicant to operate taxicabs upon the streets of the city, he shall refuse to issue such license. 
(Code 1969, § 28-45) 
Sec. 98-123. - Appeal from refusal. 
    The applicant shall have the right, within five days from the day a taxicab driver's license is denied, as provided in section 98-122, to appeal to the judge of the general district court of the city from the decision of the chief of police denying the permit. The decision of the judge of the general district court after hearing relevant evidence shall be final. 
(Code 1969, § 28-46) 
Sec. 98-124. - Form and contents; numbering. 
    Each taxicab driver's license issued under this division shall contain a statement of the name, home address, business address and the employer of the holder thereof. One of the photographs filed by an applicant for a taxicab driver's license, as provided in section 98-117, shall be attached to the license in such manner that no other photograph may be substituted therefor without probability of detection. Taxicab drivers' licenses shall be serially numbered. 
(Code 1969, § 28-47) 
Sec. 98-125. - Display. 
    Each taxicab driver's license issued under this division shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the taxicab while such taxicab is being operated by or in the charge of the holder of such license. 
(Code 1969, § 28-48) 
Sec. 98-126. - Fees-Schedule. 
    The schedule of fees with reference to taxicab drivers' licenses shall be as follows: 
(a)  $3.00 for each application form, whether used or not, and for fingerprinting by police department and for each license issued. 
(b)  $1.00 for each renewal of license. 
(c)  $20.00 for background checks on owners and/or directors upon each application and renewal of license. 
(Code 1969, § 28-49; Ord. No. 11-14-2016(3)) 
Sec. 98-127. - Same-Collection and disposition. 
    All fees, as provided for in section 98-126, shall be collected by the chief of police, or some member of his department designated by him, and shall promptly be paid over to the city treasurer, to be placed in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1969, § 28-50) 
Sec. 98-128. - Term. 
    All taxicab drivers' licenses issued under this division shall be good and valid, unless revoked or suspended, as provided for in this division, from the date of issuance until the following March 31 of each year. 
(Code 1969, § 28-51) 
Sec. 98-129. - Transfer. 
    No taxicab driver's license issued under this division shall be transferable. 
(Code 1969, § 28-52) 
Sec. 98-130. - Effect of conviction of crime involving moral turpitude. 
    A taxicab driver's license issued under this division shall become void and shall be immediately surrendered by the holder thereof upon his conviction of, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, the violation of any city, state, federal or other criminal law involving moral turpitude. 
(Code 1969, § 28-53) 
Sec. 98-131. - Revocation or suspension. 
    The city manager, upon application of the chief of police or any other interested party and upon ten days' notice by personal service, shall have the power to revoke or suspend the taxicab driver's license of any driver licensed under this division for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Repeated and persistent violation of traffic and safety laws and ordinances. 
(2)  Failure to report any accident in which such driver is involved, however slight. 
(3)  Operation of any taxicab known to the driver not to be in good order and repair. 
(4)  Conviction of reckless driving more than once within the space of any 12-month period. 
(5)  Violation of any provision of this article. 
(6)  Violation of any federal or state law or the ordinances of any political subdivision. 
(Code 1969, § 28-54) 
Sec. 98-132. - Permitting unlicensed person to drive. 
    No owner of a taxicab shall permit such taxicab to be driven by any person who does not have a valid and effective taxicab driver's license. 
(Code 1969, § 28-55) 
Secs. 98-133-98-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RATES 

Sec. 98-151. - Generally. 
(a)  The rates for taxicab service within the city shall be such as are established from time to time by ordinance of the council of the city. No different rates shall be charged or collected for such service. 
(b)  The rates to be charged and collected for taxicab service shall be determined by accurate taximeters. 
(c)  Waiting time shall include the time the vehicle is stopped in traffic or stopped at the direction of the passenger. It shall also include time when the vehicle slows to a speed at which the charges under the distance rates are less than the charge for the time rates. Waiting time shall not include the first three minutes after the vehicle has arrived at the destination to which it was called. 
(d)  When calls to a place of pickup are made to a taxicab located at a stand, no charge shall be made until the taxicab arrives at the point of pickup. 
(e)  When a charge is made for waiting time, there shall be no charge for mileage. 
(f)  The maximum rates for services rendered by taxicabs shall be as follows: 
(1)  Distance rates: 
a.  For the first one-eighth mile or fraction thereof, $2.80. 
b.  For each additional one-eighth mile or fraction thereof, $0.20. 
(2)  Time rates: For each 40 seconds of waiting time, $0.20. While a charge is made for waiting time, there shall be no charge for mileage under the foregoing distance rates. 
(3)  Extra passengers: For each additional passenger, $0.30. 
(4)  A fuel surcharge of $1.00 may be added to the current meter charge for each trip. Such surcharge may be included from the rate card posted in each taxicab. Such surcharge may remain in effect until such time as the city manager notifies holders of permits for taxicabs that the surcharge is to be removed, in which case no surcharge shall be charged or included on the rate card after the first day of the following month. The city manager shall send such notice at such time as the city manager determines that the average cost per gallon of regular unleaded self-service gasoline in the city as published by the American Automobile Association drops below $2.00 per gallon for a consecutive six-month period. 
(g)  Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting an owner from charging less than the rates set forth in (f) above. 
(Code 1969, § 28-56; Ord. of 11-14-94(2); Ord. of 5-11-09) 
Sec. 98-152. - Display. 
    The rates for use of a taxicab in effect, whether for within the corporate limits of the city or not, shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place inside the vehicle at all times and shall be exhibited to any person demanding it. 
(Code 1969, § 28-57) 
Chapter 102 - WATERWAYS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local erosion advisory commissions for public beach conservation and development, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-711; local authority to require removal, repair, etc., of wharves, piers, pilings, bulkheads, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-11.3; local boating regulations, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-744; local regulation of personal watercraft distance from shore, etc., Code of Virginia, § 29.1-744.1; powers of cities as to improvement of navigability of streams, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-155 et seq. 

Sec. 102-1. - Lake Spring-Fishing. 
(a)  No person under three years of age or over 12 years of age shall at any time fish in Lake Spring. 
(b)  The special fishing rodeo sponsored by the director of parks and recreation for handicapped and/or nursing home occupants shall not be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(c)  There shall be established a limit of six fish per person per day. 
(d)  Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 17-20) 
Charter reference- Powers as to lakes and other waters (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-858) adopted, § 2.2. 
Sec. 102-2. - Same-Placement of fish. 
    No person shall place any fish in Lake Spring without the express permission of the city manager or his duly appointed representative. 
(Code 1969, § 17-21) 
Chapter 106 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the City of Salem Zoning Ordinance as adopted by City Council on March 14, 2005, effective July 1, 2005. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; planning, ch. 62; signs, ch. 66; subdivisions, ch. 78; vehicles for hire, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Local zoning powers, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2280 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 106-100. - Title and authority. 
(A)  This chapter, and the Official Zoning Map of the City of Salem, Virginia shall be known and referred to as the Salem Virginia Zoning Ordinance. 
(B)  The provisions of this chapter have been adopted by the Salem City Council pursuant to declaration of legislative intent contained in § 15.2-2200, and the authority contained in § 15.2-2280 and § 15.2-2281 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-102. - Jurisdiction. 
(A)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all property within the corporation limits of the City of Salem, Virginia, with the exception that any property held in fee simple ownership by the United States of America or the Commonwealth of Virginia shall not be subject to the provisions contained herein. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-104. - Purpose. 
(A)  This chapter, and any amendments hereto, have been adopted for the general purpose of implementing the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Salem, and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, and/or general welfare of the public. To these ends, this chapter is designed to give reasonable consideration to each of the following purposes: 
1.  Provide for adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire, flood, crime, and other dangers; 
2.  Reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets; 
3.  Facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community; 
4.  Facilitate the provision of adequate police and fire protection, disaster evacuation, civil defense, transportation, water, sewerage, flood protection, schools, parks, forests, playgrounds, recreational facilities, airports and other public requirements; 
5.  Protect against destruction of, or encroachment upon, historic areas; 
6.  Protect against one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, undue density of population in relation to the community facilities existing or available, obstruction of light and air, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, or loss of life, health or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers; 
7.  Encourage economic development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base; 
8.  Provide for the preservation of agricultural and forestal lands; 
9.  Protect approach slopes and other safety areas of licensed heliports and airports; 
10.  Promote the creation and preservation of affordable housing suitable for meeting the current and future needs of the city; 
11.  Protect surface and groundwater resources. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-106. - Effective date. 
(A)  This chapter shall be effective on July 1, 2005. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-108. - Application of regulations. 
(A)  All land uses and activities not specifically provided for or addressed in this chapter shall be considered uses and activities prohibited within the city unless the administrator finds that the land use or activity is compatible and consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  If a land use or activity is deemed by the administrator to be prohibited within the city, that use or activity shall not be permitted within the city unless a use not provided for permit is approved by the council pursuant to this chapter. 
(C)  Where the standards imposed by this chapter are more or less restrictive than the standards imposed by any other public regulation, the more restrictive standard shall apply. 
(D)  This chapter shall not apply to, or interfere with, any private covenant. However, if the regulations imposed by this chapter are more restrictive, or impose a higher standard than the private covenant, then the provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
(E)  All city agencies and officials that have the responsibility to issue permits and licenses pertaining to the construction of buildings or the use of land within the city shall do so only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If a permit or license is issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the permit or license shall be null and void. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-110. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
(A)  The following zoning districts shall be established within the City of Salem. The location of these districts shall be shown on the official zoning map. 
Agricultural Districts 
AG Agricultural District  
Residential Districts 
RSF Residential Single Family District RMF Residential Multi-Family District MHP Manufactured Home Park District RB Residential Business District  
Business Districts 
DBD Downtown Business District TBD Transitional Business District HBD Highway Business District BCD Business Commerce District  
Manufacturing Districts 
LM Light Manufacturing District HM Heavy Manufacturing District  
Special Purpose Districts 
COD Cluster Housing Overlay District CUD College and University District FOD Floodplain Overlay District PUD Planned Unit District  
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-112. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
(A)  If in the opinion of the administrator, uncertainty exists as to the exact location of any zoning district boundary, the administrator shall apply the following rules to determine the location of the boundary: 
1.  Zoning district boundaries that appear to approximately follow the center lines of street, rights-of-way or alleys, shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
2.  Zoning district boundaries that appear to follow platted lot lines shall be construed as following such platted lot lines except that the zoning designation of any lot shall extend to the center line of any adjacent street, right-of-way or alley. 
3.  Zoning district boundaries that appear to follow the center lines of streams and rivers shall be construed as following such center lines. 
(B)  If the rules contained in (A) above do not provide sufficient certainty to determine the location of a zoning district boundary, the administrator may request the Board of Zoning Appeals interpret the location of the district boundary pursuant to the authority granted by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 106-200. - AG-Agriculture district. 
Sec. 106-200.1. - Statement of intent. 
(A)  The AG Agricultural District is created in recognition that some land exists within the city that continues to be used for limited agricultural purposes. Although now used for agriculture, the comprehensive plan recommends, through the future land use map, that these areas eventually be used for other productive uses. It is anticipated that future growth of Salem will be occurring through the development of these and other areas. Although currently zoned for agricultural use, it is anticipated that these areas will eventually be rezoned to higher use classifications in accordance with the comprehensive plan and prior to subdivision and development. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-200.2. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  The following uses are permitted by right in the AG Agricultural District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
Agriculture * 
Agritourism 
Farm Stand * 
Forestry Operation 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Home Occupation * 
Manufactured Home, Emergency * 
Residential Human Care Facility 
Single Family Dwelling, Detached * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Public Parks and Recreational Areas 
4.  Office Use Types 
(None) 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
(None) 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Amateur Radio Tower * 
Utility Services Minor 
(B)  The following uses are permitted by special exception in the AG Agricultural District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
Stable 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Family Day Care Home * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Camps 
Cemetery * 
Clubs 
Religious Assembly 
4.  Office Use Types 
(None) 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Agricultural Services 
Antique Shops 
Camp Grounds 
Garden Center 
Golf Course 
Homestay Inn * 
Kennel, Commercial 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Aviation Facility 
Outdoor Gathering * 
Shooting Range, Outdoor 
Utility Services, Major 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 3-14-2011(1); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2); Ord. of 4-9-2018(3)) 
Sec. 106-200.3. - Site development regulations. 
    The following are general development standards for the AG Agricultural District. For additional, modified or more stringent standards see article III, use and design standards. 
(A)  Minimum Lot Requirements. 
1.  Area: Ten acres 
2.  Frontage: 50 feet on a public street 
(B)  Minimum Setback Requirements. 
1.  Principal Structure: 
Front Yard: 30 feet, if right-of-way is 50 feet or greater in width; 55 feet from the centerline of any right-of-way less than 50 feet in width. However, if an adjoining lot is developed, no principal structure shall be required to have a front yard greater than that observed by an existing building on an adjoining lot. 
Side Yard: Any side yard shall be a minimum of ten percent of lot width. 
Rear Yard: 30 feet 
2.  Accessory Structures: 
Front Yard: Behind the rear building line of the principal structure. 
Side Yard: Five feet 
Rear Yard: Five feet 
(C)  Maximum Height of Structures. 
1.  Principal Structures: 45 feet 
2.  Accessory Structures: 45 feet 
(D)  Maximum Building Size. 
1.  Principal Structures: None 
2.  Accessory Structures: 30 percent of rear yard area. Accessory structures larger than 1,000 square feet shall require a special exception permit in accordance with section 106-524 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-202. - RSF-Residential single family district. 
Sec. 106-202.1. - Statement of intent. 
(A)  The RSF Residential Single Family District is created in recognition that most residential neighborhoods in Salem are comprised primarily of single family dwellings on relatively small lots. It is anticipated that most future residential development will occur in this district. Proposed development standards such as lot sizes and frontage requirements in the RSF District reflect Salem's compact development pattern and recognition that future residential development will be "infill development" Limited uses other than residential are permitted. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-202.2. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  The following uses are permitted by right in the RSF Residential Single Family District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Home Occupation * 
Manufactured Home, Emergency * 
Residential Human Care Facility 
Single Family Dwelling, Detached * 
Temporary Family Health Care 
  Structure * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Community Recreation * 
Public Parks and Recreation Areas 
Religious Assembly 
4.  Office Use Types 
(None) 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
(None) 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Amateur Radio Tower * 
Utility Services, Minor 
(B)  The following uses are permitted by special exception in the RSF Residential Single Family District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
Stable * 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Accessory Apartment * 
Family Day Care Home * 
Single Family Dwelling, Attached 
Townhouse * 
Two Family Dwelling 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Cemetery * 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
4.  Office Use Types 
(None) 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Golf Course 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Outdoor Gathering * 
Utility Services, Major 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 4-9-2018(3)) 
Sec. 106-202.3. - Site development regulations. 
    The following are general development standards for the RSF Residential Single Family District. For additional, modified or more stringent standards see article III, use and design standards. 
(A)  Minimum Lot Requirements. 
1.  Area: 9,000 square feet. 
2.  Frontage: 75 feet on a public street. 
3.  Width: In order to maximize land usage, lots which front on a curve and whose side lot lines are perpendicular to the right-of-way center line are required to have an average 75 foot width. All other lots will be required to have a minimum width of 75 feet. 
(B)  Minimum Setback Requirements. 
1.  Principal Structure: 
Front Yard: 25 feet, if right-of-way is 50 feet or greater in width; 50 feet from the centerline of any right-of-way less than 50 feet in width. However, if an adjoining lot is developed, no principal structure shall be required to have a front yard greater than that observed by an existing building on an adjoining lot. 
Side Yard: Any side yard shall be a minimum of ten percent of lot width. However, under no circumstances shall either side yard be required to exceed 25 feet. 
Rear Yard: 25 feet. 
Corner Lots: The setback on the side street shall be equal to the setback observed by the principal structure on an adjoining lot. If the side street does not have street facing lots, the side yard setback for corner lots shall be ten percent of the lot width. 
2.  Accessory Structures: 
Front Yard: Behind the rear building line of the principal structure. 
Side Yard: Five feet. 
Rear Yard: Five feet. 
(C)  Maximum Height of Structures. 
1.  Principal Structures: 45 feet. Principal structures exceeding 45 feet in height shall require a special exception permit in accordance with section 106-524 this chapter. 
2.  Accessory Structures: The height of any accessory structure shall not exceed the height of the principal structure on the lot. 
(D)  Maximum Building Size. 
1.  Principal Structures: None. 
2.  Accessory Structures: 30 percent of rear yard area. Accessory structures larger than 1,000 square feet shall require a special exception permit in accordance with section 106-524 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 12-12-05(2); Ord. of 3-24-08(2); Ord. of 9-8-08(3)) 
Sec. 106-204. - RMF-Residential multi-family district. 
Sec. 106-204.1. - Statement of intent. 
    The RMF Residential Multi-Family District has been created in recognition that some areas within the city are suitable for higher density residential uses. Apartments and townhouses are the predominant land uses in this district. These housing types provide diversity in the style and value of housing in the city. Development standards in the RMF District such as density, lot sizes and frontage requirements reflect Salem's compact development pattern and recognition that higher density housing that is properly designed and located, can play an important role in meeting the city's future housing need. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-204.2. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  The following uses are permitted by right in the RMF Residential Multi-Family District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Accessory Apartment * 
Home Occupation * 
Manufactured Home, Emergency * 
Multi-Family Dwelling * 
Residential Human Care Facility 
Single Family Dwelling, Detached * 
Townhouse * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Assisted Care Residence 
Community Recreation * 
Educational Facilities - Primary/Secondary 
Public Parks and Recreation Areas 
Religious Assembly 
4.  Office Use Types 
(None) 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
(None) 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Amateur Radio Tower * 
Utility Services, Minor 
(B)  The following uses are permitted by special exception in the RMF Residential Multi-Family District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Family Day Care Home * 
Single Family Dwelling, Attached 
Two Family Dwelling 
3.  Civic Use Types 
(None) 
4.  Office Use Types 
General Office 
Medical Office 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Homestay Inn * 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Outdoor Gathering * 
Utility Services, Major 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 4-9-2018(3)) 
Sec. 106-204.3. - Site development regulations. 
    The following are general development standards for the RMF Residential Multi-Family District. For additional, modified or more stringent standards see article III, use and design standards. 
(A)  Minimum Lot Requirements. 
1.  Area: 7,200 square feet. 
2.  Frontage: 60 feet on a public street. 
3.  Width: In order to maximize land usage, lots which front on a curve and whose side lot lines are perpendicular to the right-of-way center line are required to have an average 75 foot width. All other lots will be required to have a minimum width of 75 feet. 
(B)  Minimum Setback Requirements. 
1.  Principal Structure: 
Front Yard: 25 feet, if right-of-way is 50 feet or greater in width; 50 feet from the centerline of any right-of-way less than 50 feet in width. However, if an adjoining lot is developed, no principal structure shall be required to have a front yard greater than that observed by an existing building on an adjoining lot. 
Side Yard: 20 feet. 
Rear Yard: 20 feet. 
2.  Accessory Structures: 
Front Yard: Behind the rear building line of the principal structure. 
Side Yard: Two feet. 
Rear Yard: Two feet. 
(C)  Maximum Height of Structures. 
1.  Principal Structures: 45 feet. 
2.  Accessory Structures: The height of any accessory structure shall not exceed the height of the principal structure on the lot. 
(D)  Maximum Building Size. 
1.  Principal Structures: None. 
2.  Accessory Structures: 30 percent of rear yard area. Accessory structures larger than 1,000 square feet shall require a special exception permit in accordance with section 106-524 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 3-24-08(3)) 
Sec. 106-206. - MHP-Manufactured home park district. 
Sec. 106-206.1. - Statement of intent. 
    The MHP Manufactured Home Park District has been created in recognition that manufactured housing is an important and desired housing option for some city residents. Standards and uses for the MHP district have been designed to reflect standards and uses found in some current manufactured home park communities and to allow the development of new manufactured home communities that have a desirable living environment. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-206.2. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  The following uses are permitted by right in the MHP Manufactured Home Park District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Home Occupation * 
Manufactured Home, Emergency * 
Manufactured Home Park * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Public Parks and Recreation Areas 
4.  Office Use Types 
(None) 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
(None) 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Utility Services-Minor 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-206.3. - Site development regulations. 
    The following are general development standards for the MHP Manufactured Home Park District. For additional, modified or more stringent standards see article III, use and design standards. 
(A)  Minimum Lot Requirements. 
1.  Area: Ten acres. 
2.  Frontage: 50 feet on a public street. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-208. - RB-Residential business district. 
Sec. 106-208.1. - Statement of intent. 
    The RB Residential Business District is created in recognition that some older residential areas near the center of the city may be suitable for the integration of residential and limited commercial uses of benefit to neighborhood residents. The intent of the district is to create a walkable, livable residential community with a mixture of residential and nonresidential uses. To that end, the scale and nature of retail uses is limited to preserve the mixed character of the district. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-208.2. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  The following uses are permitted by right in the RB Residential Business District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Accessory Apartment * 
Home Occupation * 
Manufactured Home, Emergency * 
Residential Human Care Facility 
Single Family Dwelling, Detached * 
Townhouse * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Cultural Services 
Public Parks and Recreation Areas 
Religious Assembly 
4.  Office Use Types 
General Offices 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Homestay Inn * 
Studio, Fine Arts 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Amateur Radio Tower * 
Utility Services-Minor 
(B)  The following uses are permitted by special exception in the RB Residential District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Family Day Care Home * 
Multi-Family Dwelling * 
Single Family Dwelling, Attached 
Two Family Dwelling 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Administrative Services 
Educational Facilities-Primary/Secondary 
4.  Office Use Types 
Financial Institutions 
Medical Offices/Clinics 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Antique Shops 
Day Care Center * 
Personal Services 
Retail Sales 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
(None) 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 2-14-2011(1); Ord. of 4-9-2018(3)) 
Sec. 106-208.3. - Site development regulations. 
    The following are general development standards for the RB Residential Business District. For additional, modified or more stringent standards see article III, use and design standards. 
(A)  Minimum Lot Requirements. 
1.  Area: 7,200 square feet. 
2.  Frontage: 60 feet on a public street. 
(B)  Minimum Setback Requirements. 
1.  Principal Structure: 
Front Yard: 25 feet, if right-of-way is 50 feet or greater in width; 50 feet from the centerline of any right-of-way less than 50 feet in width. However, if an adjoining lot is developed, no principal structure shall be required to have a front yard greater than that observed by an existing building on an adjoining lot. 
No front yard shall be used for any parking area or otherwise designed or devoted to any vehicle use unless a special exception permit has been approved specifically allowing such parking. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein shall prohibit a driveway in the front yard that leads to a parking area in the side yard or rear yard. 
Side Yard: Any side yard shall be a minimum of ten percent of lot width. However, under no circumstances shall either side yard be required to exceed 25 feet. 
Rear Yard: 15 feet. 
Corner Lots: the setback on the side street shall be equal to the setback observed by the principal structure on an adjoining lot. If the side street does not have street facing lots, the side yard setback for corner lots shall be ten percent of the lot width. 
2.  Accessory Structures: 
Front Yard: Behind the rear building line of the principal structure. 
Side Yard: Two feet. 
Rear Yard: Two feet. 
(C)  Maximum Height of Structures. 
1.  Principal Structures: 45 feet. 
2.  Accessory Structures: 15 feet. 
(D)  Maximum Building Size. 
1.  Principal Structures: None. 
2.  Accessory Structures: 30 percent of rear yard area. Accessory structures larger than 1,000 square feet shall require a special exception permit in accordance with section 106-524 of this chapter. 
(E)  Other Requirements. 
Drive-through facilities in which a person, who remains in a motor vehicle, conducts business or exchanges through a window or exterior opening in a structure are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 12-12-05(3); Ord. of 9-8-08(3); Ord. of 2-14-2011(1)) 
Sec. 106-210. - DBD-Downtown business district. 
Sec. 106-210.1. - Statement of intent. 
    The DBD Downtown Business District has been created to recognize and promote the unique character of Salem's downtown area. The district allows and encourages, through flexible design standards, a mixture of professional offices, financial services, government functions and specialty retail. Upper floor residential uses are encouraged. Automobile related uses are limited in the district. Overall, permitted uses, setbacks and development standards are designed to maintain a downtown urban character. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-210.2. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  The following uses are permitted by right in the DBD Downtown Business District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Home Occupation * 
Manufactured Home, Emergency * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Assisted Care Residence 
Clubs 
Educational Facilities, 
College/University * 
Guidance Services 
Life Care Facility 
Nursing Home 
Post Office 
Public Parks and Recreation Areas 
Religious Assembly 
Safety Services 
4.  Office Use Types 
Financial Institutions 
General Offices * 
Laboratories * 
Medical Offices/Clinics * 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Antique Shops 
Automobile Parts/Supply, Retail 
Business or Trade School 
Business Support Services 
Commercial Indoor Entertainment 
Communication Services 
Consumer Repair Services 
Convenience Store 
Day Care Center * 
Funeral Services 
Homestay Inn * 
Hotel/Motel/Motor Lodge 
Microbrewery * 
Microdistillery * 
Pawn Shop 
Personal Improvement Services 
Personal Services 
Restaurant 
Retail Sales 
Studio, Fine Arts 
Veterinary Hospital/Clinic 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
Transportation Terminal 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Mixed Use * 
Utility Service, Minor 
(B)  The following uses are permitted by special exception in the DBD Downtown Business District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Multi-Family Dwelling * 
Residential Human Care Facility 
Single Family Dwelling, Attached * 
Single Family Dwelling, Detached * 
Townhouse * 
Two Family Dwelling * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Administrative Services * 
Correction Facilities 
Crises Center 
Cultural Services 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Halfway House 
Public Assembly 
Public Maintenance and Service Facilities 
4.  Office Use Types 
Outpatient Mental Health and Substance Abuse Clinic* 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Assembly Hall 
Commercial Indoor Amusement 
Dance Hall * 
Hospital 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Outdoor Gathering * 
Parking Facility, Surface/Structure 
Utility Service, Major 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 3-10-08(4); Ord. of 9-13-2010(5); Ord. of 1-25-2016(1); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2); Ord. of 8-14-2017(1); Ord. of 4-9-2018(3); Ord. of 5-14-2018(1)) 
Sec. 106-210.3. - Site development regulations. 
    The following are general development standards for the DBD Downtown Business District. For additional, modified or more stringent standards see article III, use and design standards. 
(A)  Minimum Lot Requirements. 
1.  Area: No minimum. 
2.  Frontage: No minimum. 
(B)  Minimum and Maximum Setback Requirements. 
1.  Principal Structure: 
Front Yard: Maximum of zero; exception: Maximum of 20 feet if for outdoor patio-style dining. Front yard shall only be used for patio-style outdoor dining. No front yard shall be used for any parking area or otherwise designed or devoted to any vehicle use. 
Side Yard: No Minimum. 
Rear Yard: No Minimum. 
Corner Lots: The setback of the side street shall have a maximum of zero; exception: Maximum of 20 feet if for outdoor patio-style dining. 
2.  Accessory Structures: 
Front Yard: Behind the rear building line of the principal structure. 
Side Yard: No Minimum. 
Rear Yard: No Minimum. 
(C)  Maximum Height of Structures. 
1.  Principal Structures: 80 Feet. Structures higher than 80 feet shall require a special exception permit in accordance with section 106-524 of this chapter. 
2.  Accessory Structures: Less than height of principal structure. 
(D)  Maximum Building Size. 
1.  Principal Structures: None. 
2.  Accessory Structures: 30 percent of rear yard area. Accessory structures larger than 1,000 square feet shall require a special exception permit in accordance with section 106-524 of this chapter. 
(E)  Other Requirements. Drive-through facilities in which a person, who remains in a motor vehicle, conducts business or exchanges through a window or exterior opening in a structure are allowed for financial institutions only, and only in the rear yard with access from the side or rear street. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 1-25-2016(1); Ord. of 4-9-2018(3); Ord. of 5-14-2018(1)) 
Sec. 106-212. - TBD-Transitional business district. 
Sec. 106-212.1. - Statement of intent. 
    The TBD Transitional Business District has been created in recognition that there are commercial areas near downtown Salem that exhibit patterns of development similar, but less intensive than, the downtown business district. These areas are suitable for future downtown-type uses and development patterns. The Transitional Business District allows a mixture of professional offices, financial services, government functions and specialty retail. Upper floor residential uses similarly are encouraged. Automobile related uses are limited in the district. Overall, setbacks and development standards are designed to allow a downtown urban character. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2); Ord. of 8-14-2017(1)) 
Sec. 106-212.2. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  The following uses are permitted by right in the TBD Transitional Business District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Home Occupation * 
Manufactured Home, Emergency * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Assisted Care Residence 
Clubs 
Guidance Services 
Life Care Facility 
Nursing Home 
Post Office 
Public Parks and Recreation Areas 
Religious Assembly 
Safety Services 
4.  Office Use Types 
Financial Institutions 
General Offices 
Laboratories 
Medical Offices/Clinics 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Antique Shops 
Automobile Parts/Supply, Retail 
Automobile Repair Services, Minor 
Business or Trade School 
Business Support Services 
Commercial Indoor Entertainment 
Communication Services 
Consumer Repair Services 
Convenience Store 
Day Care Center * 
Funeral Services 
Homestay Inn * 
Hotel/Motel/Motor Lodge 
Microbrewery * 
Microdistillery * 
Pawn Shop 
Personal Improvement Services 
Personal Services 
Restaurant 
Retail Sales 
Studio, Fine Arts 
Veterinary Hospital/Clinic 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
Transportation Terminal 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Mixed Use * 
Utility Service, Minor 
(B)  The following uses are permitted by special exception in the TBD Transitional Business District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Multi-Family Dwelling * 
Residential Human Care Facility 
Single Family Dwelling, Attached * 
Single Family Dwelling, Detached * 
Townhouse * 
Two Family Dwelling * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Administrative Services 
Correction Facilities 
Crises Center 
Cultural Services 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Halfway House 
Public Assembly 
Public Maintenance and Service Facilities 
4.  Office Use Types 
Outpatient Mental Health and Substance Abuse Clinic* 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Assembly Hall 
Commercial Indoor Amusement 
Hospital 
Microbrewery * 
Microdistillery * 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Outdoor Gathering * 
Parking Facility, Surface/Structure 
Utility Service, Major 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 9-13-2010(5); Ord. of 1-25-2016(1); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2); Ord. of 2-13-2017(1); Ord. of 8-14-2017(1)) 
Sec. 106-212.3. - Site development regulations. 
    The following are general development standards for the TBD Transitional Business District. For additional, modified or more stringent standards see article III, use and design standards. 
(A)  Minimum Lot Requirements. 
1.  Area: No minimum. 
2.  Frontage: No minimum. 
(B)  Minimum and Maximum Setback Requirements. 
1.  Principal Structure: 
Front Yard: Zero; exception: Maximum of 20 feet if for outdoor patio-style dining. Front yard shall only be used for patio-style dining. No front yard shall be used for any parking area or otherwise designed or devoted to any vehicle use. 
Side Yard: No Minimum 
Rear Yard: No Minimum 
2.  Accessory Structures: 
Front Yard: Behind the rear building line of the principal structure. 
Side Yard: No Minimum 
Rear Yard: No Minimum 
(C)  Maximum Height of Structures. 
1.  Principal Structures: 80 feet structures higher than 80 feet shall require a special exception permit in accordance with section 106-524 of this chapter. 
2.  Accessory Structures: Less than height of principal structure. 
(D)  Maximum Building Size. 
1.  Principal Structures: None 
2.  Accessory Structures: 30 percent of rear yard area. Accessory structures larger than 1,000 square feet shall require a special exception permit in accordance with section 106-524 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 1-25-2016(1)) 
Sec. 106-213. - CBD-Community business district. 
Sec. 106-213.1. - Statement of intent. 
    The CBD Community Business District has been created to allow a variety of commercial and service uses to coexist with residences in a transitional, mixed-use environment. This district provides development standards for uses which are more intensive than Residential Business (RB) Districts, but less intensive than Highway Business District (HBD). CBD districts are typically transitional areas, often corridors, on the edges between commercial and residential zones. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
Sec. 106-213.2. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  The following uses are permitted by right in the CBD Community Business District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Home Occupation * 
Manufactured Home, Emergency * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Cultural Services 
Guidance Services 
Public Parks and Recreation Areas 
Religious Assembly 
4.  Office Use Types 
Financial Institutions 
General Offices 
Medical Offices 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Antique Shops 
Business Support Services 
Consumer Repair Services 
Convenience Store 
Day Care Center * 
Homestay Inn * 
Laundry 
Personal Improvement Services 
Personal Services 
Restaurant 
Retail Sales 
Studio, Fine Arts 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Mixed Use * 
(B)  The following uses are permitted by special exception in the CBD Community Business District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Family Day Care Home * 
Residential Human Care Facility 
Single Family Dwelling, Attached 
Single Family Dwelling, Detached * 
Townhouse * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Clubs 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Post Office 
4.  Office Use Types 
(None) 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Assembly Hall 
Gasoline Station 
Kennel, Commercial 
Microbrewery * 
Veterinary Hospital/Clinic 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Amateur Radio Tower 
Outdoor Gathering * 
(Ord. of 1-23-2017(2); Ord. of 4-9-2018(3)) 
Sec. 106-213.3. - Site development regulations. 
    The following are general development standards for the CBD Community Business District. For additional, modified or more stringent standards see article III, use and design standards. 
(A)  Minimum lot requirements. 
1.  Area: 7,200 square feet. 
2.  Frontage: 60 feet on a public street. 
(B)  Minimum setback requirements. 
1.  Principal structure: 
Front yard: 30 feet from street centerline. 
Side yard: No minimum. 
Rear yard: No minimum. 
2.  Accessory structures: 
Front yard: Behind the rear building line of the principal structure. Outdoor dining areas may be located in the front yard area, provided they are properly screened from adjoining residential property. 
Side yard: Five feet. 
Rear yard: Five feet. 
(C)  Maximum height of structures. 
1.  Principal structures: 45 feet. 
2.  Accessory structures: Less than height of principal structure. 
(D)  Maximum building size. 
1.  Principal structures: No maximum. 
2.  Accessory structures: 30 percent of rear yard area. Accessory structures larger than 1,000 square feet shall require a special exception permit in accordance with section 106-524 of this chapter. 
(E)  Other requirements. 
1.  Drive-through facilities in which a person, who remains in a motor vehicle, conducts business or exchanges through a window or exterior opening in a structure shall require a special exception permit in accordance with section 106-524 of this chapter. 
2.  Residential uses shall conform to the site development regulations of RB, Residential Business District. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
Sec. 106-214. - HBD-Highway business district. 
Sec. 106-214.1. - Statement of intent. 
    The HBD Highway Business District has been created to provide and allow a wide variety of commercial and service uses that are typically found along or near major transportation arterials. This district provides a location and development standards for more intensive commercial uses not appropriate for the Downtown (DBD) or Residential (RB) Districts. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-214.2. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  The following uses are permitted by right in the HBD Highway Business District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Home Occupation* 
Manufactured Home, Emergency * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Assisted Care Residence 
Clubs 
Cultural Services 
Guidance Services 
Life Care Facility 
Nursing Home 
Park and Ride Facility 
Post Office 
Public Assembly 
Public Maintenance and Service Facilities 
Public Parks and Recreation Areas 
Religious Assembly 
Safety Services 
4.  Office Use Types 
Financial Institutions 
General Offices 
Laboratories 
Medical Offices/Clinics 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Agricultural Services 
Antique Shops 
Assembly Hall 
Athletic Instruction Services 
Automobile Dealership, New * 
Automobile Parts/Supply, Retail 
Automobile Rental/Leasing 
Automobile Repair Services, Minor 
Business or Trade School 
Business Support Services 
Car Wash 
Commercial Indoor Amusement 
Commercial Indoor Entertainment 
Commercial Indoor Sports and Recreation 
Commercial Outdoor Entertainment 
Commercial Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
Communication Services 
Construction Sales and Services 
Consumer Repair Services 
Convenience Store 
Day Care Center * 
Equipment Sales and Rental 
Funeral Services 
Garden Center 
Gasoline Station 
Golf Course 
Homestay Inn * 
Hotel/Motel/Motor Lodge 
Kennel, Commercial 
Laundry 
Pawn Shop 
Personal Improvement Services 
Personal Services 
Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service * 
Restaurant 
Retail Sales 
Studio, Fine Arts 
Veterinary Hospital/Clinic 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
Custom Manufacturing 
Recycling Centers and Stations 
Transportation Terminal 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Outdoor Gathering * 
Utility Service, Minor 
(B)  The following uses are permitted by special exception in the HBD Highway Business District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
(None) 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Administrative Services 
Cemetery * 
Correction Facilities 
Crises Center 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Halfway House 
4.  Office Use Types 
Outpatient Mental Health and Substance Abuse Clinic * 
Short-Term Lender 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Adult Business * 
Automobile Dealership, Used * 
Automobile Repair Services, Major * 
Dance Hall 
Flea Market 
Hospital 
Manufactured Home Sales * 
Massage Parlor 
Personal Storage * 
Truck Stop 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Aviation Facility 
Parking Facility, Surface/Structure 
Tower * 
Utility Service, Major 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 10-9-06(2); Ord. of 9-13-2010(5); Ord. of 2-7-2013; Ord. of 1-23-2017(2); Ord. of 8-14-2017(1); Ord. of 4-9-2018(3)) 
Sec. 106-214.3. - Site development regulations. 
    The following are general development standards for the HBD Highway Business District. For additional, modified or more stringent standards see article III, use and design standards. 
(A)  Minimum Lot Requirements. 
1.  Area: 7,200 square feet 
2.  Frontage: 60 feet on a public street 
(B)  Minimum Setback Requirements. 
1.  Principal Structure: 
Front Yard: 30 feet from street centerline 
Side Yard: No Minimum 
Rear Yard: No Minimum 
2.  Accessory Structures: 
Front Yard: 30 feet from street centerline 
Side Yard: No Minimum 
Rear Yard: No Minimum 
(C)  Maximum Height of Structures. 
1.  Principal Structures: 80 feet 
2.  Accessory Structures: Less than height of principal structure. 
(D)  Maximum Building Size. 
1.  Principal Structures: No Maximum 
2.  Accessory Structures: No Maximum 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-216. - BCD-Business commerce district. 
Sec. 106-216.1. - Statement of intent. 
    The BCD Business Commerce District is created as a flexible district to encourage the orderly development of commercial and light industrial uses. The district is designed to require high standards of building and site design, while allowing maximum flexibility in development standards. The commission and council must review all BCD proposals as an amendment to the zoning map pursuant to section 106-520 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-216.2. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  The following uses are permitted by right in the BCD Business Commerce District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Manufactured Home, Emergency * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Cultural Services 
Guidance Services 
Post Office 
Public Parks and Recreation Areas 
Safety Services 
4.  Office Use Types 
Financial Institutions 
General Offices 
Laboratories 
Medical Offices/Clinics 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Business or Trade School 
Communication Services 
Day Care Center * 
Hotel/Motel/Motor Lodge 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
Custom Manufacturing 
Industry Type I 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Utility Services Minor 
(B)  The following uses are permitted by special exception in the BCD Business Commerce District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
(None) 
3.  Civic Use Types 
(None) 
4.  Office Use Types 
Outpatient Mental Health and Substance Abuse Clinic * 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Personal Services 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
[None] 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Aviation Facilities 
Tower * 
Utility Services, Major 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 9-13-2010(5); Ord. of 4-9-2018(3)) 
Sec. 106-216.3. - Site development regulations. 
    Business Commerce District (BCD) site development regulations and requirements pertaining to minimum lot sizes, minimum lot frontages, minimum open space requirements, minimum setbacks, maximum lot coverage and maximum building heights shall be established by the council after review and recommendation of the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-218. - LM-Light manufacturing district. 
Sec. 106-218.1. - Statement of intent. 
    The LM Light Manufacturing District is created to establish and preserve areas within the city that are suitable for business and light industrial uses. LM Light Manufacturing districts are the location of a significant portion of the city's employment base. The district allows a wide variety of industrial and warehouse uses and activities that occur primarily within enclosed structures, with minimal or no environmental impacts associated with smoke, odor, and noise. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-218.2. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  The following uses are permitted by right in the LM Light Manufacturing District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Manufactured Home, Emergency * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Public Maintenance and Service Facilities 
Public Parks and Recreation Areas 
Safety Services 
4.  Office Use Types 
Financial Institutions 
General Office 
Laboratories 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Agricultural Services 
Automotive Repair Services, Major * 
Business Support Services 
Day Care Center * 
Equipment Sales and Rental 
Laundry 
Manufactured Home Sales * 
Truck Stop 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
Custom Manufacturing 
Construction Yard 
Industry Type I 
Recycling Centers 
Transfer Station 
Transportation Terminal 
Truck Terminal 
Warehousing and Distribution 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Parking Facility, Surface/Structure 
Utility Services, Minor 
(B)  The following uses are permitted by special exception in the LM Light Manufacturing District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
(None) 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Administrative Services 
4.  Office Use Types 
(None) 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Athletic Instruction Services 
Automobile Rental/Leasing 
Microbrewery * 
Personal Storage * 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
Asphalt Plant * 
Brewery * 
Distillery * 
Industry Type II 
Landfill, Construction Debris 
Landfill, Rubble 
Landfill, Sanitary 
Meat Packing and Related Industries 
Railroad Facilities 
Resource Extraction 
Scrap and Salvage Services 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Tower * 
Utility Services, Major 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 2-7-2013; Ord. of 8-11-2014; Ord. of 1-25-2016(1); Ord. of 8-22-2016(1); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2); Ord. of 7-10-2017(1); Ord. of 8-14-2017(1); Ord. of 4-9-2018(3)) 
Sec. 106-218.3. - Site development regulations. 
    The following are general development standards for the LM Light Manufacturing District. For additional, modified or more stringent standards see article III, use and design standards. 
(A)  Minimum Lot Requirements. 
1.  Area: No Minimum 
2.  Frontage: No Minimum 
(B)  Minimum Setback Requirements. 
1.  Principal Structure: 
Front Yard: No Minimum 
Side Yard: No Minimum 
Rear Yard: No Minimum 
2.  Accessory Structures: 
Front Yard: No Minimum 
Side Yard: No Minimum 
Rear Yard: No Minimum 
(C)  Maximum Height of Structures. 
1.  Principal Structures: 70 feet. 
2.  Accessory Structures: 70 feet. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 1-25-2016(1)) 
Sec. 106-220. - HM-Heavy manufacturing district. 
Sec. 106-220.1. - Statement of intent. 
    The HM Heavy Manufacturing District is created to establish and preserve areas within the city that are suitable for business and more intensive industrial uses. The district allows a wide variety of intensive industrial and warehouse uses. Manufacturing activities and uses within the district occur primarily within enclosed structures, but uses have significant outdoor storage needs. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-220.2. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  The following uses are permitted by right in the HM Heavy Manufacturing District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
Manufactured Home, Emergency * 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Public Maintenance and Service Facilities 
Public Parks and Recreation Areas 
Safety Services 
4.  Office Use Types 
Financial Institutions 
General Office 
Laboratories 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Automotive Repair Services, Major * 
Business Support Services 
Day Care Center * 
Equipment Sales and Rental 
Laundry 
Manufactured Home Sales * 
Transportation Terminal 
Truck Stop 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
Asphalt Plant * 
Construction Yard 
Custom Manufacturing 
Industry Type I 
Industry Type II 
Meat Packing and Related Industries 
Railroad Facilities 
Recycling Centers 
Transfer Station 
Truck Terminal 
Warehousing and Distribution 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Parking Facility, Surface/Structure 
Utility Services, Major 
Utility Services, Minor 
(B)  The following uses are permitted by special exception in the HM Heavy Manufacturing District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards. 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
(None) 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Administrative Services 
4.  Office Use Types 
(None) 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
Athletic Instruction Services 
Automobile Rental/Leasing 
Personal Storage * 
Microbrewery * 
Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service * 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
Brewery * 
Distillery * 
Industry Type III 
Landfill, Construction Debris 
Landfill, Rubble 
Landfill, Sanitary 
Resource Extraction 
Scrap and Salvage Services 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
Aviation Facilities 
Tower * 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 2-14-2011(2); Ord. of 2-7-2013; Ord. of 8-11-2014; Ord. No. 1-25-2016(1)); Ord. of 8-22-2016(2); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2); Ord. of 7-10-2017(1); Ord. of 8-14-2017(1); Ord. of 4-9-2018(3)) 
Sec. 106-220.3. - Site development regulations. 
    The following are general development standards for the HM Heavy Manufacturing District. For additional, modified or more stringent standards see article III, use and design standards. 
(A)  Minimum Lot Requirements. 
1.  Area: No Minimum 
2.  Frontage: No Minimum 
(B)  Minimum Setback Requirements. 
1.  Principal Structure: 
Front Yard: No Minimum 
Side Yard: No Minimum 
Rear Yard: No Minimum 
2.  Accessory Structures: 
Front Yard: No Minimum 
Side Yard: No Minimum 
Rear Yard: No Minimum 
(C)  Maximum Height of Structures. 
1.  Principal Structures: 75 feet 
2.  Accessory Structures: 75 feet 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 1-25-2016(1)) 
Sec. 106-222. - Cluster housing overlay (COL). 
Sec. 106-222.1. - Statement of intent. 
    The Cluster Housing Overlay is created to encourage and allow flexibility in site design and lot arrangements for new single family residential development in the City of Salem. This overlay allows a reduction in minimum lot size and frontage requirements from those required in the underlying single family residential zoning district. All cluster lot size reductions must be compensated for by the provision of an equal or greater amount of open space within the cluster housing development. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-222.2. - Permitted location and uses. 
(A)  The Cluster Housing Overlay may be requested as a zoning overlay for any land within the City of Salem zoned RSF Residential Single Family. 
(B)  Single family detached and attached dwellings shall be permitted within the Cluster Housing Overlay subject to the review and approval by the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-222.3. - Development regulations. 
(A)  Development regulations within Cluster Housing Overlay shall be as specified in the underlying zoning district, with the following exceptions: 
1.  Minimum Development Size: Two acre 
2.  Maximum Density: Five dwelling units per acre 
3.  Minimum Lot Size: 4,500 square feet 
4.  Minimum Frontage: 40 feet 
5.  Minimum Setbacks: 
Front Yard: 15 feet 
Side Yard: Five feet 
Rear Yard: Ten feet 
Front yards that are adjacent to an existing public street, shall have a setback as specified in the underlying zoning district. 
Side and rear yards that are adjacent to existing residential development, shall have the side and rear setbacks as specified in the underlying zoning district. 
6.  Open Space: Minimum of 15 percent of development size, or one square foot of open space for each square foot of reduction in lot size below 9,000 square feet, whichever is greater. 
7.  Streets in a cluster housing overlay may be public in accordance with VDOT and city standards or may be private. In reviewing plans for the cluster development, the commission may recommend, and the council may approve, one or more private streets within the proposed cluster development. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-222.4. - Approvals. 
    Approval of a Cluster Housing Overlay shall be by special exception permit as defined by section 106-524 and section 106-600 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-224. - College and university district (CUD). 
Sec. 106-224.1 - Statement of intent 
    The College and University District has been created in recognition that institutes of higher learning have unique land use characteristics. These institutions may typically involve classroom, office, laboratory, and residential areas, as well as areas devoted to culture, recreation and food service. The intermingling of these uses creates a campus environment. The College and University District allows great flexibility in development standards. New development is reviewed to insure that it is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare interests of citizens and that is compatible with the Salem Comprehensive Plan and surrounding and nearby land uses. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-224.2 - Permitted uses. 
(A)  The following uses are permitted by right in the CUD College and University District, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
(None) 
3.  Civic Use Types 
Educational Facilities, College/University * 
4.  Office Use Types 
(None) 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
(None) 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
(None) 
(B)  The following uses are permitted by special exception in the CUD College and University District subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter. An asterisk (*) indicates that the use is subject to additional, modified or more stringent standards as listed in article III, use and design standards 
1.  Agricultural Use Types 
(None) 
2.  Residential Use Types 
(None) 
3.  Civic Use Types 
(None) 
4.  Office Use Types 
(None) 
5.  Commercial Use Types 
(None) 
6.  Industrial Use Types 
(None) 
7.  Miscellaneous Use Types 
(None) 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-224.3. - Development regulations. 
(A)  Development Regulations for structures within College and University Districts shall be as defined in section 106-306.5 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-224.4. - Approvals. 
    Approval of new development within the College and University District shall be subject to the provisions and standards contained in section 106-306.5 and section 106-400 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-226. - Floodplain overlay district (FOD). 
Sec. 106-226.1. - Statement of intent. 
(A)  It is the intent of the Floodplain Overlay District to aid in providing safety and protection from flooding. More specifically, the standards contained in this district help to prevent the creation of health and safety hazards, the loss of property and life, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by: 
1.  Restricting the unwise use, development and occupancy of lands subject to inundation which may result in soil erosion, sedimentation and siltation, pollution of water resources, and general degradation of the natural and manmade environment; 
2.  Regulating uses, activities and development which, acting alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities and development, if unregulated, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities and frequencies; 
3.  Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development from locating within areas subject to flooding; 
4.  Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur in flood prone area to be protected and/or flood proofed against flooding and flood damage; 
5.  Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards; and 
6.  Adequately providing for qualification and continuation of the City of Salem in the regular program of the national flood insurance program as administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-226.2. - Definitions. 
(A)  All definitions pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the Floodplain Overlay District are found in Article VI Definitions and Use Types. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-226.3. - Administration and applicability. 
(A)  The provisions codified in this section shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Salem identified as being floodplain districts as stipulated in this section. No land shall be developed and no development and/or structure shall be located, related, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this district and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-226.4. - Establishment of floodplain districts and restrictions. 
(A)  Floodplain districts shall include all land subject to inundation by the waters of the 100-year flood. The source of this delineation shall be the flood insurance study for the City of Salem, as prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration-Federal Emergency Management Agency, dated, September 28, 2007, or the most recent revision thereof. The designated floodplain districts and accompanying regulations shall be overlays to the existing underlying zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map, and as such the provisions for floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying zoning district regulations. The physical boundaries of the floodplain districts are established as shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) from the above-cited flood insurance study, which map is declared to be a part of this ordinance and which shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Official and the Clerk of Council. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the overlaying floodplain districts and the underlying existing zoning regulations, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. 
(B)  The delineation of any floodplain district may be revised, amended and modified by the Council after Planning Commission and Council public hearings as required by section 106-520 of this Code and, § 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, in compliance with the national flood insurance program, when there are changes through natural, man-made or other causes and/or changes are indicated by future detailed hydrologic and hydraulic studies. All such changes are subject to the review and approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the building official. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the areas, the Board of Zoning appeals, in accordance with section 106-528 shall make the necessary determination. Persons questioning or contesting the location of the flood boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Board and to submit technical evidence. 
(C)  All applications for development in the floodplain district and all permits issued for the floodplain shall incorporate the following information. 
1.  For structures to be elevated, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement). 
2.  For structures to be flood proofed (nonresidential only), the elevation to which the structure will be flood proofed. 
3.  The elevation of the 100-year flood. 
4.  Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground elevations. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 9-10-07) 
Sec. 106-226.5. - Development and use by certificate of elevation. 
(A)  All uses, activities, development, new construction and substantial improvements, including prefabricated buildings and manufactured homes, occurring within any floodplain district shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a certificate of elevation and shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with all other applicable codes and ordinances, including the City of Salem's subdivision regulations. Prior to the issuance of any permits, the building official shall require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 12-12-05(4)) 
Sec. 106-226.6. - Development regulations, all districts. 
(A)  Generally. In any floodplain overlay district, the development and/or use of land (including new construction and substantial improvements, placement of manufactured home and prefabricated buildings) shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying district, provided that all such uses, activities and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with flood proofing, elevation, anchorage and related provisions contained in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and all other applicable codes and ordinances, and shall be constructed with material and utility equipment resistant to flood damage, and be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
    The lowest floor elevation of any new residential structure constructed within a floodplain shall be at least one foot above base flood elevation. The lowest floor elevation of any new non-residential structure shall also be one foot above base flood elevation, unless such structure is floodproofed. No existing structure shall be modified, expanded, or enlarged unless the new construction complies with this standard. 
(B)  Electrical and plumbing improvements. All electrical water heaters, electric furnaces, other critical electrical installations and all other electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air condition equipment shall be permitted only at elevations at or above the level of the 100-year flood in all floodplain districts, or shall be so designed or located such that waters from the base flood cannot enter or accumulate within any components. 
(C)  Telephone utilities. All telephone utilities to be placed in any floodplain district shall be located and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood, including being elevated above the level of the 100-year flood whenever possible. 
(D)  Water, sewer, gas, oil facilities. New and replacement water supply systems, sanitary sewage systems including pumping stations and collector systems, and gas and oil supply systems shall be designed and located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters in all floodplain districts. 
(E)  Streets and sidewalks. Streets and sidewalks in all floodplain districts shall be designed to minimize their potential for increasing and aggravating the levels of flood flow. Drainage openings shall be required to minimize flood flows without significantly increasing flood heights or established elevations identified floodplain districts. 
(F)  Drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided to minimize exposure to flood hazards in all floodplain districts and be designed to convey the flow of surface waters without damage to persons or property. The system shall ensure drainage away from buildings, onsite waste disposal sites and septic tank facilities with subsurface disposal fields. The city may requires a primarily underground system to accommodate frequent floods and a secondary surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be consistent with local, regional and state drainage plans and requirements. All facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge of runoff onto adjacent properties. 
(G)  Land subdivisions and new developments. The preliminary subdivision plat requirements contained in the Salem Subdivision Ordinance shall include a map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or land development with respect to any designated flood, including information on but not limited to, the 100-year flood elevations, boundaries of the floodplain districts, proposed lots and sites, fills and flood or erosion protective facilities. Proposals for any other new development shall also include base flood elevation data and location of any floodplain districts. Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development is in a flood prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to assure that: 
1.  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood prone area; 
2.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
3.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(H)  Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within any floodplain district shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. The provision shall apply to subdivisions and lots where an existing manufactured home is replaced, any expansion to an existing park or subdivision, an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, and to new parks, subdivisions and installation constructed after the effective date of the initial floodplain regulations. 
(I)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites shall either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and, 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements for placement in the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(J)  Area below lowest floor. For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings, having a total net area of not less than one square. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-226.7. - Development restrictions, floodway. 
(A)  Generally. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, stream bed alteration or relocation, new construction, substantial improvements and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system. In floodways, no encroachments, fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development shall be permitted, except where the effect of such development (as may be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying zoning district) on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying improvements which have been approved by appropriate local, state and/or federal authorities as required by law (i.e., no proposed use, development or activity shall be permitted within the floodway which would cause any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood). 
(B)  Alternation and relocation of floodway and channel. Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or floodways of any watercourse, stream, etc., within the City of Salem, approval shall be obtained from the U. S. Corps of Engineers, the State Water Control Board and the State Marine Resources Commission. Furthermore, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all affected adjacent jurisdictions, the Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management) and the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(C)  Manufactured homes. The placement of any manufactured home within any floodway is strictly prohibited except in an existing manufactured home park or existing manufactured home subdivision. 
    Manufactured homes that are not subject to the provisions of this ordinance shall be elevated so that either: (1) the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or (2) the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 9-10-07) 
Sec. 106-226.8. - Existing structures and vacant land. 
(A)  A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of this chapter but which is not in conformity with the provisions of in this section may be continued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In addition, such structure or use shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
1.  Existing structures and/or uses located in floodways shall not be expanded or enlarged, unless the effect of the proposed expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying improvements. 
2.  Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use located in any floodplain overlay district, to an extent or amount of less than 50 percent of its market value, shall be elevated and/or flood proofed to the greatest extent possible. 
3.  The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use regardless of its location in the flood plain district to an extent or amount of 50 percent or more of its market value shall only be undertaken in full compliance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
4.  The owner and/or agents of any existing structure and/or use located in any flood plain overlay districts shall fully disclose in writing to all prospective interested parties including, but not limited to, purchasers and renters that (1) the land and/or structures are located in flood prone areas, and (2) whether any variances have been granted for certain structures located in flood prone areas. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 9-10-07) 
Sec. 106-226.9. - Variances. 
(A)  The Board of Zoning Appeals, in accordance with section 106-528, may consider petitions for variance(s) from the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that all relevant factors pertaining to the danger to life and property caused by increased flood levels and velocities due to encroachments are thoroughly examined. In considering applications for variances, the Board shall consider the following factors: 
1.  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. 
2.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
3.  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions. 
4.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners. 
5.  The important of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
6.  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location and a location within a floodplain district. 
7.  The availability of alternate locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
8.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
9.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
10.  The safety access to the property by ordinary and emergency vehicles in times of flood. 
11.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site. 
12.  Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this division. 
(B)  No variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development or activity within any floodway district, except in full compliance with all of the following requirements: 
1.  The variance will not cause any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood. (Appropriate documentation from a registered engineer must be submitted which substantiates the impact on flood heights, velocities and flows through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses and calculations.) If the variance involves any alterations or relations to a floodway or its channel, such alterations or relocations shall also be approved as required by law. 
(C)  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall notify the applicant for a variance(s) in writing that the issuance of a variance(s) to construct a structure below the 100-year flood elevation: 
1.  Increases the risks to life and property; and 
2.  Will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. 
(A)  A record of the notification, as well as all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, shall be maintained, and any variances which are issued shall be noted in the annual report submitted as required by law. 
(B)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state landmarks register without regard to the procedures set forth in this section. 
(C)  Requirements for granting a variance within the floodplain shall be as follows: 
1.  The failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; 
2.  The variance will be the minimum relief to any hardship; and 
3.  The granting of such variance will not result in: 
a.  Unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights; 
b.  Additional threats to public safety; 
c.  Nuisances; 
d.  Fraud or victimization of the public; or 
e.  Conflicts with local laws or ordinances. 
4.  The applicant has shown a good and sufficient cause to justify the variance. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-226.10. - Municipal liability. 
(A)  The degrees of flood protection sought by the provisions of this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. These provisions do not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts, or that land uses permitted within such districts, will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
(B)  The provisions of this division shall not create liability on the part of the city or any office or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-228. - Planned Unit district. 
Sec. 106-228.1. - Statement of intent. 
(A)  The intent of the Planned Unit District (PUD) is to encourage maximum flexibility in the design and development of land. PUD developments facilitate the adequate and economical provision of streets, utilities and other improvements, and allow for the management of the natural and scenic qualities of vacant land that is proposed for development. The PUD district allows a variety of housing options, as well as commercial, civic and office use types of a number and scale sufficient to serve the needs of the PUD residents. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-228.2. - Permitted uses. 
(A)  Applications for planned unit districts may propose any residential, civic, and/or commercial use type as part of a planned unit district. All land uses proposed shall be shown on the preliminary and final master plans. as required by this chapter. 
(B)  All use types proposed shall be reviewed by the Commission and Council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. No use type may be allowed within the planned unit district unless approved by Council as part of the final master plan. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-228.3. - Development regulations. 
(A)  Each planned unit development shall be subject to the following development standards. 
1.  Maximum gross density: Maximum gross density allowable in the planned unit district shall be established by Council by approval of the final master plan. 
2.  Minimum common open space and/or recreational areas: 15 percent of the gross area of the planned unit district. 
3.  Criteria for all required open space: 
a.  Minimum countable open space: 5,000 contiguous square feet 
b.  Minimum horizontal dimension: 50 feet, except that areas with a horizontal distance of not less than 20 feet shall be counted as open space provided such areas contain facilities such as, but not limited to, bikeways, exercise trails, tot lots, gazebos, picnic tables, etc. 
c.  Common open space shall not include proposed street rights-of-way, open parking areas, or driveways. 
d.  All common open space and/or recreational areas shall be of an appropriate nature and location to serve the residents of the planned unit district. 
4.  The maximum area devoted to civic, office and commercial use types shall be established by Council by approval of the final master plan. 
a.  Commercial and office uses types shall be located, and shall be of a scale and location suitable to serve the needs of the residents of the planned unit district convenience. 
b.  Commercial, office, and civic use types shall be screened and landscaped so as to be compatible with adjoining residences. 
c.  Construction of commercial, office and civic use types shall not begin until 20 percent of the residential units of the total planned unit district have been completed. 
5.  Minimum setback requirements shall be specifically established during the review and approval of the preliminary and final master plans. The following guidelines shall be used in establishing the building spacing and setbacks: 
a.  Building spacing shall provide privacy within each dwelling unit; 
b.  Building spacing shall ensure that each room has adequate light and air; 
c.  Areas between buildings used as service yards, storage of trash, or other utilitarian purposes should be designed so as to be compatible with adjoining dwellings; 
d.  Building spacing and design shall provide privacy for outdoor activity areas (patios, decks, etc.) associated with individual dwelling units. 
6.  Streets in the planned unit district may be public in accordance with VDOT and city standards or may be private. In reviewing the planned unit development preliminary master plan, the commission may recommend, and the Council may approve, one or more private streets within the proposed district 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-228.4. - Application process. 
(A)  Prior to submitting a formal application for review and approval under these provisions, the applicant shall meet with city staff to discuss the requirements of the planned unit district. The purpose of the meeting is to obtain a mutual understanding of the application requirements and process. The applicant is encouraged to submit information on the scope and nature of the proposal to allow staff to become familiar with the proposal in advance of this meeting. 
(B)  Any application to rezone land to the PUD designation, shall constitute an amendment to the zoning ordinance. The written and graphic information submitted by the applicant as part of the application process shall constitute conditional zoning proffers. Once the Council has approved the final master plan, all accepted proffers shall constitute conditions pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(C)  To initiate an amendment, the applicant shall complete a rezoning application. This information shall be accompanied by graphic and written information, which shall constitute a preliminary master plan. All information submitted shall be of sufficient clarity and scale to clearly and accurately identify the location, nature, and character of the proposed district. At a minimum this information shall include: 
1.  A legal description and plat showing the site boundaries, and existing street lines, lot lines, and easements. 
2.  Existing zoning, land use and ownership of each parcel proposed for the district. 
3.  A general statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the PUD district, including a description of the character of the proposed development, the existing and proposed ownership of the site, the market for which the development is oriented, and objectives towards any specific manmade and natural characteristics located on the site. 
4.  A description and analysis of existing site conditions, including information on topography, natural water courses, floodplains, unique natural features, tree cover areas, etc. 
5.  A land use plan designating specific use types for the site, both residential and non-residential use types, and establishing site development regulations, including setback, height, building coverage, lot coverage, and density requirements. 
6.  A circulation plan, including location of existing and proposed vehicular, pedestrian, bicycle, and other circulation facilities and location and general design of parking and loading facilities. General information on the trip generation, ownership and maintenance and proposed construction standards for these facilities should be included. A traffic impact analysis may be required by the administrator. 
7.  A public services and utilities plan providing requirements for and provision of all utilities, sewers, and other facilities to serve the site. 
8.  An open space plan, including areas proposed for passive and active recreational uses, natural and undisturbed areas, and proposed buffer areas proposed around the perimeter of the site. Information on the specific design and location of these areas and their ownership and maintenance should be included. 
9.  Generalized statements pertaining to any architectural and community design guidelines shall be submitted in sufficient detail to provide information on building designs, orientations, styles, lighting plans, etc. 
10.  A development schedule indicating the location, extent and sequence of proposed development. Specific information on development of the open space, recreational areas, and non-residential uses should be included. 
(D)  The completed rezoning application and supporting preliminary master plan materials shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and analysis. The commission shall review this information and make a report of its findings to the Council. The commission shall as part of its review hold a public hearing pursuant to § 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(E)  The commission shall make a report of its findings to the Council within 90 days of the receipt of the materials, unless the applicant requests, or agrees to an extension of this time frame. The commission's report shall recommend approval, approval with modifications, or disapproval of the preliminary master plan. Failure of the commission to make a report of its findings to the Council within this period shall constitute a commission recommendation of approval. 
(F)  If the commission recommends denial of the preliminary master plan, or approval with modification, the applicant shall, if requested, have 60 days to make any modifications. If the applicant desires to make any modifications to the preliminary master plan, the council's review and action shall be delayed until such changes are made and submitted for review. 
(G)  The Council shall review the preliminary master plan, and act to approve or deny the plan within 90 days. Approval of the preliminary master plan shall constitute acceptance of the plan's provisions and concepts as proffers pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The plan approved by the Council shall constitute the final master plan for the PUD. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-228.5. - Revisions to final master plan. 
(A)  Major revisions to the final master plan shall be reviewed and approved following the procedures and requirements for zoning map amendments contained in section 106-520 of this chapter. Major revisions include, but are not limited to changes such as: 
1.  Any increase in the density of the development; 
2.  Substantial change in circulation or access; 
3.  Substantial change in the mixture of dwelling unit types included in the project; 
4.  Substantial changes in the mixture of land uses or an increase in the amount of land devoted to non-residential purposes; 
5.  Reduction in the approved open space, landscaping or buffering; 
6.  Substantial change in architectural or site design features of the development; 
7.  Any other change that the administrator finds is a major divergence from the approved final master plan 
(B)  All other changes in the final master plan shall be considered minor amendments. The administrator, upon receipt of a written request of the owner, may approve such minor amendments. 
1.  A request which is disapproved by the administrator shall be considered a major amendment and shall be subject to the approval process outlined above for such amendments. 
Sec. 106-228.6. - Approval of preliminary and final site development plans. 
(A)  Following the approval of the final master plan, the applicant or its authorized agent, shall be required to submit preliminary and final site plans for approval. 
(B)  It is the intent of this section that subdivision review under the subdivision regulations be carried out simultaneously with the review of a PUD under this section. The plans required under this section shall be submitted in a form which will satisfy the requirements of the subdivision regulations, as determined by the administrator. 
(C)  Preliminary and final site plans submitted for review shall in compliance with the final master plan approved by the Council. The city shall review and approve or disapprove any final site plan within 60 days of its submittal. 
(D)  No PUD shall be approved and no work shall be authorized on construction until all property included in the Final Master Plan is in common ownership. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-228.7. - Failure to begin development. 
(A)  Failure of the applicant or agent to submit a preliminary site plan for at least one portion of the PUD within five years of the approval of the final master plan, shall constitute an application on the part of applicant to rezone the land included within the PUD to the zoning district or districts applicable to the land prior to the approval of the PUD. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-229. - Reserved. 
Sec. 106-230. - Urban forest overlay district. 
Sec. 106-230.1. - Statement of intent. 
(A)  It is the intent of the Urban Forest Overlay District to promote healthy tree canopies within the City of Salem. The standards contained in this district help to increase both the number and size of trees in new development. These types of plants are important to maintaining general health as they reduce temperatures caused by urban heat islands, absorb carbon dioxide and other pollutants, and emit oxygen. This ordinance shall not apply to parcels zoned RSF or RMF. 
Sec. 106-230.3. - Establishment of urban forest overlay district. 
(A)  Urban Forest Overlay Districts shall include all parcels with frontage on one or more of the following roads: 
1.  West Main Street-Between 4th Street and the Western City Limits. 
2.  East Main Street-Between Thompson Memorial and Route 419. 
3.  Route 419. 
4.  Apperson Drive. 
5.  4th Street-Between West Main Street and Union Street. 
6.  Wildwood Road. 
7.  Thompson Memorial Drive. 
Sec. 106-230.5. - Development regulations. 
(A)  Development regulations within the Urban Forest Overlay District shall be as specified in the underlying zoning districts, with the following additions: 
1.  A minimum of one tree, selected from section 106-230.9, per acre. Approved tree species in the Urban Forest Overlay District, shall be planted within the interior parking lot. Development on less than one acre shall also contain a minimum of one tree. No development shall be required to have more than five trees. Where multiple trees are required, a mix of different species from the list is encouraged. 
2.  In addition to item 1., when a new, expanded, or reconfigured parking area is required or proposed adjacent to a public street rights-of-way, one tree selected from section 106-230.9, approved tree species in the Urban Forest Overlay District shall be planted at 100 foot intervals, starting at the designated rights-of-way intersection, in order to maximize the beneficial environmental effects. All trees shall be planted ten feet behind the curb with a minimum eight foot radius landscaped area surrounding it. This requirement may be modified to allow for ingress and egress areas, signage or for other reasons at the discretion of the administrator. A list of planting locations shall be kept in the department of inspections and zoning. 
3.  All approved trees shall have a minimum caliper of three inches dbh (diameter at breast high) at the time of planting, be trained to a central leader, and have a minimum height of five feet. 
4.  Non-approved tree species may be used at the discretion of the administrator. 
5.  The locations of tree plantings may be left to the developer, but must be approved during the site plan review process. 
6.  The preservation of appropriate existing mature trees is encouraged and may count towards the required number of trees at the discretion of the administrator. 
Sec. 106-230.7. - Administration. 
(A)  All trees shall be locally adapted to the area and shall meet the specifications for the measurement, quality, and installation of trees outlined in this chapter. 
(B)  Landscaping shall not obstruct the view of motorists using any street, private driveway, parking aisles or the approach to any street intersection so as to constitute a traffic hazard or a condition dangerous to the public safety upon any such street, driveway, parking aisle, or street intersection. Required sight distances shall apply to street trees. Larger trees with a central leader should be limbed up a minimum of eight feet for visibility and access. Trees with multiple leaders should be thinned. Any sight obstruction determined by the administrator shall be corrected immediately. 
(C)  The owner shall be responsible for the perpetual maintenance and protection of all trees required by this ordinance. 
(D)  Replacement of trees is permitted and shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of this ordinance. Dead, unhealthy, or misshapen trees shall be replaced immediately by the owner. 
(E)  Maintenance includes actions necessary to keep trees neat and orderly in appearance and free of litter and debris. Pruning of trees shall be done in a manner that preserves the character of the tree and is not detrimental to the health of the tree. 
(F)  The administrator shall have the authority to enforce the requirements of this ordinance. 
_____
Sec. 106-230.9. - Approved tree species in the urban forest overlay district. 
(A)  These tree species have been selected to grow to a minimum height of 20 feet and for other criteria such as absorption of ozone or particulate matter. 
Approved trees: (NOTE: pH and soil samples are strongly recommended before selecting a particular species.) 
Interior Parking Lots 
As required under 106-203.5 A1. Size at Maturity Shape 'Regal' Elm 55' tall x 30' wide Pyramidal 'Allee' Elm 60' tall x 50' wide Vase 'Regal' Elm 55' tall x 30' wide Pyramidal 'Autumn Blaze' Maple 50' tall x 40' wide Oval 'Red Sunset' Maple 50' tall x 40' wide Oval 'Armstrong' Maple 60' tall x 15' wide Fastigiated Pin Oak 70' tall x 40' wide Pyramidal Willow Oak 60' tall x 40' wide Pyramidal 'Green Vase' Zelkova serrata 65' tall x 45' wide Vase Redbud 25' tall x 25' wide rounded Serviceberry varieties 20' tall x 15' wide Oval Star Magnolia 20' tall x 20' wide Pyramidal Hedge maples 35' tall x 30' wide Oval 'Winter King' Hawthorn 20' tall x 20' wide Pyramidal Disease resistant crabapple varieties 20' tall x 20' wide rounded Crepe Myrtle 20' tall x 20' wide Vase Snowgoose Cherry 20' tall x 20' wide oval Yoshino Cherry 35' tall x 35' wide rounded Kwanzan Cherry 35' tall x 35' wide Vase  
Roadside Planting Strips 
As required under 106-203.5 A2. Size at Maturity Shape Redbud 25' tall × 25' wide Rounded Serviceberry varieties 20' tall × 15' wide Oval Star Magnolia 20' tall × 20' wide Pyramidal Hedge maples 35' tall × 30' wide Oval 'Winter King' Hawthorn 20' tall × 20' wide Pyramidal Disease resistant crabapple varieties 20' tall × 20' wide Rounded Crepe Myrtle 20' tall × 20' wide Vase Snowgoose Cherry 20' tall × 20' wide Oval Yoshino Cherry 35' tall × 35' wide Rounded Kwanzan Cherry 35' tall × 35' wide Vase  
(Ord. of 2-11-08) 
_____
Sec. 106-231. - Reserved. 
Sec. 106-232. - Industrial park overlay district. 
Sec. 106-232.1. - Statement of intent. 
(A)  It is the intent of the industrial park overlay district to recognize that industrial land is a scarce and valuable resource within the City of Salem. The standards contained in this district allow for land to be used with maximum intensity, while also recognizing the need to buffer surrounding areas and street frontage. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2012) 
Sec. 106-232.3. - Establishment of industrial park overlay districts. 
(A)  Industrial park overlay districts shall include all parcels with frontage on one or more of the following streets: 
1.  The portion of Salem Industrial Drive south of the railroad right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2012) 
Sec. 106-232.5. - Site development regulations. 
(A)  Notwithstanding the requirements of article IV, herein, the development regulations within the industrial park overlay district shall be as specified in the underlying zoning districts, with the following exceptions: 
1.  The front yard setback shall be a minimum of eight feet from the street right-of-way. For parcels adjacent to the Roanoke River, the rear yard setback shall be a minimum of eight feet from normal high water elevation. 
2.  For parcels adjacent to the Roanoke River, an eight-foot landscape buffer yard from normal high water elevation shall be established and reserved for natural vegetation. 
3.  When parcels abut a different zoning classification, a 15-foot buffer yard with two rows of large evergreen trees shall be planted within the buffer. 
4.  No perimeter landscaping as required under section 106-402.7 between parking areas and adjacent properties is required for parking lots with fewer than 100 parking spaces. 
5.  Planting islands at the ends of parking rows are not required for parking lots with fewer than 100 parking spaces. 
6.  Regardless of the number of parking spaces, rows of more than 20 parking spaces shall be broken up with an island containing at least one tree. 
7.  Front yard setbacks shall be professionally designed and landscaped with a combination of evergreen shrubs and deciduous trees. The required number of shrubs shall be a minimum of one shrub per 25 linear feet of frontage. The required number of deciduous trees shall be a minimum of one tree per 100 linear feet of frontage. These plantings may be grouped with the approval of the administrator. 
8.  Each parcel shall have a minimum of one canopy tree, as defined in section 106-230.9, per 100 parking spaces. For parcels containing fewer than 100 parking spaces, a minimum of one such tree shall be provided. These trees shall be located within large planting areas so as to shade parking areas or buildings. 
9.  Stormwater areas may be landscaped with bog plants, or as rain gardens, in conjunction with city stormwater regulations. Stormwater areas may include appropriately adapted trees or plants, which may count towards the overall landscaping requirements. 
10.  Structures that encroach into the front setback at the time of the adoption of this ordinance are exempt from the provisions of section 106-402.23(4). However all other requirements of section 106-402.23 are in full force and effect, as well as the requirements in section 106-526. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2012) 
Sec. 106-232.7. - Administration. 
(A)  The owner shall be responsible for the perpetual maintenance and protection of all landscaped areas required by this ordinance. 
(B)  Replacement of trees is permitted and shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of this ordinance. Dead, unhealthy, or misshapen trees shall be replaced immediately by the owner. 
(C)  Maintenance includes actions necessary to keep trees neat and orderly in appearance and free of litter and debris. Pruning of trees shall be done in a manner that preserves the character of the tree and is not detrimental to the health of the tree. 
(D)  The administrator shall have the authority to enforce the requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2012) 
Secs. 106-233-106-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE AND DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 106-300. - Use and design standards. 
(A)  The standards contained in Article II District Regulations shall apply to all of the following use types, unless specifically modified and/or superceded by the use and design standards in this article. 
(B)  The standards listed as general standards shall apply in all zoning districts in which the use type is permitted, either by right or by-special use. 
(C)  Where a specific zoning district is indicated, the use and design standards listed in this article shall apply to that zoning district, and shall be in addition to any general standard for that use. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-302. - Agricultural uses. 
Sec. 106-302.1. - Agriculture. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  Commercial uses such as gift shops and restaurants associated with viticulture operations shall only be allowed by special exception permit. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-302.3. - Farm stand. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  At least 50 percent of the products offered for sale at the farm stand shall be produced on the site of the stand or on contiguous property. 
2.  Ingress and egress to the site of the farm stand shall be clearly delineated, and the location and design of such shall be approved by the City of Salem. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-302.5. - Stable. 
(A)  General standards: 
None. 
(B)  Stables shall comply with the following standards in RSF districts: 
1.  Minimum lot size: Two acres. 
2.  On lots less than five acres no more than one stable animal per acre shall be permitted. 
3.  Corrals shall comply with setback requirements for accessory structures. 
4.  Stables shall manage animal waste so as not to create a nuisance or health hazard to adjoining or nearby properties. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-304. - Residential uses. 
Sec. 106-304.1. - Accessory apartment. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  An accessory apartment shall only be considered accessory to a detached single family dwelling. 
2.  At the completion of construction, no accessory apartment shall contain more than 40 percent of the finished floor area of the principal dwelling. 
3.  No accessory apartment shall contain less than 300 square feet of finished floor area, or more than 1,000 square feet of finished floor area. 
4.  Only one accessory apartment shall be allowed per lot or per principal dwelling. 
5.  The owner of the principal dwelling shall reside on the property and the accessory apartment shall only be occupied by a family member of the owner of the principal dwelling. 
6.  No separate utility services shall be allowed for the accessory apartment. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-304.3. - Family day care home. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  All family day care homes shall comply with the Minimum Standards for Family Day Care Homes established by the Virginia Department of Social Services, as may be amended. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-304.5. - Home occupations. 
(A)  Intent: These standards for home occupations are established in recognition that certain small scale business activities may be appropriate as an accessory use to a residential dwelling. The character and scale of the business activity must be clearly minor and subordinate to the principal use of the property as a residence. 
(B)  General standards: 
1.  All home occupations shall be operated by the resident occupants of the dwelling that is the location of the home occupation. 
2.  Only residents of the dwelling shall be engaged in the home occupation activity. No other employees shall be allowed at the site of the home occupation. 
3.  No dwelling used for a home occupation shall be altered or used in any manner that would cause the dwelling to differ in character from a residential use. 
4.  No retail or wholesale sales shall be permitted as part of any home occupation. 
5.  Lessons in the fine arts (dance, music, art), or tutoring shall be allowed as a home occupation provided the total number of students shall not exceed five per day. 
6.  The care of up to a maximum of five individuals (not including provider's own children and any children who reside in the home), or the tutoring of up to five individuals shall be permitted as a home occupation. 
7.  No signage shall be allowed. No advertising associated with the home occupation shall direct clients to the location of the home occupation. 
8.  The home occupation shall not require the use or storage of hazardous or toxic materials and no such material shall be associated with the home occupation. 
9.  There shall be no external storage of equipment or materials associated with the home occupation, and there shall be no external evidence of the existence of the home occupation on the property. One vehicle associated with the home occupation shall be allowed, provided the vehicle is of a type and scale otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
10.  The volume and characteristics of traffic associated with the home occupation shall be consistent with the volume and characteristic of traffic associated with dwellings in the general area. 
11.  The home occupation shall not involve the commercial delivery of materials or products to or from the premises. Incidental deliveries common to residential dwellings shall be permitted. 
12.  More than one home occupation may be located within a single dwelling provided the level of activity associated with all of the home occupations, when considered together, does not violate any of these general standards. 
(C)  Application process: 
1.  The administrator shall be responsible for reviewing all applications for home occupations. 
2.  Applicants for home occupations shall complete a home occupation application and in doing so shall indicate compliance with the intent of these regulations and the general standards contained herein. 
3.  If the administrator believes that a proposed home occupation will comply with the intent and general standards contained herein, the application for the home occupation shall be approved. 
4.  If the administrator believes that a proposed home occupation will not comply with the intent and general standards contained herein, the administrator shall notify the applicant of the changes necessary to achieve compliance with these provisions. If the applicant disagrees with the opinion of the administrator, the administrator may, and at the request of the applicant shall, refer the application to the Commission and Council which shall review the application as a special exception pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(D)  Renewals: 
1.  All approved home occupations shall be granted for a period of 12 months. Applicants shall be responsible for requesting a renewal of any approved home occupation. 
2.  Except as provided below, the administrator shall review all renewal requests, and shall approve all requests that are consistent with these standards. The administrator may approve renewals of home occupations approved by Council, provided the home occupation has not changed in character or scale from that approved by Council, and is being operated in accordance with these provisions. 
3.  If a home occupation is operated in violation of these standards at any time during any 12-month period, the administrator shall not have the authority to renew the application and shall refer the application to the Commission and Council which shall review the application as a special exception pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(E)  Enforcement: 
1.  The administrator shall have the authority to require compliance with these provisions. When, in the opinion of the administrator, an operator of a home occupation violates the home occupation standards contained herein, the administrator shall require compliance pursuant to the procedures contained in section 106-514. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-304.7. - Manufactured home, emergency. 
(A)  These regulations are adopted in recognition that temporary emergency housing options may be necessitated by fire, flood, or other unforeseen and sudden acts of nature. 
(B)  General Standards: 
1.  The city council may authorize the emergency use of a manufactured home on a lot if the building official certifies that the permanent dwelling on the lot has been lost or destroyed by a fire, flood, or other unforeseen and sudden acts of nature, and as a result in uninhabitable. 
2.  Only one emergency manufactured home shall be permitted on a lot of record. It shall be located on the same lot as the destroyed dwelling, and must be occupied only by the person or family whose dwelling was destroyed. 
3.  The emergency manufactured home shall meet all setback and yard requirements for the district in which it is located. It shall be anchored and stabilized in accordance with applicable building code provisions. 
4.  The emergency manufactured home must be removed as soon as reconstruction or replacement of the uninhabitable dwelling is complete, or within a 12-month period of its placement on the site, whichever is sooner. A one time extension of up to six additional months may be granted by the city council if substantial reconstruction of the destroyed dwelling has occurred and work has, and is continuing to progress. No final certificate of occupancy for the reconstructed dwelling shall be issued until the emergency manufactured home is removed from the site. 
(C)  Where the President of the United States has declared a federal disaster, the city council may authorize the placement of temporary manufactured homes supplied by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to disaster victims who lost their homes. In such cases all local zoning and building code requirements shall be waived in favor of FEMA standards. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-304.9. - Manufactured home park. 
(A)  Approval Process: 
1.  Manufactured home parks shall only be allowed in Manufactured Home Park Districts (MHP). 
2.  All requests for MHP districts shall be considered conditional rezoning requests and shall require an amendment to the official zoning map pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  If council approves a new or expanded MHP district the applicant shall submit a site plan in accordance with section 106-400 of this chapter. The submitted site plan shall be approved by the city prior to commencing development of the park. 
(B)  General Standards: 
1.  The minimum lot size for any new or expanding park shall be ten acres. 
2.  Any new or expanding park shall have a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a public street. 
3.  Any new or expanding park shall have a minimum lot width of 50 feet at the adjacent public street, and any portion of the park devoted to the placement of manufactured homes shall have a minimum lot width of 100 feet. 
4.  Public water and sewer service shall be provided to all residential lots and accessory uses within any new or expanding manufactured home park. 
5.  No portion of any new or expanded manufactured home park shall be located within any floodplain overlay district. 
(C)  Density and Individual Lot Requirements: 
1.  The maximum density of any new or expanding park shall be ten manufactured home units per acre. 
2.  New individual lots devoted to the placement of manufactured homes shall have a minimum area of 3,000 square feet and a minimum width of 30 feet. 
3.  Each manufactured home lot shall have a pad constructed for the placement of the manufactured home. Each pad constructed shall be located to allow the placement of a manufactured home in full compliance with the area, lot and setback requirements contained herein. 
4.  Each manufactured home shall be anchored to the pad in accordance with applicable building code requirements. 
5.  Each manufactured home shall be skirted with a durable material within 30 days of placement of the manufactured home on the site. 
(D)  Setback Requirements: Manufactured homes on new individual lots within any new or expanded manufactured home park shall comply with the following minimum requirements: 
1.  Front Yard: 20 feet from any street or driveway interior to the park; 30 feet from any perimeter street or driveway. 
2.  Side Yard: Five feet. 
3.  Rear Yards: Ten feet. 
(E)  Open Space and Recreational Areas: 
1.  Any new or expanded manufactured home park shall devote a minimum of ten percent of the area of the park to recreational and open space uses. 
2.  Areas of the park devoted to individual lots, streets, driveways, parking areas, and/or office or laundry facilities shall not be counted as open space or recreation areas. 
3.  Open space and recreation areas may be passive or active. No area shall have a contiguous size of less than 5,000 square feet. The location and character of open space and recreation areas should be appropriate to meet the needs of park residents and shall include such facilities as recreation centers, swimming pools, athletic courts, bikeways, walking trails, picnic areas, tot lots and other similar facilities. 
(F)  Management Offices and Resident Services Facilities: 
1.  An office area devoted solely to the management of the park shall be allowed within the park. 
2.  A convenience store, located within the building occupied by the management office, and designed to serve only the daily needs of the park residents may be located within the park. No signage associated with this use shall be allowed on the outside of this building, or be visible from any property or road outside the park. 
3.  Management provided laundry and storage facilities shall be allowed within the park, provided these facilities are designed and located to primarily serve the needs of park residents. These facilities may be located within the management office building, or may be located elsewhere in the park. 
(G)  Streets and Parking: 
1.  Private streets and driveways shall be allowed within the manufactured home park. All private streets and driveways shall be paved. 
2.  Each manufactured home shall be provided a minimum of two parking spaces. These spaces may be located on the individual manufactured home lots, or may be located within common parking areas that are in a location convenient to the individual lots. The surface material of all parking areas shall be established by the city as part of the approval of the MHP District. 
3.  In addition to the above, parking spaces shall be provided for the management office and all resident services facilities. 
(H)  Status of Existing Parks: 
1.  In manufactured home parks established prior to the adoption of these provisions, individual manufactured homes on existing lots may be removed and replaced, provided the replacement home is located in approximately the same location as the home removed. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 8-22-2016(3)) 
Sec. 106-304.11. - Multi-family dwellings. 
(A)  Intent: The following minimum standards are intended to create a safe and healthy multi-family living environment Setback and density regulations have been established to insure an adequate separation between buildings 
(B)  General Standards: 
1.  Applicants for multi-family developments shall submit a site plan in accordance with section 106-400 of this chapter. The submitted site plan shall be approved by the city prior to commencing development of the site. 
2.  The following minimum lot areas shall be required for all multi-family dwelling units. The listed square footage requirements shall be in addition to a base minimum lot area of 7,200 square feet. 
Number of Bedrooms in Unit Square Feet 
Required Efficiency 1,500 One Bedroom 2,000 Two Bedroom 2,500 Three Bedrooms 3,000 Four or more Bedrooms 3,500  
For the purposes of calculating minimum lot area requirements, any room, other than a living room, dining room or area, kitchen or bathroom, that could be used for sleeping purposes shall be counted as a bedroom. 
3.  All multi-family dwellings shall be served by public water and sewer. 
(C)  Additional Standards in RMF and RB Districts: 
1.  A minimum 40 foot separation shall be provided between buildings containing multi-family dwellings. This minimum separation may be reduced to 20 feet if both facing walls contain no windows, doors or balconies, or the corners of adjacent buildings are at right angles to one another. 
2.  Any new or expanded multi-family use containing over 20 units shall devote a minimum of ten percent of the area of the development to recreational and open space uses. 
3.  Open space and recreation areas may be passive or active. The location and character of open space and recreation areas should be appropriate to meet the needs of residents and shall include such facilities as recreation centers, swimming pools, athletic courts, bikeways, walking trails, picnic areas, tot lots and other similar facilities. 
(D)  Additional Standards in DBD and TBD Districts: 
1.  The multi-family use shall be allowed only in the same structure as an office or commercial use type. 
2.  The office or commercial use type must occupy at least 50 percent of the gross floor area of the structure. 
3.  Multi-family units on the first floor shall be permitted provided that no such unit shall have frontage on Main Street, Broad Street, Market Street, Academy Street, Union Street, or College Avenue. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-304.13. - Single family dwelling, attached. 
(A)  Standards in DBD and TBD Districts: 
1.  The attached single family dwellings shall be allowed only in the same structure as an office or commercial use type. 
2.  The office or commercial use type must occupy at least 50 percent of the gross floor area of the structure 
3.  Attached single family dwellings on the first floor shall be permitted provided that no such units shall have frontage on Main Street, Broad Street, Market Street, Academy Street, Union Street, or College Avenue. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-304.15. - Single family dwelling, detached. 
(A)  Single family dwellings shall contain a minimum of 600 square feet. 
(B)  Standards in DBD and TBD Districts: 
1.  Single family dwellings shall be allowed only in the same structure as an office or commercial use type. 
2.  The office or commercial use type must occupy at least 50 percent of the gross floor area of the structure. 
3.  Single family dwellings on the first floor shall be permitted provided that no such units shall have frontage on Main Street, Broad Street, Market Street, Academy Street, Union Street, or College Avenue. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 12-12-05(5); Ord. of 4-9-2018(3)) 
Sec. 106-304.17. - Townhouse. 
(A)  Intent: The following minimum standards are established in recognition that common-wall single-family dwellings on individual lots of record are a viable housing alternative to conventional detached single-family dwellings. These standards are intended to allow flexibility in unit arrangements, unit size and yard space, thereby allowing the creation of efficient and economical housing arrangements. 
(B)  Townhouse Development Standards: The following minimum standards refer to the overall design of the site, and not to individual townhouse lots. 
1.  Applicants for townhouse developments shall submit a site plan in accordance with section 106-400 of this chapter. The site plan shall include a master plan that defines the entire townhouse development. The party submitting the site plan shall not commence development until the plan has been approved by the city. Approval of a final subdivision plat, pursuant to the provisions of the Salem Subdivision Ordinance is required prior to the sale of any townhouse lot. 
2.  The minimum development size for any townhouse development shall be 15,000 square feet. The maximum density of any townhouse development shall be ten dwelling units per acre. 
3.  The minimum frontage for a townhouse development shall be 60 feet on a public street. 
4.  Along public rights-of-way, the setback for the townhouse groupings shall be as specified in article II. Setback areas shall be free of all physical improvements, including parking areas, except for the following: 
a.  Pedestrian walkways and sidewalks. 
b.  Privacy fences in rear yards. 
c.  Accessory buildings in rear yards. 
d.  Retaining walls. 
5.  When buffer yards are required between zoning districts of different intensities, plantings shall be installed as specified in the 25-foot, or greater, buffer yard requirement found in section 106-402.3. No individual townhouse lot lines shall extend into any required landscape buffer. 
6.  When buffer yards are not required between zoning districts of different intensities, a minimum 25-foot setback shall be established between the townhouse groupings and adjacent properties. This area shall be professionally landscaped with a combination of trees and shrubs, and shall be free of all physical improvements including parking areas, except for the following: 
a.  Pedestrian walkways and sidewalks. 
b.  Privacy fences in rear yards. 
c.  Accessory buildings in rear yards. 
d.  Retaining walls. 
7.  No townhouse unit shall have a private driveway connecting to a public street. 
8.  All townhouse developments shall be served by public water and sewer. 
9.  A homeowners' association shall be created for each townhouse development. The homeowners' association shall be responsible for the perpetual maintenance of all commonly owned areas and facilities including, but not limited to, open space, required buffer yards, common areas, private streets and parking areas, and stormwater management facilities within the townhouse development. 
(C)  Minimum Townhouse Lot Requirements: 
1.  Individual townhouse lots may front on either public or private streets, parking areas, or other commonly-owned areas within the development. 
2.  There shall be no minimum lot size for individual townhouse lots. Each townhouse lot shall be large enough to accommodate the footprint of the unit, any required yards, and any amenities intended for the exclusive use of that unit, such as private parking areas or patios. No required townhouse yard may contain any parking area not intended for the exclusive use of that unit. Individual townhouse lots may extend into the 25-foot landscaped setback at the perimeter of the development, however they may not extend into any required buffer yard. 
3.  The minimum width for any townhouse unit shall be 16 feet. 
(D)  Minimum Townhouse Yard Requirements: 
1.  Townhouse Unit: 
Front Yard: 
(a)  The minimum front yard for any townhouse unit fronting on a public street shall be as specified in article II, District Regulations. 
(b)  The minimum front yard for any townhouse unit not fronting on a public street shall be ten feet. 
Rear Yard: The minimum rear yard shall be ten feet. 
Side Yard for End Units: The minimum side yard for end units shall be ten feet. 
(E)  Maximum Height of Structures: 
1.  The maximum height of any townhouse unit shall be three stories or 45 feet. 
(F)  Maximum Building Size: 
1.  Accessory Structures: No accessory building shall exceed 100 square feet in size. 
(G)  Grouping of Townhouses: 
1.  Townhouses shall be attached in groups of three to 12. 
2.  The facades of townhouses shall be varied by staggered front yards and variations in design and materials. No more than four abutting townhouses shall have the same front yard depth and the same architectural treatment of facades and roof lines. The front yard stagger, when required, shall be a minimum of two feet. 
3.  All townhouses shall be arranged such that only the front or side of any unit shall face a public street. If site characteristics require that the backs of townhouses face a public street, then vegetative screening shall be required per the provisions of this chapter. Such vegetative screening shall be located within a common area, and not on any townhouse lot. 
4.  A minimum 40-foot separation shall be provided between groupings of townhouse units. This minimum separation may be reduced to 20 feet if both facing walls contain no windows, doors or balconies. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 10-8-2012) 
Sec. 106-304.19. - Two family dwelling. 
(A)  Standards in DBD and TBD Districts: 
1.  The two family dwelling shall be allowed only in the same structure as an office or commercial use type. 
2.  The office or commercial use type must occupy at least 50 percent of the gross floor area of the structure. 
3.  Two family dwellings on the first floor shall be permitted provided that no such units shall have frontage on Main Street, Broad Street, Market Street, Academy Street, Union Street, or College Avenue. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-306. - Civic uses. 
Sec. 106-306.1. - Cemetery. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  Minimum parcel size: Five acres. 
2.  No internment shall occur within 25 feet of the property line. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-306.3. - Community recreation. 
(A)  Any outdoor activity area, swimming pool or ball field or court that adjoins a residential use type shall be landscaped with one row of small evergreen trees in accordance with section 106-402 of this chapter. 
Sec. 106-306.5. - Educational facilities, college and university. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  A site plan as required by this chapter shall be submitted and approved prior to the commencement of any new construction or enlargement of an educational facility. The administrator may waive this site plan requirement if the total increase in the impervious area resulting from this construction or enlargement is less than 3,000 square feet. 
2.  Screening and buffering for educational facilities shall be provided as required by the provisions found in section 106-402 of this chapter. 
(B)  Standards in the DBD District: 
1.  Educational facilities, college/university shall be allowed only on floors above the ground floor and in the same structure as a commercial use type except for parcels fronting Clay Street between Thompson Memorial Avenue and North Market Street. These parcels may allow educational facilities, college/university on any floor. 
2.  The commercial use type must occupy at least the first floor of the structure, and should be configured to be pedestrian friendly. 
(C)  Standards in the CUD District: 
1.  Educational facility buildings shall be setback a minimum of 30 feet from any street, and shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from adjoining property lines. 
2.  Educational facility buildings shall have a maximum height of 45 feet. However, this maximum height may be increased up to a maximum height of 70 feet provided the minimum setback of the building is increased by one foot for each foot of additional height above 45 feet. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
Sec. 106-306.7. - Administrative services. 
    Standards in the DBD District for administrative services: 
1.  Administrative services shall be permitted only on floors above the ground floor and in the same structure as a commercial use type for parcels fronting: 
(a)  Main Street between Thompson Memorial Drive and Academy Street; 
(b)  College Avenue between Clay Street and Thompson Memorial Drive; and 
(c)  North Market Street. 
2.  Commercial use types must occupy at least the first floor of the structure, and should be configured to be pedestrian friendly. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2018(1)) 
Sec. 106-308. - Office uses. 
    Standards in the DBD District for office use types: 
1.  Office use types shall be permitted only on floors above the ground floor and in the same structure as a commercial use type for parcels fronting: 
(a)  Main Street between Thompson Memorial Drive and Academy Street; 
(b)  College Avenue between Clay Street and Thompson Memorial Drive; and 
(c)  North Market Street. 
2.  Commercial use types must occupy at least the first floor of the structure, and should be configured to be pedestrian friendly. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2018(3)) 
Sec. 106-308.1. - Outpatient mental health and substance abuse clinics. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  No outpatient mental health and substance abuse clinic may be constructed, developed or operated within 1,000 feet of any other such outpatient mental health and substance abuse clinic. 
2.  No outpatient mental health and substance abuse clinic may be constructed, developed or operated within 500 feet of a residentially zoned district, or within 500 feet of property occupied or used for an educational facility, place of religious assembly, public park and recreation area or day care center. 
3.  A special exception permit, granted by city council, shall be required prior to the construction, development, or operation of any outpatient mental health and substance abuse clinic. 
4.  The "establishment" of an outpatient mental health and substance abuse clinic as referred to in this section includes the opening of such business as a new business, the relocation of such business, the enlargement of such business in either scope or area, or the conversion, in whole or part, of an existing business to an outpatient mental health and substance abuse clinic. 
(Ord. of 9-13-2010(5)) 
Sec. 106-310. - Commercial uses. 
Sec. 106-310.1. - Automobile dealership, new. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  Outdoor display areas in conjunction with automobile sales shall be constructed of the same materials required for off-street parking areas as required by section 106-404 of this chapter. 
2.  A perimeter landscaping strip and landscaping shall be provided as required by section 106-402 of this chapter. 
3.  The storage and/or display of motor vehicles in the perimeter landscaping strip shall be prohibited. 
4.  Exterior display or storage of new or used automobile parts is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-310.3. - Automobile dealership, used. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  Outdoor display areas in conjunction with automobile sales shall be constructed of the same materials required for off-street parking areas as required by section 106-404 of this chapter. 
2.  A perimeter landscaping strip and landscaping shall be provided as required by section 106-402 of this chapter. 
3.  The storage and/or display of motor vehicles in the perimeter landscaping strip shall be prohibited. 
4.  Exterior display or storage of new or used automobile parts is prohibited. 
5.  Any vehicle which is missing major mechanical or body parts or have been substantially damaged shall be placed in a storage yard. The storage yard shall be fully screened from public view and shall be set back at least 100 feet from any adjoining residential district. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-310.5. - Automobile repair services, major. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  All vehicles stored on the premises in excess of 72 hours shall be placed in a storage yard. The storage yard shall be fully screened from public view and shall be set back at least 100 feet from any adjoining residential district. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-310.7. - Day care center. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  All day care centers shall comply with the Minimum Standards for Day Care Centers established by the Virginia Department of Social Services, as may be amended, unless specifically exempt from those minimum standards. 
2.  Parking areas and access driveways at all day care centers shall be designed to allow for the easy and safe drop off and pick up of center attendees. No day care center shall be allowed that causes congestion, or the disruption of traffic flow on adjacent or nearby streets. 
3.  The administrator shall have the authority to require a special exception permit for any day care center, that due to its location and/or parking lot or access driveway design, has the potential to result in congestion, or the disruption of traffic flow on adjacent or nearby streets. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-310.9. - Homestay inn. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  The owner or owner's agent shall reside on the same parcel occupied by the homestay inn. 
(B)  Additional standards in AG, RMF, and RB districts: 
1.  No more than five guest sleeping rooms shall be utilized for a homestay inn. The maximum number of guest occupants at any one time shall not exceed 20 guests. 
2.  Any building erected, enlarged or modified to accommodate a homestay inn shall maintain the appearance of a residence. No rooms shall have direct entrance or exit to the outside of the building, except that emergency exits when required by the fire marshal may be provided for emergency purposes only. 
3.  Guests may stay no more than 30 consecutive nights in any one calendar year. 
4.  Meals shall be provided only to overnight guests and no cooking shall be permitted in guest rooms. 
5.  Required parking areas for guests and employees shall be provided on-site. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 11-23-09) 
Sec. 106-310.11. - Manufactured home sales. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  A perimeter landscaping strip and landscaping shall be provided as required by section 106-402. 
2.  The storage and/or display of manufactured homes in the perimeter landscaping strip required above shall be prohibited. 
3.  The storage of used manufactured homes on the premises which are not suitable for occupancy shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-310.13. - Personal storage. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  The minimum lot size shall be one acre. 
2.  The minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
3.  No security fencing, security gate or other obstruction to vehicle access shall be permitted in the required front yard setback or in any buffer yard required pursuant to section 106-402. 
4.  All interior driveways shall be at least 26 feet wide when cubicles open onto one side only and at least 30 feet wide when cubicles open onto both sides to accommodate loading and unloading at individual cubicles. Adequate turning radiuses shall be provided, where appropriate, for a 30-foot long single unit truck or moving van. All driveways shall be surfaced pursuant to section 106-404.11. 
5.  No door openings for any cubicle shall be constructed facing any residentially zoned property. 
6.  The following uses shall be prohibited: 
a.  Auctions by tenants, commercial wholesale or retail sales, or miscellaneous or garage sales. 
b.  The servicing, repair or fabrication of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, appliances or other similar equipment. 
c.  The operation of power tools, spray-painting equipment, table saws, lathes, compressors, welding equipment, kilns, or other similar equipment. 
d.  The establishment of a transfer and storage business. 
e.  The storage of flammable, highly combustible, explosive or hazardous materials shall be prohibited. 
7.  Outdoor storage areas shall be used for the storage of motor vehicles, trailers, and recreational vehicles only. All outdoor storage areas shall be screened from adjoining properties by a ten foot landscaped area consisting of small evergreen trees and evergreen shrubs in accordance with section 106-402. 
8.  Accommodations for a live-in manager shall be permitted. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-310.15. - Recreational vehicle sales and service. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  A perimeter landscaping strip and landscaping shall be provided as required by section 106-402. 
2.  The storage and/or display of recreational vehicles in the perimeter landscaping strip required above shall be prohibited. 
3.  Any recreational vehicle which is missing major mechanical or body parts or has been substantially damaged shall be placed in a storage yard. The storage yard shall be fully screened from public view and shall be set back at least 100 feet from any adjoining residential district. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-310.17. - Adult business. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  Sexually explicit material shall not be displayed in the windows of adult businesses. Further, adult merchandise as defined in Chapter 58, Section 58-180 shall not be visible from any point outside the establishment. 
2.  Signs advertising the adult business and any attention-getting devices shall not display sexually explicit pictures or language. 
3.  All off-street parking areas of the adult business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot candle of light on the parking surface and walkways. Adequate lighting shall also be provided for all entrances and exits serving the adult business. 
4.  Adult businesses shall not employ any person under the age of 18. 
5.  Wide angle mirrors and/or video systems must be used to provide the manager with continuous monitoring of all areas of the establishment. 
6.  The owner or operator shall install, operate and maintain a security camera and video tape system designed by a security specialist which shall continuously monitor all exterior entrances and parking areas of the establishment. Such cameras shall provide clear imagery of the establishment's patrons and their vehicles. Tapes recording activities in the areas under surveillances shall be preserved for a period of 12 months. Authorized representatives of the Police Department or the Building Inspections and Zoning Department shall have access to such tapes in accordance with applicable law. 
7.  No adult business shall be located within 300 feet of a public or private licensed day care center, educational facilities, primary/secondary, religious assembly, or RSF, RMF, RB, AG, or MHP Districts. 
(Ord. of 10-9-06(2)) 
Sec. 106-310.19. - Microbreweries. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  Such establishments shall include a tasting area, and may include restaurant, retail, and live entertainment uses. 
(B)  Standards in DBD and TBD Districts: 
1.  Such establishments shall include a tasting area, and may include restaurant, retail, and live entertainment uses. 
2.  First floor frontage shall have at least 50 percent transparency from the street, and shall be primarily occupied by non-industrial uses. 
(Ord. of 1-25-2016(1); Ord. of 7-10-2017(1)) 
Sec. 106-310.21. - Microdistillery. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  Such establishments shall include a tasting area, and may include restaurant, retail, and live entertainment uses. 
2.  First floor frontage shall have at least 50 percent transparency from the street, and shall be primarily occupied by non-industrial uses. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
Sec. 106-310.23. - Dance hall. 
(A)  General standards: 
None 
(B)  Standards in DBD District: 
1.  Hotels, restaurants, microbreweries, and microdistilleries that contain a dance floor of up to 50 percent or less of the total floor area subordinate to the primary use shall be considered an accessory use and not a dance hall for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2017(1)) 
Sec. 106-312. - Industrial uses. 
Sec. 106-312.1. - Asphalt plants. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  A Type C buffer yard shall be required in accordance with section 106-402. 
(B)  Additional standards in the LM district: 
1.  In considering a special exception permit request for an asphalt plant, in addition to the general standards listed above, the commission and council shall specifically consider and set standards for the following: 
a.  The maximum height of any structure and any additional setback requirements necessary to compensate for any increased height. 
b.  Specific measures to control dust during the construction and operation of the plant. 
c.  Specific levels of noise permitted during the daytime and nighttime operation of the plant, as measured at adjacent property lines, and any additional requirements for the design or operation of the plant intended to reduce noise. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-312.3. - Breweries. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  Such establishments may also include restaurants, tasting rooms, and retail related to the beverage being produced. 
(Ord. of 1-25-2016(1)) 
Sec. 106-312.5. - Distilleries. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  Such establishments may also include restaurants, tasting rooms, and retail related to the beverage being produced. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
Sec. 106-314. - Miscellaneous uses. 
Sec. 106-314.1. - Amateur radio tower. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  An amateur radio tower shall be considered as an accessory structure and shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the respective zoning district. 
2.  More than one tower shall be permitted on a site provided all setback requirements have been met. 
3.  Amateur radio towers shall only contain antennae and/or communications equipment that are designed for receiving and transmitting amateur radio signals. 
4.  Amateur radio towers shall be illuminated if required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), but no lighting shall be allowed if not required by either agency. 
(B)  In all zoning districts where amateur radio towers are permitted the following additional standards shall apply: 
1.  The maximum height permitted by right for an amateur radio tower shall be 75 feet. Any tower which exceeds this height may be permitted only after obtaining a special exception permit in accordance with section 106-524 of this chapter and the additional criteria established under (C) for such permits below. 
(C)  Where a special exception permit is required by this chapter, the following criteria shall be considered: 
1.  In accordance with the FCC's Memorandum Opinion and Order in PRB-1 also known as "Amateur Radio Preemption", 101 FCC2d 952 (1985), local regulation of amateur radio towers shall consider the following: 
a.  The FCC, in regulating and licensing amateur radio stations and operators, is operating under basic federal objectives which preempt certain local regulations which preclude amateur communications. 
b.  Restrictions on the placement, screening, or height of towers based on health, safety or aesthetic considerations must reasonably accommodate amateur communications. 
c.  Restrictions must represent the minimum practicable regulation to accomplish the purpose of the district in which the tower is proposed, as well as the purpose of this chapter as contained in section 106-104. 
2.  The specific height of the amateur radio tower shall be established as a condition of the special use permit. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-314.2. - Mixed use. 
(A)  Intent: The following minimum standards are established in recognition that mixed use, often multi-floor, structures, is desirable within the downtown and community business districts. Mixed use allows maximum flexibility in the designation of different areas of a single parcel for different uses. Uses coexisting include, but are not limited to, loft apartments, condos, retail, office space, and restaurants. Generally non-residential uses should be designated for the first floor of multi-floor buildings to encourage pedestrian traffic and to avoid the creation of dead zones. When available the facades and characteristics of existing and surrounding buildings should be maintained. 
(B)  General standards: 
1.  Applicants for mixed use development shall submit a site plan in accordance with section 106-400 of this chapter, along with sufficiently detailed layouts for each building and each floor of the building, designating the specific areas dedicated to each different use. The submitted site plan shall be approved by the city prior to commencing development of the site. 
2.  Major revisions to the final site plan shall be reviewed and approved following the procedures and requirements for site plan review contained in section 106-400 of this chapter. Major revisions include, but are not limited to changes such as: 
a.  Any increase in the density of the development; 
b.  Substantial change in circulation or access; 
c.  Substantial change in the mixture of dwelling unit types included in the project; 
d.  Substantial changes in the mixture of uses or an increase in the amount of space devoted to non-residential purposes; 
e.  Reduction in the approved open space, landscaping or buffering; 
f.  Substantial change in architectural or site design features of the development; 
g.  Any other change that the administrator finds is a major divergence from the approved final master plan. 
3.  All other changes in the final site plan shall be considered minor amendments. The administrator, upon receipt of a written request of the owner, may approve such minor amendments. A request which is disapproved by the administrator shall be considered a major amendment and shall be subject to the approval process outlined above for such amendments. 
(C)  Standards in the DBD district: 
1.  Residential uses shall be allowed only in the same structure as an office or commercial use type. Common entrances are encouraged. 
2.  The office or commercial use type must occupy at least the first floor of the structure, except as allowed by the following: 
a.  Educational facilities, college/university as allowed by section 106-306.5, standards in the DBD district. 
b.  Residential uses may be included on the ground floor at the discretion of the administrator, with consideration of historical and architectural features, requirements of the department of historic resources, original historic commercial space layout, and other qualifying factors. 
3.  All development should be configured so as to be pedestrian friendly. 
4.  New construction or construction involving the demolition of existing buildings shall be of scale and construction materials so as to be appropriate with existing surrounding buildings. Materials and types of construction that should be given consideration include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Brick facades; 
b.  Cornices, parapets, molding, lintels and other externally visible decorations; 
c.  Roof lines; 
d.  Windows. 
5.  A homeowner's/property owner's association shall be created for each mixed use structure development. The association shall be responsible for the perpetual maintenance of the property and any open space or common areas within the development. 
(D)  Standards in the CBD district: 
1.  Notwithstanding section 106-402, buffer yards, screening and landscaping, a type B buffer yard shall be planted between mixed use development and residential development prior to the commencement of any non-residential use. 
2.  Residential occupancy shall be contained to the primary structure only. 
3.  Development utilizing residential structures shall delineate on the required site plan which structure is the primary structure. 
4.  Non-residential uses in accessory structures shall require a special exception permit in accordance with section 106-524 of this chapter. 
5.  Non-residential uses to occur out of doors shall require a special exception permit in accordance with section 106-524 of this chapter. 
6.  Multi-family residential mixed use development shall require a special exception permit in accordance with section 106-524 of this chapter. 
7.  Parking shall be required on site and in accordance with section 106-404 of this chapter. 
(E)  Standards in the TBD district: 
1.  Residential uses shall be allowed only in the same structure as an office or commercial use type. Common entrances are encouraged. 
2.  The office or commercial use type must occupy at least the first floor of the structure, except as allowed by the following: 
a.  Residential uses may be included on the ground floor at the discretion of the administrator, with consideration of historical and architectural features, requirements of the department of historic resources, original historic commercial space layout, and other qualifying factors. 
3.  All development should be configured so as to be pedestrian friendly. 
4.  New construction or construction involving the demolition of existing buildings shall be of scale and construction materials so as to be appropriate with existing surrounding buildings. Materials and types of construction that should be given consideration include, but are not limited to: 
Brick facades; 
Cornices, parapets, molding, lintels and other externally visible decorations; 
Roof lines; 
Windows. 
5.  A homeowner's/property owner's association shall be created for each mixed use structure development. The association shall be responsible for the perpetual maintenance of the property and any open space or common areas within the development. 
(Ord. of 3-10-08(4); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2); Ord. of 2-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 106-314.3. - Outdoor gatherings. 
(A)  General standards: 
1.  As part of the application for a special exception permit the petitioner shall submit information indicating the individuals and/or parties sponsoring the event, the nature of the gathering, the events, displays and/or entertainment scheduled, the number of tickets to be sold, an estimate of the total number of people expected to attend, and the dates for which the permit is requested. 
2.  In addition, a detailed plan shall be submitted of all facilities to be provided in accordance with the following guidelines: 
a.  Adequate provisions for sanitation facilities, garbage and trash collection and disposal, and facilities for providing food, water and lodging for persons at the gathering shall be provided. 
b.  The sponsors shall provide for adequate medical facilities, fire protection and security of the site. 
c.  Adequate on-site parking shall be provided for all employees and patrons of the gathering. The parking layout shall be determined in advance of the festival, adequately marked on the site and shall be supervised during the festival in such a manner as to provide safe and convenient access to all patrons and employees, and to accommodate emergency service vehicles. 
d.  Adequate off-site circulation and traffic controls to provide safe ingress and egress to the gathering without burdening the existing road network or substantially disrupting the normal flow of traffic. 
e.  Any lighting installed for the gathering shall be directed away from adjoining properties. 
f.  The level of any music and other noise created by the gathering shall be directed away from any adjoining residence and may be specifically limited by the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-314.5. - Towers. 
(A)  Intent. These minimum standards are intended to govern the location of all towers and the installation of antennas and accessory equipment structures. 
(B)  Towers, with related unmanned equipment buildings, shall be permitted only by special exception in HBD, BCD, LM and HM zoning districts as specified in Article II District Regulations. Towers shall also be allowed by special exception in any zoning district on property owned or controlled by the City of Salem. 
(C)  As part of the review and approval of any special exception permit for a tower, Council may waive any of the requirements of this section, or prescribe such reasonable additional conditions in connection therewith as to assure that the design and installation of the tower and related facilities will conform to sound planning principals. 
(D)  No tower or related facilities shall be located within 500 feet of any residential district. 
(E)  No tower shall exceed 199 feet in height, including antennas. 
(F)  Towers shall be monopole in design, and subject to any applicable standards of the FCC or FAA, be painted a neutral color. 
(G)  At any tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the facilities to the natural setting and the built environment. The related unmanned equipment structure shall not contain more than 750 square feet of gross floor area or be more than 12 feet in height, and shall be located in accordance with the requirements of the zoning district in which located. 
(H)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FCC or FAA. If lighting is required, the council may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbances to surrounding views. 
(I)  No advertising of any type shall be allowed on any tower. 
(J)  Satellite and microwave dishes attached to monopoles shall not exceed two feet in diameter or six feet in diameter when attached to towers. 
(K)  All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the tower governed by this section shall bring such structures into compliance with such revised standards as required. Failure to bring a tower into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the revocation of the special exception permit, and removal of the tower at the owner's expense. 
(L)  The owner of any tower shall ensure that it is constructed and maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable federal, state, and local building codes and regulations. 
(M)  Each applicant requesting a special exception permit for a new tower shall submit 18 copies of a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawing, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, easements, adjacent uses, and other information deemed necessary by the city to assess compliance with the regulations of this chapter. Additionally the applicant shall provide actual photographs of the site from designated relevant views that include a simulated photographic image of the proposed monopole or tower. The photograph with the simulated image shall include the foreground, the mid-ground, and the background of the site. An engineering report, certifying that the proposed tower and site are compatible for co-location with a minimum of three similar users including the primary user, must accompany the application. The applicant shall provide copies of their co-location policy. 
(N)  In addition to any reasonable application fees established by council, the applicant shall be financially responsible for the cost of any professional engineering and or related services that may be procured by the city to independently verify the application information submitted by the applicant. 
(O)  No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the council that no existing tower, or structure can accommodate the proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
1.  No existing towers, or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
2.  Existing towers, or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
3.  Existing towers, or structures are not of sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna or related equipment. 
4.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with existing antenna, or the antenna on the existing towers, or structures would cause interference with the applicants proposed antenna. 
5.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers, or structures unsuitable. 
(P)  Towers, guys, and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements for primary structures 
(Q)  Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet high and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
(R)  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the support buildings from adjacent property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaping strip of at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. Existing mature tree growth and natural land form on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Antennas and other equipment located on the top or side of a building or structure shall be screened from public view. 
(S)  Any tower, that is not operational for a continuous period of 90 days shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the building official or city manager notifying the owner of such removal requirement. Removal includes the removal of the tower, all subterranean tower and fence footers, underground cables and support buildings. The buildings may remain with the approval of the landowner. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. If the tower is not removed per this section, the city may require the landowner to have it removed. In all cases, the site shall be returned as closely as possible to its original conditions. 
(T)  Every applicant for a special exception permit for a tower shall, as a condition for the issuance of the special exception permit, file with the building official a continuing bond in the penal sum of not less than $10,000.00, and conditioned for the faithful observance of the provisions of this chapter and all amendments thereto, and of all the laws and ordinances relating to towers, and which shall indemnify and save harmless the city from any and all damages, judgments, costs, or expenses which the city may incur by reason of the removal or the causing to be removed any tower as provided for in this section. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
Sec. 106-316. - Accessory uses and structures. 
(A)  As defined in section 106-600, accessory uses and structures may be commonly found and associated with principal use types. Principal uses which are allowed by right or by special exception may include accessory uses and activities, provided such accessory uses and activities are appropriate and incidental to the principal use, and provided they are designed and located in accordance with the intent and provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-316.1. - Accessory uses: agricultural use types. 
(A)  Agricultural use types may include the following accessory uses, activities or structures on the same site or lot: 
1.  Parking associated with a principal use. 
2.  The storage of agricultural equipment, products, or materials associated with the principal use. 
3.  Temporary sawmills. 
4.  Other uses and activities necessarily and customarily associated with purpose and function of agricultural use types, as determined by the administrator. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-316.3. - Accessory uses: residential use types. 
(A)  Residential use types may include the following accessory uses, activities or structures on the same site or lot: 
1.  Private garages and parking for the principal use. 
2.  Recreational activities and uses used by residents, including structures necessary for such uses. 
3.  Playhouses, gazebos, incidental household storage buildings, swimming pools, and other similar accessory structures. 
4.  Garage or yard sales provided that such sales occur no more than seven days in a two-month period. 
5.  Other uses and activities necessarily and customarily associated with purpose and function of residential use types, as determined by the administrator. 
(B)  1.  Temporary family health care structures, as defined herein, shall be a permitted accessory use in RSF Residential Single Family District if such structures (i) are used by a caregiver in providing care for a mentally or physically impaired person, and (ii) are on property owned or occupied by the caregivers as his or her residence. For purposes of this section, "caregiver" and "mentally or physically impaired person" are defined in § 15.2-2292.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
2.  In addition to the specific requirements of a temporary family health care structure found in section 106-602.3 herein, such structures must meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Any person proposing to install such a structure shall first obtain a permit from the city for which such applicant may be charged a fee up to $100.00. The city may not withhold such permit if the applicant provides sufficient proof of compliance with the requirements herein and the requirements found in § 15.2-2292.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  Only one such structure shall be allowed on a lot or parcel of land. 
(c)  The applicant must provide evidence of compliance with this section to the city one year from the date of installation, and every year thereafter, as long as such structure remains on the property. Such evidence will include inspection by the city of such structure at reasonable times. 
(d)  The applicant must comply with all applicable requirements of the Virginia Department of Health. 
(e)  No signage advertising or otherwise promoting the existence of the structure shall be permitted anywhere on the property. 
(f)  Such structure shall be removed within 30 days of the time from which the mentally or physically impaired person is no longer receiving or is no longer in need of the assistance provided for in this section. 
(g)  The Zoning Administrator may revoke any permit granted hereunder if the permit holder violates any provisions herein or any provisions in § 15.2-2292.1 of the Code of Virginia. In addition to any other remedies, provided in Chapter 106 herein, the city may seek injunctive relief against the permit holder or other appropriate legal proceedings to ensure compliance. 
(h)  Such structure shall be subject to the standards as provided in section 106-202.3 herein. 
(i)  Any such structure shall connect to any water, sewer and electric utilities that are serving the primary residence on the property. 
(j)  Such structure shall comply with all requirements as set forth in § 15.2-2292.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(C)  Urban agriculture shall be a permitted accessory use in accordance with section 106-318. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 3-14-2011(1); Ord. of 6-25-2012(2)) 
Sec. 106-316.5. - Accessory uses: civic use types. 
(A)  Civic use types may include the following accessory uses, activities or structures on the same site or lot: 
1.  Parking for the principal use. 
2.  Accessory dwellings commonly associated with or necessitated by the location and operation of the principal use. 
3.  Food services operated incidental to the principal use and operated primarily for the convenience of employees, residents or users of the principal use. Typical examples include cafeterias, and dining halls. 
4.  Convenience commercial facilities clearly incidental to the principal use and operated primarily for the convenience of employees, residents, and users of the principal use. Typical examples include museum gift shops, college bookstores, or snack bars clearly incidental to the principal use. 
5.  Other uses and activities necessarily and customarily associated with purpose and function of civic use types, as determined by the administrator. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-316.7. - Accessory uses: office use types. 
(A)  Office use types may include the following accessory uses, activities or structures on the same site or lot: 
1.  Parking for the principal use. 
2.  Recreational facilities available only to the employees of the office use type. 
3.  Day care facilities available only to the employees of the office use type. 
4.  Other uses and activities necessarily and customarily associated with purpose and function of office use types, as determined by the administrator. 
5.  One accessory dwelling unit occupied by employees responsible for the security of the use. 
6.  Other uses and activities necessarily and customarily associated with purpose and function of civic use types, as determined by the administrator. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-316.9. - Accessory uses: commercial use types. 
(A)  Commercial use types may include the following accessory uses, activities or structures on the same site or lot: 
1.  Parking for the principal use. 
2.  Accessory storage buildings or areas. 
3.  One accessory dwelling unit occupied by employees responsible for the security of the use. 
4.  Other uses and activities necessarily and customarily associated with purpose and function of commercial use types, as determined by the administrator. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-316.11. - Accessory uses: industrial use types. 
(A)  Industrial use types may include the following accessory uses, activities or structures on the same site or lot: 
1.  Parking for the principal use. 
2.  Recreational facilities available only to the employees of the industrial use type. 
3.  Day care facilities available only to the employees of the industrial use type. 
4.  Cafeterias and sandwich shops available only to the employees of the industrial use type. 
5.  Incidental retail sale of goods associated with the industrial use type, provided the square footage does not exceed ten percent of the gross floor area or 3,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
6.  One accessory dwelling unit occupied by employees responsible for the security of the use. 
7.  Other uses and activities necessarily and customarily associated with purpose and function of industrial use types, as determined by the administrator. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-317. - Reserved. 
Sec. 106-318. - Urban agriculture. 
Sec. 106-318.1. - Keeping of chickens. 
(A)  Intent. The keeping of chickens supports a local, sustainable food system by providing an affordable, nutritious food source of fresh eggs. These regulations are to provide appropriate standards for the keeping of chickens within an urban residential environment, while protecting the residential integrity of the surrounding neighborhood and the health and safety of the chickens. 
(B)  General standards. Keeping of chickens, as defined herein, shall be permitted as an accessory use to single family dwellings if (i) the use is conducted at the applicant's place of residence, (ii) the use is conducted for personal household consumption only, and (iii) subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Each parcel shall contain one single family dwelling and must have a minimum lot size of one-quarter acre (10,890 square feet). 
2.  Chickens are defined herein as domestic female chicken hens. Roosters are prohibited. 
3.  Chickens shall be kept for the household's personal consumption only. Commercial use such as selling eggs or selling chickens for meat shall be prohibited. 
4.  There shall be no slaughtering or processing of chickens. 
5.  No more than six chickens shall be allowed. 
6.  Adequate shelter, care and control of the chickens are required. Any person allowed to keep chickens under this section shall comply with all of the provisions and requirements of the city and state code regarding care, shelter, sanitation, health, rodent control, cruelty, neglect, noise, reasonable control and any other requirements pertaining to, but not limited to, the adequate care and control of animals in the city. 
7.  The owner of the chickens shall take necessary action to reduce the attraction of predators and rodents and the potential infestation of insects and parasites. Chickens found to be infested with insects and parasites that may result in unhealthy conditions may be removed by an animal control officer. 
8.  Chickens shall not be allowed to roam free. They shall be kept in an enclosed secure area not to exceed a total of 128 square feet, hereinafter known as a pen. Pens shall include a coop (enclosed structure) containing a minimum of one and one-half square foot per hen and an open run area containing a minimum of eight square feet per hen. Pens may be portable. 
9.  The materials used for pens shall be uniform and kept in good condition in order to protect the safety of the chickens. 
10.  All pens shall be deemed accessory structures and shall comply with the setback requirements as provided in section 106-202.3(B)(2) herein, and shall be no closer than 50 feet from any adjacent principal structure, situate on an adjacent parcel, other than that of the owner of the chickens. Portable pens shall be moved on a regular basis. 
11.  All pens shall be located in the rear yard only. 
12.  All pens shall be located out of any drainage areas that could allow fecal matter to enter a storm drainage system or stream. 
13.  All pens shall be constructed and maintained so as to be impermeable to rodents, wild birds, and predators, including dogs and cats, and to prevent such animals or other pests from being harbored underneath, inside, or within the walls of the enclosure. All pens must be kept dry, well-ventilated, and in sanitary condition at all times, and must be cleaned on a regular basis to prevent offensive odors. All manure not used for composting or fertilizing shall be removed promptly. Odors from chickens, manure, or other chicken-related substances shall not be detectable at the property boundaries. 
14.  All feed or other material intended for consumption by the chicken shall be kept in containers impenetrable by rats or other rodents, and such container shall be equipped with tightly fitting caps or lids. All feeding shall be conducted in a manner so as to prevent unconsumed food from being accessible to other animals or rodents. The presence of rodents in an area used for the keeping of chickens shall be prima facie evidence that such area is maintained in violation of this section. 
15.  Composting of chicken litter and waste on site is highly encouraged. If any litter and/or waste is to be disposed of, it must be double bagged and securely closed and deposited in either a city approved receptacle or taken to the city transfer station. Also, any dead chickens shall also be double bagged and securely closed and deposited in either a city approved receptacle or taken to the city transfer station. 
16.  Disposal of litter, waste, and dead chickens on public land or in the sewage or stormwater collection system is strictly prohibited. 
(C)  Administration. 
1.  Persons wishing to keep chickens pursuant to this subsection must file an application with the city zoning department. The application shall include a sketch showing the area where the chickens will be housed and all types and size of enclosures in which the chickens will dwell along with a $25.00 fee. The sketch must show all property dimensions and setbacks. Once the site and enclosures have been inspected and approved by the city's animal control officer, a permit will be issued. The permit shall be valid for one year. Each existing permit must be renewed annually in July by filing an application with the city zoning department, along with payment of a $25.00 renewal. The animal control officer shall make another inspection of the site, prior to the approval of the renewal application. 
2.  Any violations found may subject the owner to revocation of their permit and to criminal charges as provided herein. 
3.  The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the zoning administrator and such enforcement authority may be delegated by the administrator to the animal control office or other departments of the city. 
4.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
5.  The keeping of chickens in AG-Agriculture district shall conform with the requirements of section 106-302 herein, and shall not be subject to the provisions of section 106-316.3 and section 106-318. 
(D)  Existing use at time of enactment. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, places of residences where chickens (roosters not being permitted under any circumstances) are currently being kept at the time of enactment of this ordinance shall have a period of two years from such date of enactment to comply with the requirements herein. However, those eligible hereunder shall, on or before August 1, 2012, declare and certify such existing use to the satisfaction of the city and make application as required by section 106-318.1(C). 
(Ord. of 6-25-2012(2)) 
Secs. 106-319-106-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 106-400. - Site plan review. 
(A)  A site plan shall be required and shall be submitted to the city for each of the following: 
1.  All new development in every zoning district except for single family and two family dwellings. 
2.  The conversion of any single family or two family dwelling to any other use or to a higher intensity residential use. 
3.  Additions or modifications to buildings or sites, except single family and two family dwellings, if said addition or modification results in a 5,000 square foot or greater increase in impervious surface area of the site. 
4.  The conversion of any property from fee simple ownership to a condominium form of ownership. 
5.  The conversion of any building or property to a different use category, e.g., commercial to industrial. 
6.  Additions or modifications that may increase the requirements of any development standard including but not limited to parking, landscaping, and stormwater management. 
(B)  All required site plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer, or land surveyor B, who is registered by the Commonwealth of Virginia. The city may waive this requirement if the type, scale or location of the proposed development does not necessitate such plans. 
(C)  A plot plan, that meets the standards contained in section 106-406.3 shall be required for all uses or development not requiring a site plan. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
Sec. 106-400.1. - Preliminary site plans. 
(A)  Applicants for site plan approval may submit a preliminary site plan to the city for review and approval prior to preparing a final site plan. The preliminary site plan shall show the general location of all existing and proposed land uses and site features. Specifically it shall include the following information: 
1.  The name and location of the proposed development. 
2.  The boundary of the entire tract showing distances and bearings. 
3.  The name and address of the property owner and or developer of the site, if different than the owner. The name and address of the person or firm preparing the plan. 
4.  Area and present zoning of the site proposed for development. 
5.  Adjacent and abutting properties with information on ownership, zoning and current use. 
6.  Location of the lot or parcel by vicinity map. Site plans shall also contain a north arrow, original date, revision dates and graphical scale. 
7.  The names, and locations of existing and proposed public or private streets, alleys and easements on or adjacent to the site. The center lines or boundary of adjacent rights-of-way shall also be shown. 
8.  The exact location of buildings or structures existing on or proposed for the site, including their setbacks from property lines, and the distance between buildings or structures. 
9.  The existing topography of the parcel prior to grading, and the proposed finished contours of the site with a maximum of two foot contour intervals. 
(B)  The city shall review the preliminary site plan and shall advise the applicant whether or not the features and uses shown on the preliminary plan generally conform to the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable city ordinance and requirement. If the features and uses shown on the preliminary plan generally conform to the provisions of this chapter, the city shall advise the applicant of the approval of the preliminary plan and shall authorize the applicant to prepare and submit a final site plan. If the features and uses shown on the preliminary plan do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, the city shall advise the applicant in writing, and shall advise the applicant on what changes to the preliminary plan are necessary prior to approval. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-400.3. - Final site plans. 
(A)  Every final site plan submitted in accordance with the requirements of this chapter shall show the following information unless the administrator determines that such information is not necessary to insure conformance with city ordinances or standards: 
1.  Location of the lot or parcel by vicinity map. Site plans shall also contain a north arrow, original date, revision dates and graphical scale. 
2.  Property lines of the parcel(s) proposed for development, including the distances and bearings of these lines. If only a portion of a parcel is proposed for development, a limits of development line shall also be shown. 
3.  The name and address of the property owner and or developer of the site, if different than the owner. The name and address of the person or firm preparing the plan. 
4.  The tax parcel number(s) of parcels proposed for development and depicted on the site plan. 
5.  The name of adjacent property owners and the owners of any property on which any utility or drainage easement may be required in conjunction with the development. Tax parcel numbers for each of these properties shall also be provided. 
6.  The nature of the land use(s) proposed for the site. 
7.  The zoning district designation of the parcel(s) proposed for development, and the zoning designation and current land use of adjacent parcels. 
8.  The names, and locations of existing and proposed public or private streets, alleys and easements on or adjacent to the site. The center lines or boundary of adjacent rights-of-way shall also be shown. 
9.  The location, type, and size of site access points such as driveways, curb openings, and crossovers. Sight distances at these access points shall be provided. If existing median cuts will serve the site they shall be shown. If new median cuts are proposed, their location shall also be shown. 
10.  All proffers accepted pursuant to section 106-522 shall be shown on the plan. 
11.  Off-street parking areas and parking spaces including handicapped spaces, loading spaces, and walkways indicating type of surfacing, size, angle of stalls, width of aisles, and a specific schedule showing the number of spaces provided and the number required by this chapter. 
12.  The exact location of buildings or structures existing on or proposed for the site, including their setbacks from property lines, and the distance between buildings or structures. 
13.  The number of stories, floor area, and building height of each building proposed. If more than one land use is proposed, the floor area of each land use shall be provided. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of parking required for the use(s). 
14.  For residential developments, the type of dwelling unit shall be stated along with the number of units proposed. Where necessary for determining the number of required parking spaces, the number of bedrooms in each unit shall also be provided. 
15.  The location of proposed or required fire lanes and signs. 
16.  The existing topography of the parcel prior to grading, and the proposed finished contours of the site with a maximum of two foot contour intervals. 
17.  Detailed utility plans and calculations shall be submitted for sites for which public water or sewer will be provided or for sites on which existing utilities will be modified. The City Engineer shall have the authority to set the standards for such plans. 
18.  An erosion and sedimentation control plan and detail sheet shall be submitted for site developments involving the grading disturbance of greater than 5,000 square feet of area, or 1,000 cubic yards of material. 
19.  A detailed storm water management plan and calculations shall be submitted. The City Engineer shall determine the requirements for such plans. 
20.  The location of existing and proposed freestanding signs on the parcel. 
21.  The location and type of proposed exterior site lighting, including height of poles and type of fixtures. 
22.  The location of any 100 year flood plain and floodway on the site, and the relationship of buildings and structures to this floodplain and floodway. 
23.  The location of required or proposed buffer yards, screening, fencing, and site landscaping and irrigation. The type and size of the plant materials and screening to be used shall be provided. In addition, the relationship of these materials to physical site improvements and easements shall be provided. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-400.5. - Format of plans. 
(A)  Site plans shall be submitted on sheets no greater in size than 34 by 44 inches. A sheet size of 24 by 36 inches is preferred. The scale of the plans shall not be greater than one inch equals ten feet (1"=10'), or less than one inch equals 50 feet (1"=50'). Plans shall be designed using an engineering scale. The Director of Planning and Development may approve a lesser scale such as 1"=100' provided sufficient detail is provided to insure compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter and any other requirement or ordinance of the city or Commonwealth. 
(B)  If more than one sheet is used to supply the information required by this chapter, sheets shall be numbered, and match lines shall be provided, when appropriate, to clearly indicate where the plans join. 
(C)  Prior to final approval by the city, site plans shall be signed by the owner or developer of the parcel(s) proposed for development. The signature shall certify that the owner/developer is aware of the site design requirements imposed by the site plan and other applicable city codes, and shall further certify that the owner/developer agrees to comply with these requirements, unless modified in accordance with local law. 
(D)  After approval, the city may require that all approved plans be submitted to the city in digital format. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-400.7. - Administrative procedures and requirements. 
(A)  The Director of Planning and Development shall have the administrative authority to establish city procedures for site plan review and approval. No procedure so established shall set a lesser standard than is legislated in this chapter. 
(B)  The Director of Planning and Development shall coordinate the city review of any site plan submitted in accordance with city administrative procedures, and shall have the authority to request opinions or decisions from other city departments, agencies or authorities of the Commonwealth of Virginia, or from other persons as may from time to time be consulted. 
(C)  A minimum of ten complete sets of site plans shall be submitted for review. A review fee shall be required for any site plan submitted. The city shall establish procedures for the collection of these fees. 
(D)  The city shall review, and approve or disapprove any site plan submitted for its review within 45 days of the filing of the plan with the city. If an unapproved site plan is returned to the applicant or other agent of the property owner, due to lack of required information on the plan, or because the design or standards proposed on the site plan do not meet the provisions of this chapter or other applicable city standards, the 45-day time period shall begin again with the resubmittal of the plan to the city. 
(E)  Approval of a final site plan pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire five years from the date of approval in accordance with § 15.2-2261 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, unless building and/or zoning permits have been obtained for the development. 
(F)  No building or zoning permit shall be issued by any city official for any building, structure or use depicted on a required site plan, until such time as the plan is approved by the city. 
(G)  No change, revision, or erasure shall be made on any pending or approved site plan, nor on any accompanying data sheet where approval has been endorsed on the plan or sheets, unless authorization for such changes is granted in writing by the Director of Planning and Development who shall consult with all applicable departments or agencies prior to approving the change. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-400.9. - Minimum standards and improvements required. 
(A)  Any improvement required by this chapter, or any other ordinance of the City of Salem shall be installed at the cost of the developer unless other agreements have been reached between the developer, the city, the Virginia Department of Transportation, and/or any other governmental agency. 
(B)  Prior to the approval of a site plan the applicant shall execute an agreement to construct required or proposed improvements located within public rights-of-way or easements or any such improvement connected to any public facility. The applicant shall also file a performance guarantee with surety acceptable to the city in the amount of the estimated cost of the improvements plus ten percent contingency, as determined by the city e-gineer. The owner's performance guarantee shall not be released until the construction has been inspected and accepted by the city 
(C)  Proposed lot sizes, buildings or uses shown on site plans shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. Nonconforming lots of record, buildings or uses may be developed in accordance with section 106-526 of this chapter. 
(D)  Proposed parking areas, travel lanes and access drives shown on site plans shall be designed, located and constructed in accordance with section 106-404 of this chapter. 
(E)  Utilities shown on site plans shall conform to applicable city standards, as determined by the city engineer. 
(F)  Stormwater management facilities shown on site plans shall engineer be designed and implemented in accordance with the provisions of chapter 30, article IV, of the City Code. 
(G)  Erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be designed and implemented in accordance with the provisions of chapter 30, article III, of the City Code. 
(H)  Proposed exterior site lighting shall be in accordance with section 106-406.1 of this ordinance. 
(I)  Required buffer yards, screening and/or landscaping shown on site plans shall be designed and located in accordance with section 106-402 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 3-10-08(5)) 
Sec. 106-402. - Buffer yards, screening and landscaping. 
(A)  It is the intent of these provisions to promote the public health, safety and welfare by reducing common conflicts associated with incompatible abutting land uses. It is also the intent of these provisions to promote the protection of the natural environment through plantings that absorb gaseous emissions and improve air and water quality. To the ends, these requirements seek to ease transition among different uses by reducing noise, glare, dust and overcrowding, redirecting emissions, confining litter, maintaining property values, protecting neighborhood character, promoting visual harmony, restricting passage, promoting peaceful enjoyment and privacy and enhancing the natural environment. Further, the requirements seek to encourage innovation in landscape and architectural design. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-402.1. - General requirements. 
(A)  These provisions shall apply to all developments requiring a site plan as specified by this chapter. All required landscaped plans shall be prepared by a licensed professional knowledgeable of plant materials and landscape design. 
(B)  All plantings required by this article shall be selected from section 106-402.29, approved planting list. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 8-14-2017(1)) 
Sec. 106-402.3. - Buffer yards. 
(A)  Buffer yards containing specified screening and plantings shall be required between zoning districts of different intensities as shown in Table 1. For each required buffer type, the developer of the site shall choose which option to install. Buffer yards shall be installed in the higher intensity zoning district. 
(B)  Required buffer yards shall be located such that they provide a visual and physical barrier between abutting zoning districts of different intensities and shall buffer and screen all exterior storage, service, refuse, maintenance, repair, processing, salvage, parking, and other similar areas. No use of the site may be extended beyond the required buffer yard. 
(C)  Required buffer yards shall not be located on any portion of any existing or dedicated public or private street or right-of-way, shall not obstruct the visibility of traffic circulation, and shall not interfere with the use of adjoining properties. 
Table 1 Adjoining Zoning AG RSF RMF MHP RB DBD TBD CBD HBD BCD LM HM CUD PUD Site Zoning Category of Buffer Yard Required RMF B B * * * * * * * * * * B MHP B B B * B * * * * * * B B RB B B B B * * * * * * * * * DBD B B B B B * * * * * * * B TBD B B B B B * * * * * * * B CBD B B B B B B B HBD B B B B B * * * * * * B B BCD B B B B B * * * * * * B B LM C C C C A A A A A A * * C C HM C C C C A A A A A A * * C C CUD B B B B B B B B B B B B * * PUD * * * * * * * * * * * * *  
Type of 
Buffer Yard Option 1 Option 2 A Six-foot screening Five-foot buffer yard, one row of evergreen shrubs B Eight-foot buffer yard, one row of small evergreen trees, one row of evergreen shrubs 15-foot buffer yard, one row of small evergreen trees C 15-foot buffer yard, one row of large evergreen trees, one row of small evergreen trees 25-foot buffer yard, one row of large evergreen trees  
(D)  Required buffer yards, including screening and plantings shall be in place at the time of any occupancy or use of the property. Required plantings may be installed at the beginning of the first opportune planting season after any occupancy or use of the property. 
(E)  The buffer yard shall be reserved solely for screening and plantings, except for required pedestrian or vehicular access driveways to the property, passive recreation areas, or pedestrian or bicycle trails, which can be accommodated in a manner that preserve the intended screening function between abutting zoning districts of different intensities. In no case shall any portion of a required buffer yard be used for parking, service, refuse, storage, maintenance, or any other use that impairs the intended buffer function. 
(F)  The property owner or lessee shall have the responsibility to continuously maintain the required buffer yards, screening and plantings such that they continue to meet the specified standards and intent of this section. All materials shall present an attractive appearance and be of durable construction. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 8-22-2016(5); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
Sec. 106-402.5. - Standards for buffer yard planting and screening. 
(A)  Planting required by this section shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Where required, all evergreen shrubs shall have a height of at least 24 inches at the time of planting and an ultimate height of six feet or more. One such shrub shall be planted for each three linear feet of buffer yard. Some evergreen shrubs that meet these standards are various types of hollies, yews, and junipers. 
2.  Where required, each small evergreen tree shall have a height of at least four feet at time of planting and an ultimate height of 15 feet or greater. One such tree shall be planted for each five linear feet of buffer yard. Some small evergreen trees that meet these standards are various types of pines, hollies, upright arborvitae and junipers. 
3.  Where required, each large evergreen tree shall have a height of at least six feet at the time of planting and an ultimate height of 50 feet or greater. One such tree shall be planted for each 15 linear feet of buffer yard. Some large evergreen trees that meet these standards are various types of pines, firs and hemlocks. 
4.  Existing evergreen trees and shrubs which meet the requirements of this section may be counted as contributing to total planting requirements. 
5.  All portions of buffer yard areas not containing plantings shall be seeded with lawn grass of other approved vegetative ground cover. 
(B)  Screening required by this section shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Screening shall be visually opaque and shall be constructed of a durable material. It shall be installed within the required buffer yard, and shall be continuously maintained. 
2.  Acceptable screening materials shall include stockade fences, decorative masonry walls, brick walls, and earth berms. Alternate materials may be approved, if in the opinion of the administrator, their characteristic and design meet the intent and standards of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-402.7. - Perimeter landscaping standards for parking lots. 
(A)  When a new, expanded, or reconfigured parking area is required or proposed adjacent to a public street rights-of-way, a landscaped planting strip shall be established between the parking area and the adjacent street rights-of-way. This required landscaped planting strip shall have a minimum width of eight feet, if the depth of any portion of the parking area is 60 feet or less when measured at a right angle to the street rights-of-way. The width of the required landscaped planting strip shall be increased by one foot for each additional five foot depth of parking area provided. No required landscaped planting strip shall be required to exceed a width of 50 feet. 
(B)  Within the required landscaped planting area, one deciduous tree shall be planted for each 320 square feet of landscaped area. All shade trees shall have a minimum caliper of two inches dbh at the time of planting and trained to a central leader. Lower limbs shall be removed to a clear trunk height of six foot as tree growth allows. Smaller ornamental/flowering trees may be used with the permission of the administrator. When used, these trees may retain their lower limbs, but must be planted with consideration of visibility and traffic flow. 
(C)  When buffer yards as specified in this section are not required, an eight foot wide landscaped planting strip shall be provided between all parking areas and adjacent properties. Within the required landscaped planting area, one deciduous tree shall be planted for each 160 square feet of landscaped area. All shade trees shall have a minimum caliper of two inches dbh at the time of planting and trained to a central leader. Lower limbs shall be removed to a clear trunk height of six foot as tree growth allows. Smaller ornamental/flowering trees may be used with the permission of the administrator. When used, these trees may retain their lower limbs, but must be planted with consideration of visibility and traffic flow. 
(D)  Standards in the DBD district. 
1.  Any new parking area shall conform to 106-402.7(A)-(C). 
2.  When a reconfigured parking area is required or proposed adjacent to a public street right-of-way, a landscaped planting strip shall be established between the parking area and the adjacent street right-of-way. This required landscaped planting strip shall have a minimum width of four feet. 
3.  The required landscaped planting strip shall be planted with a combination of trees and shrubs. One tree shall be planted for every 25 linear feet of landscaped area. 
4.  Landscaped endcaps shall be installed between rows of parking and adjacent street rights-of-way. 
5.  Other types of screening may be allowed at the discretion of the administrator. 
(E)  Standards in the TBD district. 
1.  Any new parking area shall conform to 106-402.7(A)-(C). 
2.  When a reconfigured parking area is required or proposed adjacent to a public street right-of-way, a landscaped planting strip shall be established between the parking area and the adjacent street right-of-way. This required landscaped planting strip shall have a minimum width of four feet. 
3.  The required landscaped planting strip shall be planted with a combination of trees and shrubs. One tree shall be planted for every 25 linear feet of landscaped area. 
4.  Landscaped endcaps shall be installed between rows of parking and adjacent street rights-of-way. 
5.  Other types of screening may be allowed at the discretion of the administrator. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 2-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 106-402.9. - Landscaping of front setback areas. 
(A)  All front setback areas located between a building and a public street shall be professionally landscaped with a combination of trees, shrubs and groundcover. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-402.11. - Use of existing woodland areas. 
(A)  In cases where quality woodland exists, preservation of existing trees between the parking lot and the adjoining right-of-way or property is encouraged and may be substituted for landscaping requirements at the discretion of the city horticulturist. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-402.13. - Interior landscaping standards for parking lots. 
(A)  The following minimum standards for interior parking lot landscaping shall be met for all new, expanded or reconfigured parking areas containing 5,000 square feet or more of impervious area. 
1.  At least one deciduous shade tree shall be installed for every ten parking spaces provided. All shade trees shall have a minimum caliper of two inches dbh at the time of planting and trained to a central leader. Lower limbs shall be removed to a clear trunk height of six foot as tree growth allows. Smaller ornamental/ flowering trees may be used with the permission of the administrator. When used, these trees may retain their lower limbs, but must be planted with consideration of visibility and traffic flow. 
2.  A continuous landscape strip shall be installed between every four rows of parking. This strip shall be a minimum of eight feet in width to accommodate required trees and shrubs. 
3.  Large planting islands (over 200 square feet) shall be located throughout the lot at the end of parking rows. These islands shall be planted with shade trees, low shrubs and/or ground cover. 
4.  Planting islands, with a minimum width of nine feet shall be provided between every 15 parking spaces to avoid long rows of parked cars. One deciduous shade tree shall be provided within each of these planting islands. 
5.  Within the interior of the parking lot, landscaping should be used to delineate vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns, improve stormwater quality and to promote stormwater management objectives. Clear and legible signs and other techniques should be used to further direct the flow of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the lot. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 3-10-08(6)) 
Sec. 106-402.15. - Planting and design guidelines. 
(A)  Use deciduous urban shade trees with ground cover or low shrubs as the primary landscape material. Avoid tall shrubs or low-branching trees that will restrict visibility. 
(B)  For planting islands that are parallel to spaces, islands shall be a minimum of nine feet wide to allow doors to open. 
(C)  For planting islands that are perpendicular to spaces, islands shall be a minimum of eight feet wide to allow for overhang of parked cars. If parking is only on one side of the island, an eight-foot width is still required. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-402.17. - Maintenance of landscaping. 
(A)  The owner, tenant and their agents, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all provided landscaping required by this chapter, or under the terms of any other development approvals, or shown on an approved site plan. All landscaped areas shall be kept free from refuse and debris and in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance. Failure to maintain such landscaping shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(B)  All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily available water supply with at least one outlet located within 150 feet of all planted areas. Drip-type or similar automatic irrigation systems are required for sites over one acre. 
(C)  All required or provided trees, shrubs, ground covers and other plant materials must be replaced during the first opportune planting season if they die or become unhealthy because of accidents, drainage problems, disease or other causes. 
(D)  In the event that any required landscaping material shown on the plan is subsequently replaced, the new material shall generally conform to the original approved landscape plan, or an approved amended plan, with respect to size and characteristics of the plantings. In applying this provision, the degree and manner in which the existing landscaping on the site has grown and matured shall be taken into consideration. 
(E)  Trees shall not be trimmed or topped so that advertisement signs may be visible. Trees shall instead be allowed to grow and at the appropriate time, the crown may be lifted. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 8-22-2016(4)) 
Sec. 106-402.19. - Modifications. 
(A)  The requirements of this section shall be applied equally to all similarly classified and situated properties but may be modified or waived by the administrator where the intent of this section is preserved and where the proposed developments of new use meets any of the following guidelines: 
1.  Natural land characteristics and/or existing vegetation would achieve the same intent of this section, provided such natural features are maintained and not modified by the development or use of the site; 
2.  Innovative landscape design, staggering of planting, screenings or architectural design would achieve the intent of this section; 
3.  The amount of required buffer yard would occupy more than ten percent of the total lot, parcel of land or development site, and proportional increases of planting and screening are added which are determined by the administrator to offset any reductions of the required buffer yard; or 
4.  The subject uses are separated by an alley, public utility right-of-way, water body or other physical separation. In such case, the width of the separating feature may replace the buffer yard requirements on a foot-for-foot basis, provided the intent of the applicable screening and planting requirements is met. Where such separating feature is wider than the applicable buffer year requirements, one row of the applicable planting requirements may be waived for every five feet of separation in excess of the required buffer yard; provided, however, that a minimum of one row of plantings or screening may be required. 
5.  When property lines abut an adjacent jurisdiction, the administrator shall determine the specific screening and buffering requirements along the property lines after consideration of the zoning designation and or land use of the adjacent property. Requirements shall not exceed those that would be required for similarly situated property within the city. 
6.  If site characteristics do not permit the compliance with these parking lot landscaping regulations and the requirements of section 106-404 (Off-Street Parking), then the administrator shall, after consultation with the city horticulturist, have the authority to determine which standards shall take precedent on the site. 
7.  The location and design of any required landscaped area may be modified by the administrator to achieve local stormwater management water quality objectives. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-402.21. - Conflicting requirements. 
(A)  When buffering, screening or planting requirements are required by a conditional rezoning, or a special exception permit approved after the effective date of this chapter, and said requirements are in conflict with the requirements contained herein, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-402.23. - Nonconforming uses and sites. 
(A)  Any lot or parcel of land having a lawful use that does not conform with the buffering, screening and landscaping provisions for this section shall be required to comply with these provisions if: 
1.  The lawful use is discontinued for more than two years; or 
2.  The lawful use is replaced in whole or in part by a higher intensity use type, i.e., commercial to industrial; 
3.  The associated building or structure containing the lawful use is removed; or 
4.  The associated building or structure containing the lawful use is enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered to the extent that costs exceed 25 percent of the building's or structure's fair market value prior to any improvement. For purpose of this section, all costs incurred from enlargement, extension, reconstruction or structural alteration of such structure during a three-year period shall be included in determining whether the costs of such improvements exceed 25 percent of the fair market value. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-402.25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of 4-19-2018(3) repealed § 106-402.25, which pertained to additional requirements for exterior storage, refuse disposal, etc. and derived from Ord. of 3-14-05(2). Subsequently, Ord. of 4-19-2018(3) laid out provisions concerning similar subject matter as § 106-406.27. 
Sec. 106-402.27. - Additional requirements for outdoor recreation uses. 
(A)  Where any area used for active outdoor recreation use, playground, tennis courts, swimming pool, or other similar use is located in a residential district, such use shall be screened from any adjoining residences with buffer yards, screening and plantings meetings Type B standards listed in this section. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-402.29. - Approved planting list. 
    Where landscaping is required by this section, the following standards shall apply: 
(A)  Buffer yards as required by this section. 
Approved trees: (Note: pH and soil samples are strongly recommended before selecting a particular species.) 
Trees Species Size at Maturity Shape Large Evergreen Trees: height > 50' at maturity Cryptomeria japonica 50'×20' Upright/Conical Atlas Cedar 40'×30' Upright/Conical Deodar Cedar 40'×30' Upright/Conical Spruce: Norway, Serbian, Oriental 50'×20' Upright/Conical Eastern White Pine 50'×20' Upright Small Evergreen Trees: height > 15' at maturity American Holly 20'×15' Conical Eastern Red Cedar variable Upright/Conical Chinese Juniper 'Spartan' 20'×6' Columnar Arborvitae 'Emerald Green', 'Green Giant' 20'×6' Columnar American Holly 20'×15' Upright/Conical Evergreen Shrubs: height > 6' at maturity Holly* Juniper* Viburnum*  
(B)  Perimeter landscapes as required by this section. 
Approved trees: (Note: pH and soil samples are strongly recommended before selecting a particular species.) 
Canopy Trees Species Size at Maturity Shape Lacebark Elm Over 45' Pyramidal Regal Elm Over 55' Pyramidal Ginkgo (non-fruiting cultivars) Over 55' Pyramidal Thornless Honeylocust Over 45' Oval American Hornbeam cultivars 30-45' Oval European Hornbeam 30-45' Fastigiated 'Autumn Blaze' Red Maple Over 45' Oval 'October Glory' Red Maple Over 45' Oval Freeman Maple Over 45' Oval Oak* * * Sweetgum Over 50' Pyramidal Blackgum Over 45' Upright 'Heritage' River Birch Over 45' Upright American Yellowwood Over 45' Broad Sophora Over 30' Broad Dawn Redwood Over 50' Conical Katsura Tree Over 40' Broad Zelkova* Over 45' Vase American Linden** Over 50' Oval  
* Most oak tree species that are hardy to USDA Zone 7 are acceptable for canopy tree areas. 
** Linden approval dependent upon site/location. 
Small Trees Species with Approval of the City Horticulturist: 
For Use in Areas where Canopy Trees are Not Acceptable Redbud sp. 20'×20' Oval Trident Maple 25'×20' Oval Serviceberry sp. 20'×15' Globe Kousa Dogwood 20'×20' Oval 'Winter King' Hawthorn 25'×25' Oval Star Magnolia - Single Stem 20'×20' Pyramidal Disease-Resistant Crabapple 20'×20' Rounded 'Yoshino' Cherry 35'×35' Rounded 'Okame' Cherry 20'×20' Oval Golden Rain Tree 25'×25' Rounded Japanese Tree Lilac 20'×15' Globe  
(C)  Substitution of species may be allowed at the discretion of the administrator in conjunction with the city horticulturist. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2017(1)) 
Sec. 106-404. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(A)  These provisions for off-street parking are intended to address the off-street parking demands created by various land uses within the City of Salem. The standards established in this section are designed to protect the health safety and welfare of the Salem community by accommodating parked vehicles in a safe and functional manner with consideration given to the stormwater quality and quantity impacts of impervious parking areas. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-404.1. - Applicability. 
(A)  These provisions shall apply equally for all use types listed in this section, except for those use types located within the DBD Downtown Business District and the TBD Transitional Business District. No minimum parking shall be required for any use type within DBD and TBD. However, if parking is provided for any use type in the DBD and the TBD, it shall be constructed to the standards contained herein as well as applicable standards contained in section 106-402, buffer yards, screening and landscaping, except that parking areas designated for private use of residents may utilize compact size parking stalls. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 2-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 106-404.3. - General regulations. 
(A)  No commercial vehicle with, or designed to have two or more rear axels shall be parked in any residential zoning district except while loading and unloading on such premises. No construction vehicle or machinery shall be parked overnight in a residential zoning district unless the machinery is incidental to the ongoing and active improvement of the property. 
(B)  No recreational vehicle shall be used for living or businesses purposes, or otherwise connected to utility services unless located within an approved campground, as otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
(C)  All required off-street parking shall be located on the same lot as the use requiring the parking, except under the following conditions: 
1.  Required parking spaces are on a contiguous lot under the same ownership or in a permanent parking easement on contiguous property. Contiguous lots providing parking for more than one use shall provide sufficient spaces to comply with the parking requirements for all uses. 
2.  For uses types other than residential, required parking spaces may be located up to 600 feet away from the use that requires the parking spaces. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-404.5. - Disabled parking. 
(A)  Site plans, as required by section 106-400 shall provide for parking spaces reserved for the disabled. The number of spaces provided shall be as required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-404.7. - Permitted locations. 
(A)  Except as provided for in section 106-210.3, all required or provided off-street parking spaces located on the ground and not within a parking structure, may be located within any required yard unless the yard is required for screening, buffering, or landscaping as provided by this chapter. 
(B)  All parking structures and carports shall comply with the minimum yard and setback requirements applicable in the zoning district where the structure is located. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-404.9. - Access. 
(A)  All off-street parking spaces shall provide safe and convenient access to a street. 
(B)  Aisles between rows of parking, and aisles providing access to parking lots shall comply with the design standards established by the building official. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-404.11. - Construction standards. 
(A)  All off-street parking areas shall be constructed of a hard surface consisting of bituminous concrete or concrete. Gravel parking areas shall not be permitted, unless the administrator determines that the use is of a temporary nature. 
(B)  For sites or structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places, parking areas may be constructed using period correct materials as permitted by the administrator. Such development shall require a site plan. 
(C)  The city engineer may require paving surfaces and/or construction techniques which minimize surface stormwater runoff in areas where it is deemed necessary. The developer may select precast interlocking blocks, porous-type asphalt paving, detention basins or other methods as approved by the city engineer. 
(D)  In no case shall there be allowed excessive dust or debris to be transferred onto the roadway system or onto neighboring properties. Violators shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to section 106-516, penalties. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
Sec. 106-404.13. - Parking space dimensions. 
(A)  All required or provided parking spaces shall have a minimum width of nine feet and a minimum depth of 20 feet except as follows: 
1.  When parking spaces are adjacent to landscaped areas, the paved depth of such spaces may be decreased by two feet to provide for vehicle overhang area. 
2.  Spaces for compact vehicles may comprise up to 20 percent of required spaces. Compact spaces shall be located in groups of five or more contiguous spaces and may have a minimum width of eight and one-half feet and a minimum depth of 18 feet. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-404.15. - Criteria for determining required parking. 
(A)  When a building includes a combination of uses, the required parking will be the sum of the required parking for each use. 
(B)  Where the parking requirement for a use is not defined in this section, and no similar use is listed, the administrator shall determine the number of spaces to be provided. 
(C)  All references to square feet in the parking requirements below shall refer to gross square feet. 
(D)  All references to maximum occupancy shall refer to maximum occupancy as defined by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
_____
Sec. 106-404.17. - Minimum parking required. 
(A)  Agricultural Use Types. 
USE TYPE PARKING REQUIRED Agriculture No Requirement Agritourism Schedule B Farm Stand No Requirement Forestry Operations No Requirement Stable No Requirement  
(B)  Residential Use Types. 
USE TYPE PARKING REQUIRED Accessory Apartment One space Family Day Care Home No Requirement Home Occupation No Requirement Manufactured Home 2 spaces per D.U. Manufactured Home, Emergency No Requirement Manufactured Home Park 2 spaces per D.U. Multi-Family Dwelling   Studio 1 space Per D.U.   One Bedroom 1.5 spaces per D.U.   Two and Three Bedrooms 2 spaces per D.U.   Four or more Bedrooms 2.5 spaces per D.U. Residential Human Care Facility 2 spaces per facility Single Family Dwelling 2 spaces per D.U. Townhouse   One Bedroom 1.5 spaces per D.U.   Two and Three Bedrooms 2 spaces per D.U.   Four or more Bedrooms 2.5 spaces per D.U. Two Family Dwelling 2 spaces per D.U.  
(C)  Civic Use Types. 
USE TYPE PARKING REQUIRED Administrative Services 1 space per employee plus 3 spaces per 1000 square feet Assisted Care Residence 1 space per employee on shift plus one space per three residents Camps Schedule B Cemetery Schedule B Clubs 1 space per three persons based on maximum occupancy Community Recreation Schedule B Correction Facilities Schedule B Crises Center 1 space per employee on shift plus one space per three persons based on maximum occupancy Cultural Services 1 space per 400 square feet Educational Facilities, College/University Schedule B Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 1 space per employee plus 1 space per four students in 11th and 12th grades Guidance Services 1 space per 300 square feet Halfway House 1 space per two persons of residential capacity, plus 1 space per employee on shift Life Care Facility Schedule B Nursing Home 1 space per employee on shift plus 1 space per 3 residents Park and Ride Facility No Requirement Post Office Schedule A Public Assembly 1 space per five seats Public Maintenance and Service Facilities Schedule A Public Parks and Recreation Areas Schedule B Religious Assembly 1 space per five seats in principal place of worship Safety Services 2 spaces per emergency vehicle based at facility  
(D)  Office Use Types. 
USE TYPE PARKING REQUIRED Financial Institutions 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet plus required stacking spaces General Offices 3.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet Medical Office/Clinic 7 spaces per practitioner or 1 space per 200 square feet, whichever is greater Laboratories 1 space per employee plus one space per company vehicle based on site  
(E)  Commercial Use Types. 
USE TYPE PARKING REQUIRED Agricultural Services Schedule A Antique Shops 1 space per 400 square feet Assembly Hall 1 space per 5 seats Athletic Instruction Services Schedule B (minimum 1 space per 300 square feet) Automobile Dealership, New Schedule A Automobile Dealership, Used Schedule A Automobile Repair Services, Major 2 spaces per repair bay plus 1 space per employee on shift Automobile Repair Services, Minor 3 spaces per repair bay plus 1 space per employee on shift Automobile Rental/Leasing Schedule A Automobile/Parts Supply, Retail Schedule A Business Support Services 1 space per 200 square feet Business or Trade Schools Schedule B Campground 1 space per camp site Car Wash 1 space per employee on shift plus stacking spaces Commercial Indoor Amusement 1 space per 3 persons based on maximum occupancy Commercial Indoor Entertainment 1 space per 4 seats plus on space per employee on shift Commercial Indoor Sports and Recreation 1 space per 3 persons based on maximum occupancy plus 1 space per employee on shift Commercial Outdoor Entertainment 1 space per 3 persons based on maximum occupancy plus 1 space per employee on shift Commercial Outdoor Sports and Recreation   Miniature Golf 1.5 space per hole   Swimming Pool Schedule B   Tennis/Court Games 2 spaces per court   Other Outdoor Sports Schedule B Communications Services 1 space per 300 square feet plus 1 space per company vehicle based on site Construction Sales and Services Schedule A Consumer Repair Services 1 space per 300 square feet Convenience Store 5 spaces plus 1 space per 200 square feet plus one space per gas dispenser Dance Hall 1 space per 3 persons based upon maximum occupancy Day Care Center 1 space per employee on shift plus one space per three persons receiving care Equipment Sales and Rental Schedule A Flea Market 1 space per 100 square feet of sales area accessible to the public Funeral Services 1 space per 2 employees on shift plus one space per 5 seats in main chapel Garden Center Schedule A Gasoline Station 1 space per employee plus required stacking spaces Golf Course 36 spaces per 9 holes Homestay Inn 1 space per sleeping room available for guests Hospital 1 space per employee on shift plus one space per 2 beds Hotel/Motel/Motor Lodge 1 space per guest room plus one space per employee, plus spaces as may be required for other uses on site Kennel, Commercial Schedule B Laundry 1 space per 300 square feet Manufactured Home Sales Schedule B Microbrewery Schedule B Microdistillery Schedule B Personal Storage 2 spaces for any live-in manager unit plus 2 spaces per 100 storage units Pawn Shop 1 space per 300 square feet Personal Improvement Services 1 space per 300 square feet Personal Services 1 space per 300 square feet Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service Schedule A Restaurant 1 space per four seats plus 1 space per employee on shift, plus required stacking spaces Retail Sales   Shopping Center 1 space per 250 square feet   Other Retail 1 space per 200 square feet Studio, Fine Arts Schedule B Truck Stop Schedule B Veterinary Hospital/Clinic 1 space per 300 square feet  
(F)  Industrial Use Types. 
USE TYPE PARKING REQUIRED Asphalt Plant Schedule B Brewery Schedule B Distillery Schedule B Construction Yards Schedule A Custom Manufacturing Schedule A Industry, Type I Schedule A Industry, Type II Schedule A Industry, Type III Schedule A Landfill, Construction Debris Schedule B Landfill, Rubble Schedule B Landfill, Sanitary Schedule B Meat Packing and Related Industries 1 space per employee on shift Railroad Facilities Schedule B Recycling Centers and Stations Schedule B Resource Extraction 1 space per employee on shift Scrap and Salvage Services Schedule A Transfer Station Schedule B Transportation Terminal Schedule B Truck Terminal Schedule B Warehousing and Distribution Schedule A  
(G)  Miscellaneous Use Types. 
USE TYPE PARKING REQUIRED Aviation Facilities Schedule B Tower 2 spaces per tower Outdoor Gathering Schedule B Shooting Range Schedule B  
SCHEDULE A 
The following table contains minimum parking requirements for uses with elements having different functions or operating characteristics. The administrator shall consider and decide the minimum parking required for uses containing a mixture of these elements. 
Element Parking Required for Element Office or Administrative Activity 3.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet Indoor Sales, Display or Service Area 1 space per 500 square feet Motor Vehicle Service Bays 2 spaces per service bays Outdoor Sales, Display or Service Area 1 space per 2,000 square feet General Equipment Servicing or Manufacturing 1 space per 1,000 square feet Indoor or Outdoor Storage or Warehousing 1 space per 5,000 square feet  
SCHEDULE B 
Specific minimum parking requirements shall be determined by the administrator, based on requirements for similar uses, location of the proposed use, expected demand and traffic generated by the proposed use. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 2-7-2013; Ord. of 1-25-2016(1); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
_____
Sec. 106-404.19. - Stacking spaces and drive-through facilities. 
(A)  Stacking spaces shall be provided for any use having a drive-through facility or areas having a drop-off and pick up areas. The following general standards shall apply: 
1.  Stacking spaces shall not impede on and off-site traffic movements, shall not cross or pass through off street parking areas, and shall not create potentially unsafe conditions. 
2.  Drive through lanes shall be separated from off-street parking areas. Individual lanes shall be striped, marked, or otherwise delineated. 
3.  Each stacking space shall be a minimum of eight feet by 20 feet. 
(B)  Stacking spaces shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Financial institutions shall provide five stacking spaces for the first drive-through window, and two stacking spaces for each additional window. 
2.  Car washes shall provide four stacking spaces per bay or stall. 
3.  Restaurants shall provide six stacking spaces per drive-through window, measured from the order station. 
4.  All other uses containing drive-through facilities shall provide a minimum of three stacking spaces for each window. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-406. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
Sec. 106-406.1. - Site lighting. 
(A)  All exterior site lighting fixtures shall be designed, located and arranged so as not to direct glare on adjoining streets or residential properties. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-406.3. - Plot plans. 
(A)  A plot plan shall be submitted, prior to the approval of a zoning permit, for any new or expanded use or development not requiring a site plan or a concept plan. Plot plans shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly indicate the area, shape and dimensions of the property proposed for development. All existing easements, natural water courses, and existing and proposed improvements shall also be shown on the plan. The plan shall clearly indicate the minimum distances between existing and proposed uses and all property lines. Proposed access to the property shall also be shown. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-406.5. - Yard, height and setback requirements. 
(A)  The lot area and yards required for any use or structure shall be permanently maintained, and shall not be counted as the required lot area or yards for any other use or structure. 
(B)  Required yards shall remain free of all uses or structures except for the following: 
1.  Fences, walls and landscaping shall be allowed in yards provided that sight triangles are maintained per section 106-406.17. Driveways and parking areas shall also be allowed. 
2.  Patios and stoops shall be allowed within all required setback areas. Decks shall comply with all district setback requirements. 
3.  Accessory structures shall be allowed in accordance with the regulations for such structures. 
(C)  Height limitations contained in Article II of this chapter shall not apply to barns or silos associated with an agricultural use, church spires, belfries, residential chimneys, flag poles, or residential television antennae. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-406.7. - Frontage requirements on culs-de-sac. 
(A)  The minimum lot frontage on the arc of a cul-de-sac shall be no less than 50 feet in all zoning districts. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-406.9. - Pipestem lots; prohibition of irregular lots. 
(A)  On pipestem lots, as defined in section 106-600, the stem shall have a minimum width of 50 feet. No building or structure shall be permitted in the stem portion of the lot. In addition, the front lot line of such lots, for the purposes of the front yard setback requirement, shall be that line of the pipe portion of the lot closest to and parallel to the street right-of-way. 
(B)  The creation of irregular lots, as defined in section 106-600 of this chapter, shall be prohibited. No lot shall be platted or modified pursuant to the provisions of the Salem Subdivision Ordinance, that due to its geometric characteristics, results in the creation of an irregular lot. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-406.11. - Single family detached dwellings; number permitted on a single lot. 
(A)  Only one single family detached dwelling shall be permitted on any lot. Any existing lot that has two or more single family detached dwellings shall be subdivided in accordance with this chapter, and the subdivision ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-406.13. - Public utility lots. 
(A)  Well lots, tank lots, stormwater detention area lots, utility pumping station lots, and similar types of public utility lots may be created in compliance with the terms of this chapter and the Salem Subdivision Ordinance, notwithstanding the frontage, width, area, and other design standards for lots found in Article II of this ordinance. Any such lot proposed for platting, shall be clearly designated on a subdivision plat reviewed and approved by the City of Salem. This plat shall contain notations and covenants that clearly restrict the use of the lot for the above-cited purposes. Further, the plat shall clearly indicate that no employment shall be allowed at these lots except for the routine and necessary maintenance of the public facilities. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-406.15. - Corner and double frontage lots, orientation of yards. 
(A)  On corner and double frontage lots, the front shall be determined by the administrator. A rear yard shall always be opposite a front yard. 
(B)  On corner lots, the setback on the side street shall be equal to the setback observed by the principal structure on an adjoining lot. If the side street does not have street facing lots, the side yard setback for corner lots shall be ten percent of the lot width. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 12-12-05(6)) 
Sec. 106-406.17. - Establishment of sight triangles. 
(A)  To promote visibility for pedestrians and the operators of motor vehicles, a clear sight triangle shall be established at the intersecting right-of-ways of any two public streets. The legs of this sight triangle shall be 25 feet in length. They shall begin at the point of intersection of the two street right-of-ways, and shall extend 25 feet along each right-of-way line. The triangle shall be formed by connecting the endpoints of these two lines. 
(B)  Within this sight triangle nothing in excess of three feet in height shall be constructed, placed, or permanently parked. In addition, no vegetative plantings within the triangle shall be allowed to grow to a height of greater than three feet. 
(C)  Nothing in this section shall imply the necessity of removing obstructions within this sight triangle, provided that these obstructions were installed or planted prior to the effective date of this chapter. Routine trimming of shrubbery violating this height requirement shall be required, if the trimming will not endanger the health of the species. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-406.19. - Location and design of fences. 
(A)  Except as provided for in sections 106-402 and 106-406.17, fences may be constructed in any location, on any lot. 
(B)  In any residence district no fence or wall more than three and one-half feet high may be erected between the building setback line and the street on which the lot faces. No fence or wall more than eight feet high may be erected within any residence district. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 7-11-05(1)) 
Sec. 106-406.21. - Standards and procedures for review of condominiums. 
(A)  A subdivision plat shall be submitted to the City of Salem for any new residential, commercial or industrial condominium development, including the conversion of any existing development to the condominium form of ownership. This plat shall meet all standards for subdivision plats. Plats shall be reviewed by the subdivision agent who shall approve the plat provided it meets the provisions of this chapter and the Salem Subdivision Ordinance. 
(B)  An approved owners' association shall be established for all condominium projects having individually owned structures or units, and common areas and facilities. The purpose of this association is for the provision of upkeep and maintenance of the common areas and facilities. The subdivision agent shall review the provisions of the association to insure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-406.23. - Maintenance of established building lines; establishment of setback lines for certain streets. 
(A)  Notwithstanding the minimum front yard setback requirements contained in Article II District Regulations, the following minimum front yard setbacks are established for the following streets: 
Apperson Drive, both sides, Colorado Street to the east corporate limits: The setback line shall be 55 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Boon Street, south side, Green Street east: The setback line shall be 60 feet, measured at right angles, from the south right-of-way line of such street. 
Boulevard-Roanoke, both sides, Fourth Street to the east corporate limits: The setback line shall be 55 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
North Broad Street, both sides, Main Street to Corbett Street: the setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Burwell Street, both sides: the setback line shall be 40 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Calhoun Street, both sides: The setback line shall be 25 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Clay Street, both sides: The setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Cleveland Avenue, both sides, Craig Avenue to High Street: The setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
College Avenue, both sides, Burwell Street to Ninth Street: The setback line shall be 421/2 feet from the established centerline of such street. 
Colorado Street, both sides, Calhoun Street to Boulevard-Roanoke: The setback line shall be 25 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Colorado Street, both sides, Eight Street to Apperson Drive: The setback line shall be 55 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Dalewood Avenue, both sides, Main Street to Garst Street: The setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Eighth Street, both sides: The setback line shall be 40 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Electric Road, both sides, East Main Street to Apperson Drive: The setback line shall be 55 feet from the established centerline of such street. 
Fourth Street, both sides, Boulevard-Roanoke to West Main Street: The setback line shall be 40 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Hawthorn Road, both sides, High street to North Broad Street: The setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Hemlock Road, both sides, between Boulevard-Roanoke and Lynchburg Turnpike: The setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
High Street, both sides, Clay Street to North corporate limits: The setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles, form the established centerline of such street. 
Kesler Mill Road, west side, East Main Street to Norfolk and Western Railway Company Catawba Branch Line: The setback line shall be 60 feet from the western right-of-way line of the Catawba Branch Line. 
Kesler Mill Road, east side, Norfolk and Western Railway Company Catawba Branch Line to the north corporate limits: The setback line shall be 60 feet from the eastern right-of-way line of the Catawba Branch Line. 
Lynchburg Turnpike, both sides, East Main Street to east corporate limits: The setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles, form the established centerline of such street. 
Main Street, both sides, Academy Street and Union Street to Mill Lane: The setback line shall be 50 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Main Street, both sides, Mill Lane to West corporate limits: The setback line shall be 55 feet, measured at right angles to the established centerline of such street. 
Main Street, both sides, Richfield Avenue to Lynchburg Turnpike: The setback line shall be 40 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Main Street, both sides, Lynchburg Turnpike to east corporate limits: The setback line shall be 55 feet, measured at right angles from the established centerline of such street. 
Maple Street, both sides: The setback line shall be 25 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Midland Street, both sides, Electric Road to Norfolk and Western Railway Company right-of-way: The setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles, to the established centerline of such street. 
Mill Lane, both sides, Main Street to south corporate limits: The setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
North Mill Road, both sides, Kesler Mill Road to north corporate limits: The setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles from the established centerline of such street. 
Red Lane, both sides, Hawthorn Road to north corporate limits: The setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Riverland Drive, both sides, Apperson Drive to Riverside Drive: The setback line shall be 25 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Riverland Drive, both sides, Colorado Street to Apperson Drive: The setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Shanks Street, both sides, Main Street to Carrollton Avenue: The setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Springfield Avenue, both sides, Electric Road to east corporate limits: The setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Texas Street, both sides, Boulevard-Roanoke to Electric Road: The setback line shall be 55 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
Union Street, both sides, Main Street to Eddy Avenue: The setback line shall be 30 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
White Oak Street, both sides, Burwell Street to Fourth Street: The setback line shall be 25 feet, measured at right angles, from the established centerline of such street. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-406.25. - On-site storage and temporary mobile storage containers. 
(A)  Storage containers shall be considered accessory structures and shall be located in accordance with the standards for accessory structures as described in article II of this chapter. 
(B)  No vehicle, truck body, manufactured home, mobile home, bus, trailer, recreational vehicle, shipping container, portable storage unit, or similar equipment shall be used as a storage container or building in any zoning district, except that: 
(1)  Temporary mobile storage containers designed for site delivery and pickup may be placed and used on any property for a period not to exceed 30 days per calendar year. Such a container shall be placed in the driveway or rear yard of residentially zoned property. 
(2)  Commercial and industrial use types may use shipping containers for storage provided that: 
a.  All containers are maintained in suitable condition and be free of rust, deterioration, graffiti, etc. 
b.  All containers are placed in an approved location that does not utilize existing parking spaces, fire lines, etc. 
c.  All containers are placed in the rear of the property and shielded from public views. 
d.  Such containers shall not be allowed for more than 90 consecutive days in any one-year period. 
(C)  A zoning permit shall be obtained prior to the placement of any storage container. 
(D)  No stacking of storage containers shall be allowed. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
Sec. 106-406.27. - Additional requirements for exterior storage, refuse disposal, etc. 
(A)  Any exterior area used for storage, service, maintenance, repair, processing, manufacturing, fabrication, salvage, refuse disposal, or other similar use that is visible from a public street right-of-way, shall be screened with a buffer yard, screening and plantings meeting type A standards listed in section 106-402, and shall be provided in a manner which screens the use from view. Any area so used shall also be similarly screened from view of adjoining residences and business. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2018(3)) 
Secs. 106-407-106-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 106-500. - Zoning administrator; powers and duties. 
(A)  The administrator, or his designee, shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Zoning permit. To issue or deny a zoning permit for the erection, reconstruction, moving, adding to or alteration of any structure, or the establishment of any land use. The administrator shall also have the authority to revoke any zoning permit if violations of the provisions of this chapter occur. 
2.  Certificate of zoning compliance. To issue or deny a certificate of zoning compliance certifying construction and use in accordance with this chapter. 
3.  Collect fees. To collect any fees required or set forth in this chapter. 
4.  Making and keeping records. To make and keep all records required by state law or necessary and appropriate for the administration of this chapter. 
5.  Inspection of buildings or land. To inspect any building or land to determine if violations of this chapter have been committed or exist. 
6.  Enforcement. To enforce this chapter and take all necessary steps to remedy any condition found in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
7.  Request assistance. To request the assistance of other local and state officials or agencies in the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
8.  Interpretation. To interpret the official zoning map and provisions of this chapter, and offer written opinions on their meaning and applicability. 
(B)  The administrator shall have all necessary authority on behalf of the governing body to administer and enforce the zoning ordinance. His authority shall include: (1) ordering in writing the remedying of any condition found in violation of the ordinance; (2) insuring compliance with the ordinance, bringing legal action, including injunction, abatement, or other appropriate action or proceeding subject to appeal pursuant to § 15.2-2311 of the Code of Virginia; and (3) in specific cases, making findings of fact and, with concurrence of the attorney for the governing body, conclusions of law regarding determinations of rights accruing under § 15.2-2307 of the Code of Virginia. 
(C)  The administrator may be authorized to grant a maximum of a ten percent, or a maximum of a one foot variance (whichever is less) from any building setback requirement contained in the zoning ordinance if the administrator finds in writing that: (1) the strict application of the ordinance would produce undue hardship; (2) such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity; and (3) the authorization of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the zoning district will not be changed by the granting of the variance. Prior to the granting of a variance, the administrator shall give, or require the applicant to give, all adjoining property owners written notice of the request for variance, and an opportunity to respond to the request within 21 days of the date of the notice. If any adjoining property owner objects to said request in writing within the time specified above, the request shall be transferred to the Board of Zoning Appeals for decision. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-502. - Planning commission powers, duties and composition. 
(A)  The Commission shall have the right to exercise all of the powers and duties authorized by § 15.2, Chapter 22 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(B)  Consistent with Chapter 62 of the Charter of the City of Salem, the Commission shall be composed of not less than five nor more than seven members, who shall be appointed by the Council. All of such members shall be residents of the city and freeholders qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions of community growth and development. The members of the Commission shall serve for staggered terms of four years each. 
(C)  The Commission shall develop, adopt and maintain bylaws that govern its operation. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-504. - Zoning permits. 
(A)  A zoning permit shall be required for the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, adding to, or alteration of any structure, or the establishment of any land use, except as listed below: 
1.  Patios. 
2.  Fences. 
(B)  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide any information necessary for the administrator to determine that the proposed use, building, or structure complies with all provisions of this chapter. 
(C)  For any use, building, or structure requiring an approved site plan, no zoning permit shall be issued, until such time as a site plan is submitted, reviewed and approved in accordance with section 106-400 of this chapter. 
(D)  For uses or structures not requiring an approved site plan, the administrator shall determine, in accordance with this chapter, the type of information necessary to review the permit. At a minimum, a concept plan shall be required meeting the standards established by the administrator. 
(E)  All zoning permits issued shall be valid for a period of six months, unless the structure, use or activity for which the permit was issued has commenced. The administrator may reissue any expired permit provided the structure, use and or activity complies with all applicable provisions of the ordinance at the time of reissuance. 
(F)  The administrator shall have the authority to approve the form and content of zoning permit applications. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-506. - Building permits; relation to zoning. 
(A)  No building permit for the extension, erection, or alteration of any building or structure shall be issued before an application has been made and a zoning permit has been issued. No new or modified building or structure shall be occupied or used, or any new land use established until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the city. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-508. - Certificates of zoning compliance. 
(A)  A certificate of zoning compliance shall be required for any of the following: 
1.  Occupancy or use of a building that has been hereafter erected, enlarged, or structurally altered. 
2.  Change in the use or occupancy of an existing building. 
3.  Occupancy or change in the use of vacant land except for agricultural uses not involving structures. 
4.  Any change in a nonconforming use, or any alteration of a nonconforming building or structure. 
(B)  No such occupancy, use, or change in use shall take place until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the city. Such certificate shall certify that the building or the proposed use, or the use of land complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
(C)  If a certificate of zoning compliance is denied by the city, the city shall notify the owner or owners agent of the denial. Said notice shall state the reasons for the denial, and the specific actions required on the part of the owner before the certificate of zoning compliance can be issued. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-510. - Temporary or partial certificates of zoning compliance. 
(A)  When a building, structure, or property must be occupied or used prior to the completion of all improvements required by this chapter, the city may issue a temporary or partial certificate of zoning compliance for the property, upon the request of the owner or owner's agent. Temporary or partial certificates of zoning compliance shall be valid for a period not to exceed eight months, during which time, all improvements required by this chapter must be made. 
(B)  The city shall not issue a temporary or partial certificate of zoning compliance unless: 
1.  The site and building is in a safe and useable condition, free from conditions that might endanger the health, safety or welfare of persons using the site. 
2.  The owner or authorized agent provides the city a performance guarantee guaranteeing completion of all required improvements. This guarantee shall be payable to the city in an amount determined by the city to be sufficient to complete all required improvements within eight months of the issuance of the temporary or partial certificate of zoning compliance. 
3.  The performance guarantee may be in the form of a corporate surety bond, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or other instrument approved by the city. 
4.  The administrator may waive the performance guarantee if the value of the uncompleted improvements is less than $500.00. 
5.  The administrator shall have the authority to grant an extension to the temporary or partial certificate of zoning compliance, provided all performance guarantees remain in effect. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-512. - Fees. 
(A)  Administrative review fees for all permits and procedures specified in this chapter shall be established by Council. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-514. - Enforcement. 
(A)  The administrator shall have the responsibility for enforcing the provisions of this chapter, and may, as necessary, solicit the assistance of other local and state officials and agencies to assist with this enforcement. 
(B)  Violators of the provisions of this chapter shall be notified in writing of observed violations. The administrator shall state, in the written notice, the nature of the violation, the date that the violation was observed, and the remedy or remedies necessary to correct the violation. A reasonable time period will be established for the correction of the violation. 
(C)  If the administrator is not able to obtain compliance with these provisions, civil and or criminal procedures may be initiated in accordance with city law and procedures. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-516. - Penalties. 
(A)  Pursuant to § 15.2-2286(5) of the Code of Virginia, any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more that $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-518. - Civil penalties. 
(A)  Any owner of a building or premises where a violation of any provisions of this chapter has been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent, architect, builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist, shall be punishable by a civil penalty. 
(B)  Any violation of the following scheduled provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount and timing not to exceed that authorized by § 15.2-2209 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. Council shall establish the amount of the civil penalty. 
List Schedule of Violations Subject To 
Civil Penalties 
1.  (Reserved). 
2.  (Reserved). 
(C)  Each day during which a violation is found to exist shall be a separate offense. However, the same violation arising from the same operative set of facts may be charged not more than once in a ten-day period, and the total civil penalties from a series of such violations arising from the same set of operative facts shall not exceed $5,000.00. 
(D)  The issuance of a civil penalty for a particular violation of the zoning ordinance pursuant to this section shall be in lieu of criminal sanctions except when such violation results in injury to any person or persons. 
(E)  The administrator, or the administrator's designee, may issue a civil summons for a scheduled violation. Any person summoned or issued a ticket for a scheduled violation may make an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the city treasurer prior to the date fixed for trial in court. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability, and pay the civil penalty established for the offence charged. Such persons shall be informed of their right to stand trial and that a signature to an admission of liability will have the same force and effect as a judgment of court. 
(F)  If a person charged with a scheduled violation does not elect to enter a waiver of trial and admit liability, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. A finding of liability shall not be deemed a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
(G)  No provision herein shall be construed to allow the imposition of civil penalties for (1) activities related to land development or (2) for violation of any provision of a local ordinance relating to the posting of signs on public property or public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-520. - Amendments to ordinance. 
(A)  Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice require, the City Council may, by ordinance, amend, supplement, or change these regulations, district boundaries, or classifications of property. Any such amendments may be initiated by: 
1.  Resolution of the council; 
2.  Motion of the commission; or 
3.  Petition of the owner, contract purchaser with the owner's written consent, or the owner's agent, of the property which is the subject of the proposed zoning map amendment. Any petition submitted shall be in writing and shall be addressed to council. 
4.  Any person may submit suggestions for zoning ordinance text amendments to the administrator. The administrator shall forward these requests to the Commission for their review. The commission shall be under no obligation to schedule a public hearing on any such amendment request, except that the council may direct the commission to hold a public hearing on any text amendment request. 
(B)  The administrator shall establish a schedule for the receipt of amendment applications. The administrator shall also establish and maintain the amendment application materials. These application materials shall, at a minimum, include any information the administrator deems necessary for the city staff, Commission and council to adequately evaluate the amendment request. A concept plan shall accompany all map amendment requests. The administrator shall establish minimum standards for concept plans. 
(C)  The administrator shall not accept any amendment application for a lot or parcel that does not comply with the minimum lot area, width, or frontage requirements of the requested zoning district. In such situations, the applicant shall first seek a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals. If a variance is granted, the administrator shall thereafter accept the amendment application for the consideration of the Commission and Council. 
(D)  If the Council denies any amendment application submitted for its review, or the application is withdrawn after Council consideration, the city shall not consider substantially the same application for the same property within one year of the Council action. The administrator shall have the authority to determine whether new applications submitted within this one year period are substantially the same. In making any such determination the administrator shall have the authority to consider any items pertaining to the proposed use or development of the site such as, but not limited to, the uses proposed, densities, access, building locations, and overall site design. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-520.1. - Commission study and action. 
(A)  All proposed amendments to the zoning ordinance shall be referred by the Council to the Commission for study and recommendation. The Commission shall study proposals to determine: 
1.  Whether the proposed amendment conforms to the general guidelines and policies contained in the city's comprehensive plan. 
2.  The relationship of the proposed amendment to the purposes of the general planning program of the city, with appropriate consideration as to whether the change will further the purposes of this chapter and the general welfare of the entire community. 
3.  The need and justification for the change. 
4.  When pertaining to a change in the district classification of property, the effect of the change, if any, on the property, surrounding property, and on public services and facilities. In addition, the Commission shall consider the appropriateness of the property for the proposed change as related to the purposes set forth at the beginning of each district classification. 
(B)  Prior to making any recommendation to the Council on a proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance, the Commission shall advertise and hold a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of § 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(C)  The Commission shall review the proposed amendment and report its findings and recommendations to the Council along with any appropriate explanatory materials within 100 days after the first Commission meeting after the proposed zoning ordinance amendment is referred to the Commission. Failure of the Commission to report to the Council shall be deemed a recommendation of approval. If the Commission does not report within the prescribed time, the Council may act on the amendment without the recommendation of the Commission. 
(D)  Any recommendation of the Commission shall be deemed advisory, and shall not be binding on the Council. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-520.3. - Council study and action. 
(A)  Before enacting any proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance, the Council shall hold a public hearing as required by § 15.2-2204 [Code of Virginia, with public notice as required by §§ 15.2-2204 and 15.2-2285 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. The Council may hold a joint public hearing with the Commission. After holding this hearing, the Council may make appropriate changes to the proposed amendment; provided however that no land may be zoned to a more intensive use classification than was contained in the public notice without an additional public notice as required by § 15.2-2204 [Code of Virginia]. 
(B)  The Clerk of Council shall transmit to the administrator official notice of any Council action modifying the zoning ordinance. The administrator shall thereafter have the responsibility to make any necessary and appropriate changes to the zoning ordinance text or map. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-520.5. - Posting of property. 
(A)  The city may require that properties proposed for public hearing before the Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals, under the requirements of this chapter, shall be posted with a notice announcing the nature, and the date, time and place of the public hearing. This posting requirement shall be in addition to the public hearing and notice requirements imposed by § 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia. 
(B)  The city shall prepare the notice of hearing and shall post said notice on the property or properties that are the subject of the hearing. The posting shall be accomplished at least ten days before the date of the proposed public hearing. The administer [administrator] shall determine the number of notices required to meet the intent of this section. All notices posted shall be clearly visible from abutting rights of way. 
(C)  The unauthorized removal or damage of the notices prior to the advertised public hearing, due to weather or legitimate vandalism, shall not violate the public notice intent of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-522. - Conditional zoning. 
(A)  In accordance with the authority granted to the city per § 15.2-2297 of the Code of Virginia, the owner of property for which a zoning map amendment is requested, may voluntarily proffer in writing reasonable conditions that are in addition to the regulations of the requested zoning district. All proffered conditions must be signed by the owner of the property. 
(B)  The city's acceptance of proffered conditions shall be in accordance with the procedures and standards contained in § 15.2-2297 of the Code of Virginia. 
(C)  All conditions proffered by the owner shall meet the following standards: 
1.  The rezoning itself must give rise for the need for the conditions. 
2.  The conditions shall have a reasonable relation to the rezoning. 
3.  The conditions shall not include a cash contribution to the locality. 
4.  The conditions must not provide for mandatory dedications for public facilities not otherwise provided for in § 15.2-2241 of the Code of Virginia. 
5.  The conditions must not require the mandatory creation of a property owner's association under Chapter 26 Title 55 of the Code of Virginia. 
6.  The conditions must not include payment for, or construction of, off site improvements except those provided for in § 15.2-2241 of the Code of Virginia. 
7.  All conditions proffered shall relate to the physical development or operation of the property. 
8.  All such conditions shall be in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(D)  All such conditions must be submitted to the city, in writing, before the start of the council's public hearing. 
(E)  The commission and council shall not be obligated to accept any or all of the conditions proffered by the owner. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-522.1. - Enforcement of conditions. 
(A)  The administrator shall have the authority on behalf of the Council to administer and enforce conditions accepted as part of any approved zoning map amendment. This authority shall include: 
1.  The ordering in writing of the remedy of any non-compliance with such conditions. 
2.  The bringing of legal action to insure compliance with such conditions. 
(B)  Failure of a property owner to meet all conditions accepted by the Council shall constitute cause to deny approval of a site plan, or deny issuance of a building permit, zoning permit or certificate of zoning compliance, as may be appropriate. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-522.3. - Records of conditions. 
(A)  The zoning map shall show, by an appropriate symbol, the existence of conditions on those properties for which conditions have been accepted. The administrator shall keep an index of those properties and conditions. The index shall provide for ready access to the ordinance creating the conditions. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-522.5. - Review of administrators decisions. 
(A)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the administrator pursuant to the provisions of section 106-522.1 may petition the Council for a review of the decision of the administrator. All such petitions, stating the nature of the grievance, shall be filed with the administrator within 30 days of the date of the decision for which a review is sought. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-522.7. - Amendments of conditions. 
(A)  Any request by an applicant to amend conditions that were voluntarily proffered and accepted by the Council shall be considered a new amendment to the zoning ordinance and shall be reviewed pursuant to the provisions of section 106-520. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-524. - Special exception permits and use not provided for permits. 
(A)  The procedures and standards contained in this section shall apply to all uses specifically permitted as special exceptions in the district regulations found elsewhere in this chapter. These procedures and standards shall also apply for all requests for Use Not Provided For Permits, authorized under the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  Special Exceptions are hereby established in recognition that in addition to uses permitted by right, certain uses may, depending on their scale, design, location and conditions imposed by Council, be compatible with existing and future land uses in the district. 
(C)  Use not provided for permits are hereby established in recognition that this chapter may not be sufficiently detailed to list all possible land uses. When a land use is proposed that is not listed in Article II of this chapter, and/or is not a permitted use by right or by special exception in any zoning district contained in this chapter, the Council shall have the authority under the following provisions to consider the scale, design, and location of the non-listed land use and determine its compatibility with existing and future land uses in the district. 
(D)  The review and subsequent approval or disapproval of a special exception or a use not provided for permit, shall be considered a legislative act, and shall be governed by the procedures thereof. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-524.1. - General standards. 
(A)  The administrator shall not accept any special exception application nor any use not provided for permit application for any lot or acreage that does not meet the minimum size, width and/or frontage requirements of the district where the use is proposed. In addition, the administrator shall not accept any special exception application for a lot or acreage that does not meet the minimum size, width and/or frontage requirements of any applicable use and design standards for the use as listed in Article III of this chapter. In such situations, the applicant shall first seek a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals. If a variance is granted, the administrator shall thereafter accept the special exception or use not provided for permit application for consideration by the Commission and Council. 
(B)  No special exception permit, or use not provided for permit shall be issued by the Council unless the Council shall find that in addition to conformity with any standards contained in Article III Use and Design Standards, the proposed special exception or use not provided for, shall conform with the following general standards. These standards shall be met either by the proposal as submitted and thereafter revised by the applicant, or by the proposal as modified or amended as part of the review of the application by the Commission or Council. 
1.  The proposal as submitted or modified shall generally conform to the latest comprehensive plan of the City of Salem. 
2.  The proposal as submitted or modified shall have a minimum adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhood or community. Adverse impacts shall be evaluated with consideration to items such as, but not limited to, traffic congestion, noise, lights, dust, drainage, water quality, air quality, odor, fumes and vibrations. In considering impacts, consideration shall be given to the timing of the operation, site design, access, screening, and or other matters that might be regulated to mitigate adverse impacts. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-524.3. - Application requirements. 
(A)  An application for a special exception permit or use not provided for permit, may be initiated by: 
1.  Resolution of the council; 
2.  Motion of the commission; 
3.  Petition of the owner, owner's, agent, or contract purchaser with the owner's written approval. 
(B)  Applicants shall provide at the time of application, information and or data to demonstrate that the proposed use will be in harmony with the purposes of the specific zoning district in which it will be located. The applicant shall also have the responsibility to demonstrate that the proposed use will have minimum adverse impact on adjoining property and the surrounding neighborhood. 
(C)  All applications shall show the nature and extent of the proposed use and development. If phased development is envisioned, all phases shall be shown at the time of the original application. 
(D)  The administrator shall establish and maintain special exception and use not provided for application materials. At a minimum, these materials shall require the submittal of a concept plan. Concept plans shall be developed to standards established by the administrator. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-524.5. - Review and action. 
(A)  City of Salem staff shall review all applications submitted. This review shall evaluate the proposal against the city's comprehensive plan and any specific or general standards for the use. The staff shall make a report of its findings and transmit the report to the Commission. 
(B)  The Commission shall review and make recommendations to the Council concerning the approval or disapproval of any special exception or use not provided for permit. No such recommendation shall be made until after a public hearing is held in accordance with § 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. Posting of the property announcing the public hearing shall be done in accordance with section 106-520.5 of this chapter. 
    The Commission shall base it recommendation upon the review of submitted application materials, specific and general criteria contained in this chapter, public comment received at the public hearing, and the information and evaluation of the city staff. In making a recommendation to the Council, the Commission may recommend any conditions necessary to insure that the proposal is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and community. However, any such conditions shall relate to the design, scale, use or operation of the proposed special exception or use not provided for. Where, warranted, any such conditions may exceed specific standards found elsewhere in this chapter. 
(C)  The Council may grant or deny any application for a special exception or use not provided for permit. No such action shall be taken until the Council receives the recommendation of the Commission and a Council public hearing is held in accordance with § 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
    In approving any special exception or use not provided for permit, the Council, may require and attached any conditions necessary to insure that the proposal is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and community. However, any such conditions shall relate to the design, scale, use or operation of the proposed special exception or use not provided for. Where, warranted, any such conditions may exceed specific standards found elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-524.7. - Time limitations. 
(A)  The Commission shall make a recommendation and report its findings to the Council within 100 days from the date that the proposed special exception or use not provided for permit application is referred to the Commission. Failure of the Commission to report to the Council within 100 days shall be deemed a recommendation of approval, and the council may act on the application without a recommendation from the Commission. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-526. - Non-conforming uses and structures, generally. 
(A)  Within the zoning districts established by this chapter, or by future amendments which may be adopted, or by legitimate and legal actions taken by the Council or other governmental agency, there exist lots, parcels, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of site design and/or use which were lawful before this chapter was adopted or amended, but which would be prohibited under the terms of this chapter or future amendment. Such structures uses and characteristics, or any combination thereof, are considered nonconformities, and are hereby declared by the Council to be inconsistent with the character of the districts in which they occur. 
(B)  Nonconformities are permitted to remain until removed, discontinued, or changed to conform to the provisions of this chapter. It is the intent of this chapter that the continuance of nonconformities should not be indefinite, and that the nonconforming structures, uses, or characteristics, should gradually be removed. 
(C)  Nothing shall be construed to grant conforming status to uses or structures that existed as legal nonconforming uses prior to the adoption of this chapter, or amendment thereto, unless such uses or structures now conform to all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-526.1. - Nonconformities; relationship to vested rights. 
(A)  Nothing in this chapter shall impair any vested right. Pursuant to § 15.2-2307 of the Code of Virginia, a landowner's rights shall be deemed vested and shall not be affected by the subsequent amendment of the zoning ordinance if all of the following occur: 
1.  The landowner obtains or is the beneficiary of a significant affirmative governmental act. 
2.  The landowner relies in good faith on a significant affirmative governmental act. 
3.  The landowner incurs extensive obligations, or substantial expenses in diligent pursuit of the specific project in reliance on the significant affirmative governmental act. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-526.3. - Nonconforming uses of buildings, structures or land. 
(A)  Where at the effective date of this chapter or amendments thereto, lawful use exists of buildings, structures, or land, individually or in combination, which use is no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued provided: 
1.  The use is not discontinued for more than two years. 
2.  The use is not converted or replaced, in whole or in part by a use permitted in the district regulations. 
3.  The building or structures containing the nonconforming use are maintained in their then structural condition. 
If buildings or structures containing a nonconforming use are enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered, or if a nonconforming use of land is enlarged, or expanded in area, the use of the building, structure or land shall legally conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which they are located. 
(B)  No nonconforming use shall be enlarged, intensified, or increased, nor intensified to occupy a larger structure or building, than was occupied at the effective date of this chapter. 
(C)  No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or acreage unoccupied by such use at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of this chapter. 
(D)  No building or structure conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in connection with the nonconforming use of land. 
(E)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a building or structure, removal of the building or structure, or damage from any cause to an extent of more than 50 percent of replacement cost at the time of damage, shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the building or structure or land. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-526.5. - Nonconforming buildings and structures. 
(A)  Where a lawful building or structure exists at the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter, which could not be built under the terms of this chapter, by reasons of restrictions on area, bulk, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the building or structure, or its location on a lot, such building may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful provided: 
1.  No building or structure shall be enlarged in any way which increases or extends its nonconformity. 
2.  Any building or structure which is damaged by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of damage, shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  Any building or structure which is moved for any reason, for any distance, shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(B)  Any landowner or homeowner may remove a valid nonconforming manufactured home from a manufactured home park and replace that home with another comparable manufactured home that meets the current HUD manufactured housing code. A single section home may be replaced with a single section home and a multi-section home may replace a multi-section home. 
(C)  The owner of any valid nonconforming manufactured home, either single or multi-section not located in a manufactured home park may replace that home with a newer manufactured home, either single or multi-section, that meets the current HUD manufactured home code. Any such replacement home shall retain the valid nonconforming status of the prior home. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-526.7. - Nonconforming site designs. 
(A)  If a zoning permit is requested for any type of modification to an existing structure or site, no legal nonconforming site design planned, approved, and constructed prior to the adoption of this chapter shall be required to comply in full with the provisions of this chapter. Only those site improvements directly related to, or affected by the modified use, structure or activity, shall be required to comply in full with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-528. - Board of zoning appeals. 
(A)  The Salem Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five members, and up to three alternates who shall be appointed by the Circuit Court. Composition of the BZA shall be in accordance with § 15.2-2308 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-528.1. - Powers and duties. 
(A)  The BZA shall have the power and duty to hear and decide appeals from any written order, requirement, decision, or determination made by any administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter. No such appeal shall be heard except after notice and hearing as provided by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204, as amended. 
(B)  Ex parte communications, proceedings. 
1.  The non-legal staff of the governing body may have ex parte communications with a member of the board prior to the hearing but may not discuss the facts or law relative to a particular case. The applicant, landowner or his agent or attorney may have ex parte communications with a member of the board prior to the hearing but may not discuss the facts or law relative to a particular case. If any ex parte discussion of facts or law in fact occurs, the party engaging in such communication shall inform the other party as soon as practicable and advise the other party of the substance of such communication. For purposes of this section, regardless of whether all parties participate, ex parte communications shall not include (i) discussions as part of a public meeting or (ii) discussions prior to a public meeting to which staff of the governing body, the applicant, landowner or his agent or attorney are all invited. 
2.  Any materials relating to a particular case, including a staff recommendation or report furnished to a member of the board, shall be made available without cost to such applicant, appellant or other aggrieved person, under Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2314, as amended, as soon as practicable thereafter, but in no event more than three business days of providing such materials to a member of the board. If the applicant, appellant or other aggrieved person, under Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2314, as amended, requests additional documents or materials be provided by the locality other than those materials provided to the board, such request shall be made pursuant to Code of Virginia (1950), § 2.2-3704, as amended. Any such materials furnished to a member of the board shall also be made available for public inspection pursuant to Code of Virginia (1950), § 2.2-3707(F), as amended. 
3.  For the purposes of this section, "non-legal staff of the governing body" means any staff who is not in the office of the city attorney for the City of Salem, or for the board, or who is appointed by special law or pursuant to Code of Virginia (1950), § 15.2-1542, as amended. Nothing in this section shall preclude the board from having ex parte communications with any attorney or staff of any attorney where such communication is protected by the attorney-client privilege or other similar privilege or protection of confidentiality. 
(C)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, general or special the BZA shall have the power and duty to grant upon appeal or original application in specific cases a variance, as defined in Code of Virginia (1950), § 15.2-2201, as amended, provided that the burden of proof shall be on the applicant for a variance to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that his application meets the standard for a variance as defined in Code of Virginia (1950), § 15.2-2201, as amended, and the criteria set out in this section. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of law, general or special, a variance shall be granted if the evidence shows that the strict application of the terms of the ordinance would unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property; or that granting the variance would alleviate a hardship due to a physical condition relating to the property or improvements thereon at the time of the effective date of the ordinance. No such variance shall be granted unless the spirit of the chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. To legally grant a variance, the BZA must be presented evidence and make a finding that: 
1.  The property interest for which the variance is being requested was acquired in good faith and any hardship was not created by the applicant for the variance; 
2.  The granting of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and nearby properties in the proximity of that geographical area; 
3.  The condition or situation of the property concerned is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the ordinance; 
4.  The granting of the variance does not result in a use that is not otherwise permitted on such property or a change in the zoning classification of the property; and 
5.  The relief or remedy sought by the variance application is not available through a special exception process or the process for modification of a zoning ordinance at the time of the filing of the variance application. 
    No variance request shall be evaluated by the BZA until after notice and hearing as provided by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204, as amended. In addition, posting of the property shall be required as provided for in section 106-520.5 of this chapter. 
    In granting a variance, the BZA may impose such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed structure or use as it may deem necessary in the public interest, and may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. 
(D)  The BZA shall have the power and duty to hear and decide applications for interpretation of the official zoning map where the administrator believes there is uncertainty as to the location of a district boundary. No such determination shall be made except after notice and hearing as provided by § 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. Any property owner affected by a determination of the location of the boundary must be notified by first class mail prior to any such determination. After notice and hearing the BZA may interpret the map in such a way to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter, however the BZA shall not have the power to change substantially the locations of the district boundaries as established by this chapter. This authority of the BZA to determine the location of district boundaries shall not be construed as the power to rezone property. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
Sec. 106-528.3. - Applications for variances. 
(A)  Applications for variances may be made by any property owner, tenant, government official, department, or board or bureau of the city. All applications shall be submitted to the administrator in accordance with rules adopted by the BZA. All applications and accompanying maps, plans or other information shall be transmitted promptly to the secretary of the BZA who shall place the application on the agenda to be acted upon by the BZA, within 90 days of the filing of the application. No such application shall be heard except after notice and hearing as provided by § 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. The administrator may, and at the direction of the Commission shall, transmit notice of the variance application to the Commission, which may send a recommendation to the BZA, or appear as a party at the hearing. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-528.5. - Applications for appeals. 
(A)  Appeals to the BZA may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the administrator, or from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by any other administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter. Appeals must be made within 30 days after the entry of the decision appealed from by filing with the administrator and with the BZA, a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The administrator shall forthwith transmit to the BZA all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the administrator certifies to the BZA that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed unless a restraining order is granted by the BZA, or by a court of record, on application and on notice to the administrator and for good cause shown. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-528.7. - Procedures for variances and appeal. 
(A)  The BZA shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to all parties of interest, and decide the same within 90 days of the filing of the appeal. In exercising its power, the BZA may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify an order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from. 
(B)  The concurring vote of the majority of the BZA shall be necessary to reverse any order, decision, requirement, or determination of an administrative officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the BZA is required to pass under the terms of this chapter, or to effect any variance from this chapter. 
(C)  The BZA shall keep minutes of its proceedings and other official actions which shall be filed in the office of the administrator. All records shall be public records. The chairman of the BZA, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths, and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-528.9. - Certiorari to review decision of BZA. 
(A)  In accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia (1950), § 15.2-2314, as amended, any person or persons jointly or separately aggrieved by any decision of the BZA, or any aggrieved taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city, may file with the circuit court of the city a petition that shall be styled "In Re: date Decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Salem, Virginia" specifying the grounds on which aggrieved. This petition must be filed within 30 days of the BZA's decision. 
(B)  Upon the presentation of such petition, the court shall allow a writ of certiorari to review the decision of the BZA and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made and served upon the secretary of the BZA or the chairman of the BZA, which shall not be less than ten days and may be extended by the court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, on application, on notice to the BZA and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. 
(C)  The BZA shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds appealed from and shall be verified. 
(D)  Any review of a decision of the BZA shall not be considered an action against the BZA and the BZA shall not be a party to the proceedings; however, the BZA shall participate in the proceedings to the extent required by this section. The governing body, the landowner, and the applicant before the BZA shall be necessary parties to the proceedings in the circuit court. The court may permit intervention by any other person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the BZA. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review. 
(E)  In the case of an appeal from the BZA to the circuit court of an order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator in the administration or enforcement of any ordinance or provision of state law, or any modification of zoning requirements pursuant to state law, the findings and conclusions of the BZA on questions of fact shall be presumed to be correct. The appealing party may rebut that presumption by proving by a preponderance of the evidence, including the record before the BZA, that the BZA erred in its decision. Any party may introduce evidence in the proceedings in the court. The court shall hear any arguments or questions of law de novo. 
    In the case of an appeal by a person of any decision of the BZA that denied or granted an application for a variance, the decision of the BZA shall be presumed to be correct. The petitioner may rebut that presumption by proving by a preponderance of the evidence, including the record before the BZA, that the BZA erred in its decision. 
(F)  Costs shall not be allowed against the city, unless it shall appear to the court that it acted in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from. In the event the decision of the BZA is affirmed, and the court finds that the appeal was frivolous, the court may order the person or persons who requested the issuance of the writ of certiorari to pay the costs incurred in making a return of the record pursuant to the writ of certiorari. If the petition is withdrawn subsequent to the filing of the return, the city may request that the court hear the matter on the question of whether the appeal was frivolous. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
Secs. 106-529-106-599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEFINITIONS AND USE TYPES 

Sec. 106-600. - Definitions. 
(A)  For the purposes of this chapter, the following rules of language shall apply: 
    The specific shall control the general. 
    The word person includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, and company, as well as an individual. 
    The word he shall mean she, and she shall mean he. 
    The words used or occupied include the words intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied. 
    The word lot shall include plot or parcel. 
    The present tense includes the future tense; the singular number includes the plural; the plural includes the singular. 
    The word shall is mandatory; the words may and should are permissive. 
    All public officials, bodies, and agencies referred to in this chapter are those of the City of Salem Virginia, unless otherwise specifically indicated. 
(B)  Where terms in this chapter are undefined, the meaning of the term shall be as ascribed in the most recent edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, unless it is the opinion of the Administrator that based upon normal zoning practice, a different meaning shall apply. 
(C)  The words and terms listed below shall have the following meanings: 
    Abutting. Contiguous or adjoining; having property or zoning district lines in common, or separated by a right-of-way. 
    Access. A means of approach, including ingress and egress. 
    Accessory building or structure. A building or structure detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. Where an accessory building or structure is attached to the principal building in a substantial manner, as by a wall or roof, such accessory building shall be considered a part of the principal building. 
    Accessory use. A use of land, or a building or structure or portion thereof, customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building or structure and located on the same lot with such principal use. 
    Acreage. A parcel of land, regardless of area, described by metes and bounds and not a lot shown on any recorded subdivision plat. 
    Addition. Any construction that increases the gross floor area of a building or structure, or results in an expanded footprint of a building or structure on the ground. 
    Alley. A right-of-way that provides secondary vehicle and service access to abutting properties that have frontage on one or more streets. 
    Alteration. Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or interior partitions, or any enlargement or reduction of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or a structure from one location to another. 
    Amendment. A modification to this chapter, including the text or associated maps that has been approved by the Salem City Council. 
    Antenna. A communication device which transmits or receives electromagnetic signals. Antennas may be directional, including panels, and microwave dishes, and omni-directional including satellite dishes, whips, dipoles, and parabolic types. An antenna does not include the tower or other supporting structure to which it is attached. 
    Awning. A shelter constructed of rigid or non-rigid materials on a supporting framework, either freestanding, or projecting from and supported by an exterior wall of a building. 
    Base flood. A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year). Areas including the base flood are depicted as zones AE on the City of Salem's flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
    Base flood elevation (BFE). The Federal Emergency Management Agency designated 100 year water surface elevation. 
    Basement. A story partly underground and having at least one-half of its height above the average adjoining grade on all sides of the building or structure. 
    Berm. A landscaped earthen mound, incorporated as part of a site design, and intended to enhance the compatibility of abutting or nearby properties through the mitigation of sound, the screening of views, and/or the visual enhancement of a property's landscaped character. 
    Board of zoning appeals. The term Board of Zoning Appeals shall refer to the City of Salem Board of Zoning Appeals, also referred to in this chapter as BZA. 
    Buffer yard. A yard improved with screening and landscaping materials required between abutting zoning districts of differing intensities or between adjoining land uses for the purpose of decreasing the adverse impact of differing uses and districts. 
    Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, activity, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind. 
    Building coverage. That portion of a lot, which when viewed from directly above, would be covered by any building or structure. For the purposes of this definition, lot shall include contiguous lots of the same ownership within a single zoning district which are to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. 
    Building, front. That portion of a building facing the street of address. 
    Building, height of. The vertical distance above the average existing grade measured to the highest point of the building. The height of a stepped or terraced building shall be the maximum height of any segment of the building. 
    Building line. When viewed from above, the line, parallel to the street right-of-way, that passes through the point of the principal building nearest the street right-of-way, or in the case of the rear building line, furthest from the street right-of-way. 
    Business entity or unit. A room, a portion of a room, or suite of rooms occupied or capable of being occupied by a proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other lawful enterprise where any commercial activities are conducted. 
    Cellar. A story having more than one-half of its height below average adjoining grade on all sides of the building or structure. 
    Certificate of zoning compliance. For the purposes of this chapter, official certification that premises conform to all applicable provisions of the City of Salem Zoning Ordinance and may be lawfully used or occupied. 
    Channel. A perceptible natural or artificial waterway which periodically or continuously contains moving water confined to a definite bed and banks. 
    Cluster subdivision. An alternative means of subdividing land that concentrates building density in specific areas to allow the remaining land to be reserved for the preservation of environmentally-sensitive features and open space. 
    Commission. The term Commission shall mean the Planning Commission of the City of Salem, Virginia. 
    Condominium. A building or group of buildings, created pursuant to the Virginia Horizontal Property Act, § 55-79 et seq., Code of Virginia, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 
    Construction, new. Structures for which construction commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter and including any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    Construction, start. The date a building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and /or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwellings units or not part of the main structure. 
    Council. The City Council of the City of Salem, Virginia. 
    Deck. A structure, without a roof, directly adjacent to a principal building which has an average elevation of 30 inches or greater from finished grade. A deck may be constructed of any materials. 
    Dedication. The transfer of private property to public ownership upon written acceptance. 
    Density. The number of dwelling units permitted per unit of land, commonly expressed as dwelling units per acre. 
    Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the placement of manufactured homes, streets and other paving, utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging, or drilling operations. Within the Floodplain Overlay District this definition shall also include the storage of equipment or materials. 
    District. A zoning district as described and permitted by § 15.2-2280 et seq. of the Code of Virginia. 
    Driveway. A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling, or other structure. 
    Dwelling unit. A room or group of rooms connected together containing cooking, bathroom and sleeping facilities constituting a separate, independent housekeeping unit, physically separated from any other dwelling unit in the same structure. 
    Easement. A portion of a lot or acreage reserved for present or future use by a person or entity other than the fee simple owner of the lot or acreage. Easements may exist on the ground, or under or above the lot or acreage. 
    Establishment. Any business, enterprise or other land use permitted by this ordinance. 
    Family. One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or under approved foster care, or a group of not more than four persons (including servants) living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Flood. A general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland waters; 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or 
c.  Mudslides (i.e., mudflows), which are approximately caused or precipitated by accumulations of water on or under the ground. 
d.  The collapse or subsidence of land along a body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by water or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a sever storm or by an unanticipated form of nature, such as a flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable even which results in flooding as defined in this section. 
    Flood, one hundred year. A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year). 
    Floodway fringe. That area characterized during floods by shallow, slow-moving water and represents a low hazard potential; more specifically, the floodway fringe is that area of the 100-year flood elevations contained in the flood profiles of the flood insurance study adopted by the City of Salem and as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) accompanying that study. 
    Floodplain. (1) A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; or, (2) an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of run-off or surface waters from any source. 
    Flood proofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structure which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property and water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway. The stream channel and adjacent land area required to carry off the often fast-moving floodwaters of the base flood and is considered to be an area of high hazard potential; more specifically, the floodway is that certain area of the 100-year floodplain that must be reserved in order to discharge such floodwaters without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. Floodways are defined in Table 2 of the flood insurance study adopted by the city and as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) accompanying that study. 
    Floor area, finished. The sum of the horizontal areas of a building which is intended for human habitation and use and which has a floor to ceiling height of six and one-half feet or greater. Areas excluded from the finished floor area would include unfinished basements and attics, storage and utility rooms, and garages. 
    Floor area, gross. The sum of the horizontal areas of the several stories of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls, or in the case of a common wall separating two buildings, from the centerline of such common wall. Gross floor area shall exclude interior parking and loading spaces, and airspace above atriums. 
    Garage, private. A building for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal residential building situated on the same lot as the principal building for the storage of motor vehicles. 
    Glare. The effect produced by lighting, with a brightness sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
    Land disturbing activity. Any land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into State waters or onto lands in the Commonwealth, including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. 
    Landscaping. The improvement of the appearance of an area by the planting of trees, grass, shrubs, or other plant materials. 
    Loading space, off-street. Space for bulk pick-ups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. 
    Lot. A parcel of land intended to be separately owned, developed, or otherwise used as a unit, established by plat, subdivisions or as otherwise permitted by law. 
    Lot, corner. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets or where lot lines or right-of-way lines, or the extension thereof, intersect at less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot coverage. That portion of a lot, which when viewed from directly above, would be covered by any building or structure, parking and loading areas and other surface which is impermeable or substantially impervious to storm water. Gravel parking areas shall be considered impervious. For the purposes of this definition, lot shall include contiguous lots of the same ownership within a single zoning district which are to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. 
    Lot, depth of. The average horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines. The average shall consist of the horizontal distances of the side lot lines and the distance of a line connecting the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage. A lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on more than one street other than an alley. Double frontage lots may be referred to as through lots. 
    Lot, frontage. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the point where the side lot lines intersect the street right-of-way. All sides of a lot which abuts a street shall be considered frontage. On curvilinear streets the arc between the side lot lines shall be considered the lot frontage. 
    Lot, interior. A lot, other than a corner lot, which has only one frontage on a street other than an alley. 
    Lot, irregular. A lot of such a shape or configuration that technically meets the area, frontage and width to depth requirements of this chapter but meets these requirements by incorporating unusual elongation, angles, curvilinear lines unrelated to topography or other natural land features. 
    Lot, pipestem. A panhandle or flag shaped lot with its widest point set back from the road at the rear of another lot (called the pipe), and having a thin strip of land connecting to the road to provide legal access and frontage (called the stem). Pipestem lots are also referred to as panhandle lots or flag lots. 
    Lot, width of. The average horizontal distance between all side lot lines measured at a right angle, and at the midpoint of each side lot line. 
    Lot of record. A lot whose existence, location, and dimensions have been legally recorded or registered in a deed or on a plat in the Clerk's office of the Circuit Court of the City of Salem. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest enclosed area, including basement, of any structure. An unfurnished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this division. 
    Modular home. A dwelling unit manufactured off-site and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. Such units shall be comprised of a combination of one or more sections or modules, as more fully defined in the Code of Virginia, Title 36, as amended, and incorporated herein by reference, including the necessary electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating and other service systems. Such units may also be known as industrialized buildings. 
    Monopole. A single pole structure, usually self supporting, used to support antennas. 
    Natural watercourse. Any natural stream river, creek, waterway, gully, or wash in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently, and has a definite channel, bed and banks. 
    Nonconforming building. Any building the size, dimensions or location of which was lawful when erected or altered, but which fails to conform to the current standards and regulations due to the adoption, revision or amendment of this ordinance. 
    Nonconforming lot. A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful at the time the lot was created, but which fails to conform to the current standards and regulations due to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter. 
    Nonconforming use. A use or activity which was lawful when originally established, but which fails to conform to the current standards and regulations due to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter. 
    Not-for-profit. An organization or activity which has obtained nontaxable status from the U. S. Internal Revenue Service. 
    Off-street parking area. Space provided for vehicular parking outside the dedicated street right-of-way. 
    Open space. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space. Open Space may include, recreation centers, playgrounds, swimming pools, tennis and basketball courts, and similar facilities. 
    Open space, common. Land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development and may include such complementary structures as are necessary and appropriate. 
    Open space may include, recreation centers, playgrounds, swimming pools, tennis and basketball courts, and similar facilities. 
    Outdoor storage. The keeping, in other than a building, of any goods, materials, or merchandise on the same parcel for more than 24 consecutive hours. 
    Overlay district. A district established by this Chapter to prescribe special regulations to be applied to a site in combination with the underlying or base district. 
    Patio. A level surfaced area directly adjacent to a principal building which has an average elevation of not more than 30 inches from finished grade, and without walls or a roof. A patio may be constructed of any materials. 
    Permanent foundation. For the purposes of a modular home, a permanent foundation shall consist of a continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete footing that shall fully support the exterior walls. A crawlspace, slab on grade, and basement foundations shall be considered permanent foundations. Pier and ground anchor support systems shall not be considered a permanent foundation. 
    Porch. A roofed open area, which may be glazed or screened, usually attached to or part of and with direct access to or from, a building. 
    Principal building or structure. A building or structure in which the primary use of the lot on which the building is located is conducted. 
    Principal use. The main use of land or structures as distinguished from a secondary or accessory use. 
    Private. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, private shall mean anything not owned, operated, provided and/or maintained by a local, state, or federal government. 
    Public. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, public shall mean anything owned, operated, provided and/or maintained by a local, state, or federal government. 
    Public water and sewer systems. A water or sewer system owned and operated by: 
(1)  A municipality or county; or 
(2)  A private individual or a corporation approved and properly licensed by the State Corporation Commission prior to the adoption date of this chapter; and meeting the requirements of the State Health Department and/or Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
    Recreational vehicle. Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis; (2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreation camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Replacement cost. The cost of restoring a damaged building or structure to its original condition. Replacement cost shall include reasonable estimates of the cost of materials and labor and shall be compared with the assessed value as determined by the city assessor to determine the percentage of the cost of improvements. 
    Right-of-way. A legally established area or strip of land, either public or private, on which an irrevocable right of passage has been recorded. 
    Screening. A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation. Screening is intended to substantially, but not necessarily totally obscure visual impacts between adjoining uses. 
    Setback. The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from a street right-of-way or lot line. 
    Shopping center. A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with shared access, customer and employee parking provided onsite, provision of goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements. 
    Special exception. A use with operating and/or physical characteristics different from those uses permitted by right in a given zoning district which may, nonetheless, be compatible with those by-right uses under special conditions and with adequate public review. Special Exceptions are allowed only at the discretion and approval of the Salem City Council following review and recommendation by the Salem Planning Commission. 
    Stoop. A platform, without a roof, located at the entrance of a building with sufficient area to facilitate the ingress and egress to the building. 
    Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the floor next above it, or if there is not a floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling above it. 
    Street. Any vehicular way which: (1) is an existing state or municipal roadway: or, (2) is shown on a plat approved pursuant to law; or, (3) is approved by other official action. The term street shall include road, and highway. Unless otherwise indicated, the term street shall refer to both public and private streets. 
    Structure. Anything that is constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, including but not limited to buildings, signs, manufactured homes and swimming pools. Walls and fences shall not be deemed structures except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damage would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before such damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work performed. For the purpose of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not however, include either any project for improvement for a structure to comply with existing state or city health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living condition, or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places of the state landmarks register. 
    Telecommunications. The transmitting and receiving of electromagnetic signals through the atmosphere. 
    Use not provided for permit. A permit authorizing a land use that is not listed as a permitted use by right or by special use in any zoning district provided for in this chapter. Use Not Provided for Permits are allowed only at the discretion and approval of the Salem City Council following review and recommendation by the Salem Planning Commission. 
    Variance. A reasonable deviation from the provisions regulating the size or area of a lot or parcel of land, or the size, area, bulk or location of a building or structure in accordance with § 15.2-2201 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
    Watercourse. A natural or artificial channel for passage or running water fed from natural sources in a definite channel and discharging into some stream or body of water. 
    Yard. A required open space on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. 
    Yard, front. A yard between the building line and the street right-of-way extending across the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, rear. A yard between the rear line of the building and the rear line of the lot extending the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, side. A yard between the side line of the building and the side line of the lot extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
    Zoning administrator. The Zoning Administrator of the City of Salem Virginia, or an authorized agent thereof, also referred to in this chapter as the administrator. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 12-12-05(7); Ord. of 4-9-2018(3)) 
Sec. 106-602. - Use types. 
(A)  The purpose of the use types is to establish a classification system for land uses and a consistent set of terms defining uses permitted within various zoning districts in the City of Salem. The use types section also facilitates the process of determining the applicable use type of any activity not explicitly defined. 
(B)  In the event of any question as to the appropriate use type of any existing or proposed use or activity, the administrator shall have the authority to determine the appropriate use type. In making such determination, the administrator shall consider the operational and physical characteristics of the use in question and shall consider the classification contained in the most recent edition of the North American Industry Classification System Manual published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget. In addition, the administrator shall consider the specific requirements of the use in common with those included as examples of use types. Those examples, when included in use type descriptions, are intended to be illustrative, as opposed to exclusive lists. The administrator may also determine that a proposed use or activity is sufficiently different from any use type listed below and will require an amendment to the text of this chapter or the issuance of a use not provided for permit by the City of Salem Council. 
(C)  The administrator shall make such determinations of appropriate use types in writing, which shall include an explanation of the reasons for the determination. 
(D)  A determination of the administrator may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals pursuant to the procedures for administrative appeals outlined in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 4-9-2018(3)) 
Sec. 106-602.1. - Agricultural use types. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Agriculture. The use of land for the production of food and fiber, including farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry. A garden accessory to a residence shall not be considered agriculture. The keeping of a cow, pig, sheep, goat, chicken or similar animal shall constitute agriculture regardless of the size of the animal and regardless of the purpose for which it is kept. 
    Agritourism. Any activity carried out on a farm or ranch that allows members of the general public, for recreational, entertainment, or educational purposes, to view or enjoy rural activities, including farming, wineries, ranching, historical, cultural, harvest-your-own activities, or natural activities and attractions. 
    Farm stand. An establishment for the seasonal retail sale of agricultural goods and merchandise primarily produced by the operator on the site, or on nearby property. Agricultural goods produced on other properties owned or leased by the operator may also be allowed provided a majority of the produce comes from land surrounding the wayside stand. This use type shall include agricultural products picked by the consumer. 
    Forestry operations. The use of land for the raising and harvesting of timber, pulp woods and other forestry products for commercial purposes, including the temporary operation of a sawmill and/or chipper to process the timber cut from that parcel or contiguous parcels. Excluded from this definition shall be the cutting of timber associated with land development approved by the City of Salem, which shall be considered accessory to the development of the property. 
    Stable. The boarding, keeping, breeding, pasturing or raising of horses, ponies, mules, donkeys or llamas by the owner or occupant of the property and/or their paying or non-paying guests. Included in this definition are riding academies. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 6-25-2012(2); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14. 
Sec. 106-602.3. - Residential use types. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Accessory apartment. A second dwelling unit within a detached single family dwelling which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the main dwelling unit. 
    Family day care home. A single family dwelling in which more than five but less than ten individuals, are received for care, protection and guidance during only part of a 24 hour day. Individuals related by blood, legal adoption or marriage to the person who maintains the home shall not be counted towards this total. The care of five or less individuals for portions of a day shall be considered a home occupation. 
    Home occupation. An accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful employment involving the production, provision, or sale of goods and/or services. 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation. A manufactured home shall contain one dwelling unit. Some manufactured homes are also referred to as mobile homes. 
    Manufactured home, accessory. A manufactured home that is subordinate to a single family dwelling on a single lot and meets the additional criteria contained in this chapter. 
    Manufactured home, emergency. A manufactured home used temporarily for the period of reconstruction or replacement of an uninhabitable dwelling lost or destroyed by fire, flood, or other act of nature, or used temporarily as housing relief to victims of a federally declared disaster in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Manufactured home subdivision. A ten acre or larger community of manufactured home dwellings with lots that are subdivided for individual ownership. 
    Manufactured home park. A ten acre or larger tract of land intended to accommodate a manufactured home community of multiple spaces for lease or condominium ownership. A manufactured home park is also referred to as a mobile home park. 
    Multi-family dwelling. A building or portion thereof which contains three or more dwelling units for permanent occupancy, regardless of the method of ownership. Included in the use type would be garden apartments, low and high rise apartments, apartments for elderly housing and condominiums. 
    Residential human care facility. A building (1) used as a group home where not more than eight mentally ill, mentally retarded or other developmentally disabled persons, not related by blood or marriage, reside, with one or more resident counselors or other staff persons and for which the Virginia Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services is the licensing authority, pursuant to § 15.2-2291 of the Code of Virginia, or (2) used as a group home where not more than eight aged, infirm or disabled persons, not related by blood or marriage, reside with one or more resident counselors or other staff persons and for which the Department of Social Services is the licensing authority, pursuant to § 15.2-2291(B) of the Code of Virginia. Excluded from this definition are drug or alcohol rehabilitation centers, half-way houses and similar uses. 
    Single family dwelling. A site built or modular building designed for or used exclusively as one dwelling unit for permanent occupancy. 
Detached. A single family dwelling which is surrounded by open space or yards on all sides, is located on its own individual lot, and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means. 
Attached. Two single family dwellings sharing a common wall area, each on its own individual lot. 
    Temporary family health care structure. A transportable residential structure providing an environment facilitating a caregiver's provision of care for mentally or physically impaired person that (i) is primarily assembled at a location other than its site of installation, (ii) is limited to one occupant who shall be the mentally or physically impaired person, (iii) has no more than 300 gross square feet, (iv) complies with the applicable provisions of the Industrialized Building Safety Law and the Uniform Statewide Building Code, and (v) is not placed on a permanent foundation. For purposes of this definition "caregiver" and "mentally or physically impaired person" are as defined in § 15.2-2292.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    Townhouse. A grouping of three or more attached single family dwellings in a row in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more common walls. 
    Two family dwelling. The use of an individual lot for two dwelling units which share at least one common wall, each occupied by one family. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 3-14-2011(1); Ord. of 3-14-2011(2)) 
Sec. 106-602.5. - Civic use types. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Administrative services. Governmental offices providing administrative, clerical or public contact services that deal directly with the citizen. Typical uses include federal, state, county, and city offices. 
    Assisted care residence. An establishment that provides shelter and services which may include meals, housekeeping, and personal care assistance primarily for the elderly. Residents are able to maintain a semi-independent life style, not requiring the more extensive care of a nursing home. Residents will, at a minimum, need assistance with at least one of the following: medication management, meal preparation, housekeeping, money management, or personal hygiene. At least one nurse's aid is typically on duty, with medical staff available when needed. 
    Camps. A use which primarily provides recreational opportunities of an outdoor nature on a daily or overnight basis. Included in this use type would be scout camps, religious camps, children's camps, wilderness camps, and similar uses which are not otherwise specifically described in this chapter. 
    Cemetery. Land used or dedicated to the burial of the dead, including columbariums, crematoriums, mausoleums, and necessary sales and maintenance facilities. Funeral Services use types shall be included when operated within the boundary of such cemetery. 
    Clubs. A use providing meeting, or social facilities for civic or social clubs, and similar organizations and associations, primarily for use by members and guests. Recreational facilities, unless otherwise specifically cited in this section, may be provided for members and guests as an accessory use. This definition shall not include fraternal or sororal organizations associated with colleges or universities. A Club does not include a building in which members reside. 
    Community recreation. A recreational facility for use solely by the residents and guests of a particular residential development, planned unit development, or residential neighborhood, including indoor and outdoor facilities. These facilities are usually proposed or planned in association with development and are usually located within or adjacent to such development. 
    Correction facilities. A public or privately operated use providing housing and care for individuals legally confined, designed to isolate those individuals from a surrounding community. 
    Crisis center. A facility providing temporary protective sanctuary for victims of crime or abuse including emergency housing during crisis intervention for individuals, such as victims of rape, child abuse, or physical beatings. 
    Cultural services. A library, museum, or similar public or quasi-public use displaying, preserving and exhibiting objects of community and cultural interest in one or more of the arts or sciences. 
    Educational facilities, college/university. An educational institution authorized by the Commonwealth of Virginia to award associate, baccalaureate or higher degrees. 
    Educational facilities, primary/secondary. A public, private or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary, junior and/or senior high school levels in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Guidance services. A use providing counseling, guidance, recuperative, or similar services for persons requiring rehabilitation assistance or therapy for only part of a 24 hour day. This use type shall not include facilities operated for the treatment of drug addiction and substance abuse. 
    Halfway house. An establishment providing residential accommodations, rehabilitation, counseling, and supervision to persons suffering from alcohol or drug addiction, to persons reentering society after being released from a correctional facility or other institution, or to persons suffering from similar disorders or circumstances. 
    Life care facility. A residential facility primarily for the continuing care of the elderly, providing for transitional housing progressing from independent living in various dwelling units, with or without kitchen facilities, and culminating in nursing home type care where all related uses are located on the same lot. Such facility may include other services integral to the personal and therapeutic care of the residents. 
    Nursing home. A use providing bed care and in-patient services for persons requiring regular medical attention but excluding a facility providing surgical or emergency medical services and excluding a facility providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease, or communicable disease. Nursing homes have doctors or licensed nurses on duty. 
    Park and ride facility. A publicly owned, short-term, parking facility for commuters. 
    Post office. Postal services directly available to the consumer operated by the United States Postal Service. 
    Public assembly. Facilities owned and operated by a public agency accommodating public assembly for sports, amusement, or entertainment purposes. Typical uses include auditoriums, sports stadiums, convention facilities, fairgrounds, and sales and exhibition facilities. 
    Public maintenance and service facilities. A public facility supporting maintenance, repair, vehicular or equipment servicing, material storage, and similar activities including street or sewer yards, equipment services centers, and similar uses having characteristics of commercial services or contracting or industrial activities. 
    Public parks and recreational areas. Publicly-owned and operated parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, indoor or outdoor athletic facilities, greenways and open spaces. 
    Religious assembly. A use located in a permanent building and providing regular organized religious worship and related incidental activities, except primary or secondary schools and day care facilities. 
    Safety services. Facilities for the conduct of safety and emergency services for the primary benefit of the public, whether publicly or privately owned and operated, including police and fire protection services and emergency medical and ambulance services. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2)) 
Sec. 106-602.7. - Office use types. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Financial institutions. Provision of financial and banking services to consumers or clients. Walk-in and drive-in services to consumers are generally provided on site. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan associations, savings banks, credit unions, lending establishments and free-standing automatic teller machines. 
    General office. Use of a site for business, professional, or administrative offices, excluding medical offices/clinic. Typical uses include real estate, insurance, management, travel, computer software or information systems research and development, or other business offices; organization and association offices; or law, architectural, engineering, accounting or other professional offices. Retail sales do not comprise more than an accessory aspect of the primary activity of a General Office. 
    Medical office/clinic. A facility used for human health care, such as medical, dental, therapeutic, chiropractic or similar consultation, diagnosis, and treatment by one or more practitioners licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. Medical offices/clinics provide outpatient care on a routine basis, and may offer minor surgical care, but do not provide overnight care or serve as a base for an ambulance service. 
    Outpatient mental health and substance abuse clinic. An establishment which provides outpatient services primarily related to the diagnosis and treatment of mental health disorders, alcohol, or other drug or substance abuse disorders. Services may include the dispensing and administering of controlled substances and pharmaceutical products by professional medical practitioners licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. Examples may include but are not limited to outpatient alcohol treatment centers, outpatient detoxification centers, outpatient drug and substance abuse centers, and outpatient mental health centers. 
    Laboratories. Establishments primarily engaged in performing research or testing activities into technological matters. Typical uses include engineering and environmental laboratories, medical, optical, dental and forensic laboratories, x-ray services, and pharmaceutical laboratories only involved in research and development. Excluded are any laboratories which mass produce one or more products directly for the consumer market. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 9-13-2010(5)) 
Sec. 106-602.9. - Commercial use types. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult business. Any adult bookstore, adult video store, adult model studio, adult motel, adult movie theater, adult nightclub, adult store, business providing adult entertainment, or any other establishment that regularly exploits an interest in matters relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or regularly features live entertainment intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons, and as such terms are defined in Chapter 58 of this Code. 
    Agricultural services. An establishment primarily engaged in providing services specifically for the agricultural community which is not directly associated with a farm operation. Included in this use type would be servicing of agricultural equipment, independent equipment operators, and other related agricultural services. 
    Antique shops. A place offering primarily antiques for sale. An antique for the purposes of this chapter shall be a work of art, piece of furniture, decorative object, or the like, of or belonging to the past, at least 30 years old. 
    Assembly hall. A building, designed and used primarily for the meeting or assembly of a large group of people for a common purpose. Typical uses include meeting halls, union halls, bingo parlors, and catering or banquet facilities. 
    Athletic instruction services. Establishments primarily engaged in providing indoor instruction and training in athletic sports that require high ceiling heights for the activity. Typical uses include gymnastics academies, baseball and softball training centers, tennis centers and golf centers. 
    Automobile dealership, new. The use of any building, land area or other premise for the display of new and used automobiles, trucks, vans, or motorcycles for sale or rent, including any warranty repair work and other major and minor repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
    Automobile dealership, used. Any lot or establishment where three or more used motor vehicles, including automobiles, trucks, and motorcycles are displayed at one time for sale. 
    Automobile repair services, major. Repair of construction equipment, commercial trucks, agricultural implements and similar heavy equipment, including automobiles, where major engine and transmission repairs are conducted. This includes minor automobile repairs in conjunction with major automobile repairs. Typical uses include automobile and truck repair garages, transmission shops, radiator shops, body and fender shops, equipment service centers, machine shops and other similar uses where major repair activities are conducted. 
    Automobile repair services, minor. Repair of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including the sale, installation, and servicing of equipment and parts. Typical uses include tire sales and installation, wheel and brake shops, oil and lubrication services and similar repair and service activities where minor repairs and routine maintenance are conducted. 
    Automobile rental/leasing. Rental of automobiles and light trucks and vans, including incidental parking and servicing of vehicles for rent or lease. Typical uses include auto rental agencies and taxicab dispatch areas. 
    Automobile parts/supply, retail. Retail sales of automobile parts and accessories. Typical uses include automobile parts and supply stores which offer new and factory rebuilt parts and accessories, and include establishments which offer minor automobile repair services. 
    Business support services. Establishments or places of business engaged in the sale, rental or repair of office equipment, supplies and materials, or the provision of services used by office, professional and service establishments. Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops, convenience printing and copying establishments, as well as temporary labor services. 
    Business or trade schools. A use providing education or training in business, commerce, language, or other similar activity or occupational pursuit, and not otherwise defined as an educational facility, either primary and secondary, or college and university. 
    Campgrounds. Facilities providing camping or parking areas and incidental services for travelers in recreational vehicles and/or tents. 
    Car wash. Washing and cleaning of vehicles. Typical uses include automatic conveyor machines and self-service car washes. 
    Commercial indoor amusement. Establishments which provide multiple coin operated amusement or entertainment devices or machines as other than an incidental use of the premises. Such devices would include pinball machines, video games, and other games of skill or scoring, and would include pool and/or billiard tables, whether or not they are coin operated. Typical uses include game rooms, billiard and pool halls, and video arcades. 
    Commercial indoor entertainment. Predominantly spectator uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include motion picture theaters, and concert or music halls. 
    Commercial indoor sports and recreation. Predominantly non-instructional participant-based uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include bowling alleys, ice and roller skating rinks, indoor racquetball, swimming, and/or tennis facilities. 
    Commercial outdoor entertainment. Predominantly spectator uses conducted in open or partially enclosed or screened facilities. Typical uses include sports arenas, motor vehicle or animal racing facilities, and outdoor amusement parks. 
    Commercial outdoor sports and recreation. Predominantly participant uses conducted in open or partially enclosed or screened facilities. Typical uses include driving ranges, miniature golf, swimming pools, tennis courts, outdoor racquetball courts, motorized cart and motorcycle tracks, and motorized model airplane flying facilities. 
    Communications services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms. Excluded from this use type are facilities classified as Utility Services - Major or Towers. Typical uses include television studios, telecommunication service centers, telegraph service offices or film and sound recording facilities. 
    Construction sales and services. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in retail or wholesale sale, from the premises, of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures, but specifically excluding automobile or equipment supplies otherwise classified herein. Typical uses include building material stores and home supply establishments. 
    Consumer repair services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals and households, rather than businesses, but excluding automotive and equipment repair use types. Typical uses include appliance repair shops, shoe repair, watch or jewelry repair shops, or repair of musical instruments. 
    Convenience store. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed goods for household consumption, such as prepackaged food and beverages, and limited household supplies and hardware. Convenience stores shall not include fuel pumps or the selling of fuel for motor vehicles. Typical uses include neighborhood markets and country stores. 
    Dance hall. Establishments in which more than ten percent of the total floor area is designed or used as a dance floor, or where an admission fee is directly collected, or some other form of compensation is obtained for dancing. 
    Day care center. Any facility operated for the purpose of providing care, protection and guidance to ten or more individuals during only part of a 24 hour day. This term includes nursery schools, preschools, day care centers for individuals, and other similar uses but excludes public and private educational facilities or any facility offering care to individuals for a full 24 hour period. 
    Equipment sales and rental. Establishments primarily engaged in the sale or rental of tools, trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, and similar industrial equipment, and the rental of mobile homes. Included in this use type is the incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing of such equipment. 
    Flea market. Businesses engaged in the outdoor sale of used or new items, involving regular or periodic display of merchandise for sale. 
    Funeral services. Establishments engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the dead for burial, and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include mortuaries and crematories. 
    Garden center. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in retail or wholesale (bulk) sale, from the premises, of trees, shrubs, seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, plants and plant materials primarily for agricultural, residential and commercial consumers. Such establishments typically sell products purchased from others, but may sell some material which they grow themselves. Typical uses include nurseries, plant stores and lawn and garden centers. 
    Gasoline station. Any place of business with fuel pumps and gasoline storage tanks which provides fuels and oil for motor vehicles. 
    Golf course. A tract of land for playing golf, improved with tees, greens, fairways, hazards, and which may include clubhouses and shelters. Included would be executive or par 3 golf courses. Specifically excluded would be independent driving ranges and any miniature golf course. 
    Homestay inn. A dwelling in which not more than five bedrooms are provided for overnight guests for compensation, on a daily or weekly basis, with or without meals. The owner or the owner's agent shall reside on the same parcel occupied by the homestay inn. A homestay inn may also be known as a bed and breakfast. 
    Hospital. A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons primarily on an in-patient basis and including ancillary facilities for outpatient and emergency treatment diagnostic services, training, research, administration, and services to patients, employees, or visitors. 
    Hotel/motel/motor lodge. A building or group of attached or detached buildings containing lodging units intended primarily for rental or lease to transients by the day, week or month. Such uses generally provide additional services such as daily maid service, restaurants, meeting rooms and/or recreation facilities. 
    Kennel, commercial. The boarding, breeding, raising, grooming or training of dogs, cats, or other household pets of any age not owned by the owner or occupant of the premises, and/or for commercial gain. 
    Laundry. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, cleaning or dyeing services other than those classified as Personal Services. Typical uses include bulk laundry and cleaning plants, diaper services, or linen supply services. 
    Manufactured home sales. Establishments primarily engaged in the display, retail sale, rental, and minor repair of new and used manufactured homes, parts, and equipment. 
    Massage parlor. Establishments having a fixed place of business where any person other than a massage therapist, as licensed by the Virginia Board of Nursing, administers or gives any kind or character of massage, manipulation of the body or other similar procedure. Massage therapy as licensed by the Virginia Board of Nursing shall be considered a personal service. This definition shall not be construed to include a hospital, nursing home, medical clinic, or the office of a duly licensed physician, surgeon, physical therapist, chiropractor, osteopath, or a barber shop or beauty salon in which massages are administered only to the scalp, the face, the neck, or the shoulders, or an exercise club where massage is performed by a person of the same sex as the subject of the massage. 
    Microbrewery. An establishment engaged in the production of beer with a significant commercial component, such as a restaurant or retail store. 
    Microdistillery . An establishment engaged in the production of spirits with a significant commercial component, such as a restaurant or retail store. 
    Owner's agent. A person who manages a homestay inn and whose primary residence and domicile shall be on the same parcel as the homestay inn. 
    Personal storage. A building designed to provide rental storage space in cubicles where each cubicle has a maximum floor area of 400 square feet. Each cubicle shall be enclosed by walls and ceiling and have a separate entrance for the loading and unloading of stored goods. 
    Pawn shop. A use engaged in the loaning of money on the security of property pledged in the keeping of the pawnbroker and the incidental sale of such property. 
    Personal improvement services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvements and similar services. Typical uses include driving schools, health or physical fitness centers (excluding athletic instruction services), reducing salons, dance studios, handicraft and hobby instruction. 
    Personal services. Establishments or places of business engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses include beauty and barber shops; grooming of pets; seamstresses, tailors, or shoe repairs; florists; and Laundromats and dry cleaning stations serving individuals and households. 
    Recreational vehicle sales and service. Retail sales of recreational vehicles and boats, including service and storage of vehicles and parts and related accessories. 
    Restaurant. An establishment engaged in the preparation and sale of food and beverages. Service to customers may be by counter or table service, or by take-out or delivery. 
    Retail sales. Sale or rental with incidental service of commonly used goods and merchandise for personal or household use but excludes those classified more specifically by these use type classifications. 
    Short-term lender. Establishments primarily engaged in short-term lending such as payday loans, car title loans, and refund anticipation loans. 
    Studio, fine arts. A building, or portion thereof, used as a place of work by a sculptor, artist, or photographer. 
    Truck stop. An establishment containing a mixture of uses which cater to the traveling public and in particular motor freight operators. A truck stop might include such uses as fuel pumps, restaurants, overnight accommodations, retail sales related to the motor freight industry, and similar uses. 
    Veterinary hospital/clinic. Any establishment rendering surgical and medical treatment of animals. Boarding of animals shall only be conducted indoors, on a short term basis, and shall only be incidental to such hospital/clinic use, unless also authorized and approved as a commercial kennel. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 10-9-06(2); Ord. of 11-23-09; Ord. of 2-7-2013; Ord. of 1-25-2016(1); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2); Ord. of 8-14-2017(1)) 
Sec. 106-602.11. - Industrial use types. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Asphalt plant. An establishment engaged in manufacturing or mixing of paving materials derived from asphaltic mixtures or tar. 
    Brewery. An establishment primarily engaged in the production of beer for distribution. 
    Construction yards. Establishments housing facilities of businesses primarily engaged in construction activities, including outside storage of materials and equipment. Typical uses are building contractor's yards. 
    Custom manufacturing. Establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing, within enclosed structures, involving the use of hand tools, or the use of mechanical equipment commonly associated with residential or commercial uses. 
    Distillery. An establishment primarily engaged in the production of spirits for distribution. 
    Industry, type I. Establishments engaged in the processing, manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or fabrication of materials and products, from processed or previously manufactured materials. Type I Industry is capable of operation in such a manner as to control the external effects of the manufacturing process, such as smoke, noise, soot, dirt, vibration, odor, etc. A machine shop is included in this category. Also included is the manufacturing of apparel, electrical appliances, electronic equipment, camera and photographic equipment, ceramic products, cosmetics and toiletries, business machines, food, paper products (but not the manufacture of paper from pulpwood), musical instruments, medical appliances, tools or hardware, plastic products (but not the processing of raw materials), pharmaceuticals or optical goods, bicycles, and any other product of a similar nature or requiring similar production characteristics. 
    Industry, type II. Enterprises in which goods are generally mass produced from raw materials on a large scale through use of an assembly line or similar process, usually for sale to wholesalers or other industrial or manufacturing uses. Included in this use type are industries involved in processing and/or refining raw materials such as chemicals, rubber, wood or wood pulp, forging, casting, melting, refining, extruding, rolling, drawing, and/or alloying ferrous metals, and the production of large durable goods such as automobiles, manufactured homes, or other motor vehicles. 
    Industry, type III. An establishment which has the potential to be dangerous or extremely obnoxious. Included are those in which explosives are stored, petroleum is refined, natural and liquid gas and other petroleum derivatives are stored and/or distributed in bulk, radioactive materials are compounded, pesticides and certain acids are manufactured, and hazardous waste is treated or stored as the establishment's principal activity. 
    Landfill, construction debris. The use of land for the legal disposal of construction and demolition wastes consisting of lumber, wire, sheet rock, broken brick, shingles, glass, pipes, concrete, and metals and plastic associated with construction and wastes from land clearing operations consisting of stumps, wood, brush, and leaves. 
    Landfill, rubble. The use of land for the legal disposal of only inert waste. Inert waste is physically, chemically and biologically stable from further degradation and considered to be non-reactive, and includes rubble, concrete, broken bricks, and block. 
    Landfill, sanitary. The use of land for the legal disposal of municipal solid waste derived from households, business and institutional establishments, including garbage, trash, and rubbish, and from industrial establishments, other than hazardous wastes as described by the Virginia Hazardous Waste Regulations. 
    Meat packing and related industries. The processing of meat products and byproducts directly from live animals or offal from dead animals. 
    Railroad facilities. Railroad yards, equipment servicing facilities, and terminal facilities. 
    Recycling centers and stations. A receptacle or facility used for the collection and storage of recyclable materials designed and labeled for citizens to voluntarily take source separated materials for recycling. 
    Resource extraction. A use involving on-site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural resources. Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operation, mining, and soil mining. Specifically excluded from this use type shall be grading and removal of dirt associated with an approved site plan or subdivision, or excavations associated with, and for the improvement of, a bona fide agricultural use. 
    Scrap and salvage services. Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling or other processing of uses or waste materials which are not intended for reuse in their original forms. Typical uses include paper and metal salvage yards, automotive wrecking yards, junk yards, used tire storage yards, or retail and/or wholesale sales of used automobile parts and supplies. 
    Transfer station. Any storage or collection facility which is operated as a relay point for municipal solid waste which ultimately is to be transferred to a landfill. 
    Transportation terminal. A facility for loading, unloading, and interchange of passengers, baggage, and incidental freight or package express between modes of ground transportation, including bus terminals, railroad stations, and public transit facilities. 
    Truck terminal. A facility for the receipt, transfer, short term storage, and dispatching of goods transported by truck. Included in the use type would be express and other mail and package distribution facilities, including such facilities operated by the U.S. post office. 
    Warehousing and distribution. Uses including storage, warehousing and dispatching of goods within enclosed structures, or outdoors. Typical uses include wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, moving/storage firms. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 1-25-2016(1); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
Sec. 106-602.13. - Miscellaneous use types. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Amateur radio tower. A structure on which an antenna is installed for the purpose of transmitting and receiving amateur radio signals erected and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Aviation facilities. Private or public land areas used or intended to be used for the take-off and landing of aircraft. Aviation facilities may include facilities for the operation, service, fueling, repair and/or storage of the aircraft. 
    Mixed use. Mixed use is a single building or parcel wherein multiple uses such as residential and commercial share space. 
    Outdoor gathering. Any temporary organized gathering expected to attract 500 or more people at one time in open spaces outside an enclosed structure. Included in this use type would be music festivals, church revivals, carnivals and fairs, and similar transient amusement and recreational activities not otherwise listed in this section. Such activities held on publicly owned land shall not be included within this use type. 
    Parking facility, surface/structure. Use of a site for surface parking or a parking structure unrelated to a specific use which provides one or more parking spaces together with driveways, aisles, turning and maneuvering areas, incorporated landscaped areas, and similar features meeting the requirements established by this chapter. This use type shall not include parking facilities accessory to a permitted principal use. 
    Shooting range, outdoor. The use of land for archery and the discharging of firearms for the purposes of target practice, skeet and trap shooting, mock war games, or temporary competitions, such as a turkey shoot. Excluded from this use type shall be general hunting, and the unstructured and nonrecurring discharging of firearms on private property with the property owner's permission if in compliance with the Code of the City of Salem. 
    Tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas. The term includes but need not be limited to radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, and cellular telephone and wireless communication towers. Tower types include, but are not limited to monopoles, lattice towers, wooden poles, and guyed towers. Excluded from this definition are amateur radio towers, which are otherwise defined. 
    Utility services, minor. Services which are necessary to support existing and future development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Including in this use type are distribution lines and small facilities that are underground or overhead, such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations. Also included are all major utility services owned and/or operated by the City of Salem, or any major utility services which were in existence prior to the adoption of this chapter. 
    Utility services, major. Services of a regional nature which normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as generating plants and sources, electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, water towers and tanks, community waste water treatment plants, and similar facilities. Included in this definition are also electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. 
(Ord. of 3-14-05(2); Ord. of 3-10-08(4); Ord. of 1-23-2017(2)) 
APPENDIX A - HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE CITY OF SALEM, VIRGINIA[1] 
    General Andrew Lewis started the settlement of the Salem area in 1768 when he acquired his estate "Richfield," which contained most of the area of the present-day Salem. In 1787 Lewis's son, William, sold a portion of "Richfield" to James Simpson, a real estate promoter, who is credited with founding Salem. It was Simpson who, on June 4, 1802, sold Susannah Cole the first lot in what is now the City of Salem, the oldest community in the Roanoke Valley. This first lot sold was at the corner of Main Street and Cherry Alley, now the Kroger parking lot. Simpson's original plat of the town was bounded by Union Street on the west, Church Alley on the east, Clay Street on the north, and Calhoun Street on the south. 
    In 1806, the general assembly granted Simpson a Charter, thus establishing "a town by the name of Salem." No one knows for sure who named the village, or why, except that a family of Bryans, who settled near Lake Spring, originally came from Salem, New Jersey. 
    In 1815 the boom was on when the Roanoke Navigation Company was formed to improve the Roanoke River for inland navigation. Only one boat made it. The company soon dissolved. 
    Roanoke County was formed from Botetourt County in 1838, and in 1847 Roanoke College came to Salem. In 1861 the town went to war along with the rest of the Confederacy. Then came the dusty years of the 1870's. 
    Boom again in 1889, which this time saw the "Bottom," and South Salem subdivided. The bubble burst when the record snowfall of '90 collapsed many jerry-built buildings. Salem soon stabilized its economy, which remained relatively fixed until the post-World War II influx. 
    In 1924 the manager form of government was instituted, which in the ensuing years has made Salem a veritable model of a well-kept and progressive community. 
    The town grew steadily after World War II until it had a population of 16,058 in 1960, as compared to a pre-war population of 5,737. At the end of 1966, conservative estimates placed the population above 25,000, with business and residential building on an unprecedented upswing. 
    Salem has come of age and is destined to become even larger. Although some decry the passing of the "small town," Salem's growth has been, and will be, steady, solid and progressive. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is appendix A from the 1969 Code of the city. 

APPENDIX B - THE ORIGINAL CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF SALEM, VIRGINIA[1] 
  
An Act establishing a town on the land of James Simpson in the County of Botetourt. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the original Charter of the Town of Salem, Virginia, as contained in an Act of the General Assembly of Virginia, approved January 6, 1806 (Acts December 1805, chapter 37). Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - [Town established; trustees.] 
    Be it enacted by the general assembly, that the land of James Simpson, near the upper end of the County of Botetourt, as the same is already laid off into lots and streets, shall be established [as] a town by the name of Salem; and that James Mason, William Lewis, Elijah M'Clenahan, William Blain, Lewis Cooper, John King and John Brough, gentlemen, shall be, and they are hereby constituted trustees thereof. 
Sec. 2. - [General powers of trustees; rights of inhabitants; vacancies of trustees.] 
    The trustees of the said town, or a majority of them, are empowered to make such rules and orders for the regular building of houses therein, as to them shall seem best, and to settle and determine all disputes concerning the bounds of the lots. So soon as the purchaser of any lot in the said town shall have built a dwelling house thereon equal to 12 feet square, with a brick or stone chimney, such purchaser shall enjoy the same privileges that the freeholders and inhabitants of other towns, not incorporated, hold and enjoy. Vacancies by death or otherwise of any one or more of the trustees, shall be supplied by the remaining trustees, or a majority of them; and the person so elected shall have the same power as if they had been named in this act. 
Sec. 3. - [Effective date.] 
    This act shall commence and be in force from and after the passing thereof. 
APPENDIX C - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY OF THE CITY OF SALEM, VIRGINIA[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The ordinance of February 24, 2012, changed the name of the Industrial Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia to the "Economic Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia," as set out herein, at the editor's discretion, as Art. III. The original ordinance of March 9, 1967, creating the Industrial Development Authority of the Town of Salem, Virginia, and appointing the directors thereof, and the ordinance of February 27, 1968, changing the name of such authority to "The Industrial Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia," are set out in this appendix as Articles I and II, respectively. Amendments to the ordinances are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinances. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - ORIGINAL ORDINANCE-MARCH 9, 1967 
An Ordinance Creating the Industrial Development Authority of the Town of Salem, Virginia, and Appointing the Directors Thereof. 
    WHEREAS, pursuant to the Industrial Development and Revenue Bond Act (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1373 et seq.) (the Act), the general assembly of Virginia authorized the creation of industrial development authorities by the several municipalities in the Commonwealth of Virginia so that such authorities may acquire, own, lease, and dispose of properties to the end that such authorities may be able to promote industry and develop trade by inducing manufacturing, industrial, governmental and commercial enterprises to locate in or remain in the commonwealth and further the use of its agricultural products and natural resources, and vested such authorities with all powers that may be necessary to enable them to accomplish such purposes, which powers shall in all respects be exercised for the benefit of the inhabitants of the commonwealth, for the increase of their commerce, and for the promotion of their safety, health, welfare, convenience, and prosperity; and 
    WHEREAS, the council of the Town of Salem, Virginia, is authorized to create an industrial development authority as a political subdivision of the commonwealth to promote and further the purposes of the Act; and 
    WHEREAS, the council of the Town of Salem, Virginia, is in accord with the purposes of the Act and has determined that it is in the best interests of the town and its inhabitants to create an industrial development authority pursuant to the Act; and 
    WHEREAS, such an industrial development authority shall be governed by a board of seven directors to be appointed by the council of the Town of Salem, the initial directors to be appointed two each for terms of one, two and three years and one for a term of four years; 
    BE IT ORDAINED by the council of the Town of Salem, Virginia: 

Sec. 1. - [Created; powers.] 
    There is hereby created a political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Virginia with such public and corporate powers as are set forth in the Industrial Development and Revenue Bond Act (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1373 et seq.), including such powers as may hereafter be set forth from time to time in said act. 
Sec. 2. - [Name.] 
    The name of the political subdivision of the Commonwealth created hereby shall be the industrial development authority of the Town of Salem, Virginia (the authority). 
_____
Sec. 3. - [Directors; terms of office.] 
    The following persons are hereby appointed directors of the authority for the terms of office herein set forth, which terms shall commence on the effective date of this ordinance: 
Name Address Term Lester M. Whitmore 208 Taylor Avenue 
Salem, Virginia 1 year Howard W. Starkey 1020 Stonegate Drive 
Salem, Virginia 1 year L.S. Waldrop 1212 Pickwick Lane 
Salem, Virginia 2 years Norman R. Moore 946 Boulevard-Roanoke 
Salem, Virginia 2 years Richard Berry 1040 Silverwood Road, N.W. 
Roanoke, Virginia 3 years I. Ray Byrd 226 Lewis Avenue 
Salem, Virginia 3 years S. Colston Snead, Jr. 701 Red Lane 
Salem, Virginia 4 years  
_____
Sec. 4. - [Initial meeting.] 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to call the initial meeting of the board of directors of the authority in the manner provided for the call of special meetings of the council of the Town of Salem, Virginia. 
Sec. 5. - [Effective date.] 
    An emergency is deemed to exist and this ordinance shall be effective from the date of its adoption. 
ARTICLE II. - AMENDMENT-FEBRUARY 27, 1968 
In the Council of the City of Salem, Virginia, at a Regular Meeting Held in the Council Chamber on February 26, 1968. 
    WHEREAS, by ordinance duly adopted by the council of the Town of Salem, Virginia, on March 9, 1967, there was created as a body politic, "The Industrial Development Authority of the Town of Salem, Virginia"; and 
    WHEREAS, said authority has at present one project underway; and 
    WHEREAS, on January 2, 1968, the governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia did proclaim Salem to be a city of the first class; and 
    WHEREAS, the council of the City of Salem is desirous of changing the name of "The Industrial Development Authority of the Town of Salem, Virginia" to "The Industrial Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia." 
    NOW, THEREFORE, on motion duly made, seconded and unanimously carried, BE IT RESOLVED by the council of the City of Salem as follows: 

Sec. 1. - [Name designated.] 
    That "The Industrial Development Authority of the Town of Salem, Virginia" shall hereafter be known and designated as "The Industrial Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia." 
Sec. 2. - [Contracts, obligations, etc., continued; directors and officers.] 
    That any and all contracts, agreements, assets, liabilities, or other obligations, or other actions, or causes of actions incurred by The Industrial Development Authority of the Town of Salem, Virginia, or to which said authority has or will become entitled, are hereby transferred to and vested in The Industrial Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia, and the directors and officers of the said The Industrial Development Authority of the Town of Salem, Virginia, shall continue to exercise the same duties as like directors and officers of The Industrial Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia. 
Sec. 3. - [Certification; request for seal.] 
    That the clerk of this council shall forthwith certify a copy of this resolution to the secretary of The Industrial Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia, with the request that said authority secure an appropriate seal, showing thereon its proper name, to be used in the conduct of the affairs of said authority. 
ARTICLE III. - AMENDMENT-FEBRUARY 24, 2012 
An Ordinance Changing the Name of the Industrial Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia, to the Economic Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia. 
    WHEREAS, by ordinance duly adopted by the Council of the City of Salem, Virginia, on March 9, 1967, there was created as a body politic the Industrial Development Authority of the Town of Salem, Virginia; and 
    WHEREAS, by resolution duly adopted by the Council of the City of Salem, Virginia, on February 26, 1968, the name was hereby changed from the Industrial Development Authority of the Town of Salem, Virginia, to the Industrial Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia; and 
    WHEREAS, the Council of the City of Salem is desirous of changing the name of the "Industrial Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia" to the "Economic Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia." 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SALEM, VIRGINIA, THAT: 

Sec. 1. - [Name designated.] 
    The "Industrial Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia" shall here-after be known and designated as the "Economic Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia." 
Sec. 2. - [Contracts, obligations, etc., continued; directors and officers.] 
    That any and all contracts, agreements, assets, liabilities, or other obligations, or other actions, or causes of actions incurred by the Industrial Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia, or to which said Authority has or will become entitled, are hereby transferred to and vested in the Economic Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia, and the directors and officers of the said Industrial Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia, shall continue to exercise the same duties as like directors and officers of the Economic Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia. 
Sec. 3. - [Certification; request for seal.] 
    That the Clerk of this Council shall forthwith certify a copy of this ordinance to the Secretary of the Economic Development Authority of the City of Salem, Virginia, with the request that said Authority secure an appropriate seal, showing thereon its proper name, to be used in the conduct of the affairs of said Authority. 
Sec. 4. - [Effective date.] 
    This ordinance shall be in full force and effect ten (10) days after its final passage. 
CODE DISPOSITION TABLE - 1969 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1969 Code, as updated through July 8, 1991, which are included herein. Sections of the 1969 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1969 Code 
Section Section this Code 1-1-1-4 1-1-1-4 1-4.1 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-6 1-8 2-1-2-4 2-36-2-39 2-4.1 2-2 2-4.2 50-1 2-5-2-13 2-56-2-64 2-14, 2-15 1-9, 1-10 2-16 2-86 2-16.1, 2-16.2 2-87, 2-88 2-17-2-21 2-111-2-115 2-28-2-31 2-116-2-119 2-31.1, 2-31.2 2-146, 2-147 2-32-2-35 2-176-2-179 2-37 2-181 2-37.1-2-37.3 2-201-2-203 2-38, 2-39 2-231, 2-232 2-40-2-42 2-256-2-258 2-44-2-54 2-286-2-296 2-55 82-1 2-56 2-1 2A-2-2A-17 30-41-30-56 2A-18 30-60 2A-23 30-57 2A-26, 2A-27 30-58, 30-59 3-1-3-6 10-91-10-96 3-7 10-98 3-8 10-97 3-10 10-31 3-10(b) 10-35 3-11-3-13 10-32-10-34 3-13.1 10-36 3-14 10-37 3-15 10-40 3-16, 3-17 10-38, 10-39 4-1-4-3 14-1-14-3 4-4, 4-5 14-36, 14-37 4-6-4-8 14-56-14-58 4-9, 4-10 14-100, 14-101 4-10.1 14-86 4-11 14-87 4-12 14-86 14-88 4-13 14-89 4-14-4-22 14-131-14-139 4-23-4-26 14-90-14-93 4-27(a) 14-94 4-27(b) 14-89 4-27(c)-(e) 14-94 4-27(f) 14-1 4-28-4-32 14-95-14-99 4-33-4-35 14-102-14-104 4-36-4-38 14-166-14-168 5-1-5-6 86-471-86-476 6-1, 6-2 18-3, 18-4 6-5 18-36 6-5.1-6-5.4 18-38-18-41 6-5.5 18-1 6-6 18-37 7-1-7-12 26-36-26-47 8-1 18-166 8-2-8-13 18-186-18-197 8-14, 8-15 18-226, 18-227 9-1 1-7 9-3 22-1 9-9-9-13 46-56-46-60 10-1-10-4 34-1-34-4 10-5-10-9 34-36-34-40 10-10-10-12 34-61-34-63 10-13, 10-14 34-86, 34-87 10-15-10-19 34-111-34-115 10-19.1 34-116 10-20-10-23 34-136-34-139 10-24, 10-25 34-161, 34-162 10-26 34-41 10-27-10-31 34-201-34-205 10-32-10-36 34-226-34-230 10-37-10-41 34-251-34-255 11-1 38-36 11-2-11-5 38-56-38-59 11-6-11-12 38-76-38-82 12-1 58-61, 58-62 12-2 58-61 58-65 58-67 12-3, 12-4 58-63, 58-64 12-5 58-62 12-6 58-61 58-66 12-9 58-63 12-11 58-63 12-12-12-16 10-66-10-70 13-3-13-5 30-5-30-7 13-7 30-8 13A-1 42-36 13A-2(a) 42-38-42-40 13A-2(b) 42-37 13A-3 42-42 13A-4 42-36 42-61 13A-5-13A-11 42-62-42-68 13A-12 42-43 13A-13, 13A-14 42-69, 42-70 14A-1 22-136 14A-2-14A-7 22-166-22-171 14A-8-14A-12 22-137-22-141 14A-13, 14A-14 22-172, 22-173 15-1 86-1 15-5-15-7 86-2-86-4 15-7.1 86-5 15-8-15-16 86-6-86-14 15-16.1 86-15 15-17-15-21 86-41-86-45 15-22-15-25 86-61-86-64 15-26(a)-(c) 86-65 15-26(d) 86-66 15-27 86-65 15-28-15-30 86-67-86-69 15-31-15-40 86-86-86-95 15-41-15-48 86-116-86-123 15-49 86-141 15-50 86-185 15-51 86-142 15-52-15-79 86-161-86-188 15-80 86-96 15-86, 15-87 86-206, 86-207 15-88-15-90 86-226-86-228 15-91, 15-92 86-246, 86-247 15-93(a), 15-93(b) 86-248, 86-249 15-93(c) 86-250, 86-251 15-94 86-252 15-94.1-15-94.4 86-277-86-280 15-94.5 86-276 15-94.6, 15-94.7 86-281, 86-282 15-94.8 86-284 15-94.9 86-283 15-95-15-101 86-253-86-259 15-101.1 86-260 15-103-15-105 86-301-86-303 15-106-15-112 86-321-86-327 15-113 86-346 15-114 86-348 15-116 86-347 15-117 86-328 15-118(a)-15-118(f) 86-366-86-371 15-119(a), 15-119(b) 86-372, 86-373 15-120, 15-121 86-374, 86-375 15-122, 15-123 86-391, 86-392 15-124(a), (b) 86-393 15-124(c) 86-394 15-125-15-128 86-395-86-398 15-129-15-144 86-416-86-431 16-1-16-10 90-26-90-35 16-11, 16-12 90-51, 90-52 16-13-16-21 90-71-90-79 16-21.1-16-21.8 90-96-90-103 16-22-16-27 90-121-90-126 16-29-16-35 90-127-90-133 16-36, 16-37 90-151, 90-152 16-38-16-42 90-171-90-175 16-43-16-45 90-236-90-238 16-46-16-49 90-256-90-259 16-50-16-53 90-276-90-279 16-54-16-61 90-296-90-303 16-62-16-69 90-321-90-328 16-70-16-75 90-346-90-351 16-77 90-371 16-79-16-83 90-372-90-376 16-84-16-109 90-191-90-216 17-1 58-1 17-1.1 58-28 17-2-17-8 58-2-58-8 17-9 58-9, 58-10 17-11 58-33 17-11.1 58-13 17-12 58-14 17-13 58-13 17-14 58-27 17-14.1 6-2 17-14.2 14-4 17-15 58-12 17-16, 17-17 58-19, 58-20 17-18 34-6 17-20, 17-21 102-1, 102-2 17-22-17-24 58-21-58-23 17-25-17-27 30-1-30-3 17-28 58-17 17-28.1 58-34 17-29 58-38 17-30-17-32 58-24-58-26 17-33 58-15 17-33.1 58-11 17-34, 17-35 46-8, 46-9 17-36 58-16 17-37 34-5 17-38 58-27 17-39(a)-17-39(c) 58-29-58-31 17-41 58-32 17-41.1 58-18 17-42-17-44 58-35-58-37 17-45(a), (b) 58-171 17-45(c) 58-172 17-46-17-54 58-171-58-179 18-1-18-3 62-36-62-38 18-4 62-41 18-5, 18-6 62-39, 62-40 18-7 62-1 19-1 18-261 19-2 18-263 19-3-19-6 18-286-18-289 19-7-19-9 18-311-18-313 19-10 18-1 19-11 18-2 19-12 18-262 20-1-20-8 74-136-74-143 20-9-20-13 74-171-74-175 21-1, 21-2 46-1, 46-2 21-3 46-7 21-4-21-7 46-3-46-6 22-1, 22-2 58-86, 58-87 22-3-22-6 58-87-58-90 23-1, 23-2 86-451, 86-452 23-4, 23-5 86-453, 86-454 24-1, 24-2 70-1, 70-2 24-2.1 70-3 24-3-24-5 70-4-70-6 24-6 70-36 24-12-24-27 70-37-70-52 24-28 94-1 24-29 30-4 24A-1 66-2 24A-2 66-1 24A-3-24A-7 66-3-66-7 24A-9-24A-18 66-36-66-45 24A-19-24A-24 66-71-66-76 24A-25-24A-28 66-101-66-104 24A-29-24A-31 66-126-66-128 24A-32 66-146 24A-34-24A-37 66-161-66-164 24A-38-24A-46 66-181-66-189 24A-47-24A-57 66-211-66-221 24A-58-24A-66 66-251-66-259 25-1-25-10 74-1-74-10 25-11-25-14 74-36-74-39 25-15-25-20 74-66-74-71 25-21-25-24 74-101-74-104 26-1 74-1 26-2-26-4 78-2-78-4 26-4.1 78-5 26-5-26-11 78-36-78-42 26-12-26-20 78-76-78-84 26-21-26-43 78-111-78-133 26-44-26-51 78-161-78-168 26-52-26-54 78-191-78-193 26-55 78-129 26-56-26-59 78-211-78-214 27-1-27-6 18-351-18-356 27-7-27-9 18-376-18-378 27-10-27-15 18-401-18-406 27-16-27-20 18-431-18-435 27-21, 27-22 18-451, 18-452 27-23-27-36 18-471-18-484 27-37-27-44 18-501-18-508 27-45-27-54 18-526-18-535 27-55-27-61 18-551-18-557 27-62-27-67 18-581-18-586 27-68-27-72 18-611-18-615 27A-1-27A-3 82-2-82-4 27A-3.2 82-6 27A-4-27A-6 82-7-82-9 27A-11-27A-18 82-41-82-48 27A-18.1 82-49 27A-19-27A-27 82-76-82-84 27A-28-27A-42 82-101-82-115 27A-43-27A-55 82-136-82-148 27A-56 82-177 27A-57 82-176 27A-58-27A-63 82-178-82-183 28-1 98-36 28-2-28-19 98-38-98-55 28-21 98-56 28-22 98-37 28-24-28-38 98-81-98-95 28-39-28-55 98-116-98-132 28-56, 28-57 98-151, 98-152 29-1-29-8 54-1-54-8 29-9-29-16 54-76-54-83 29-17-29-26 54-36-54-45 29-28-29-31 54-46-54-49 30-1-30-7 58-111-58-117 31-1-31-3 58-141-58-143 31-3.1 58-144 31-4-31-7 58-145-58-148 32-1 106-1 32-3-32-6 106-2-106-5 32-8, 32-9 106-6, 106-7 32-9.1 106-36 32-9.3-32-9.8 106-37-106-42 32-10 106-71 32-12-32-16 106-72-106-76 32-17 106-101 32-19-32-23 106-102-106-106 32-24 106-136 32-26-32-31 106-137-106-142 32-31.1, 32-31.2 106-143, 106-144 32-32 106-176 32-34-32-40 106-177-106-183 32-41 106-211 32-43, 32-44 106-212, 106-213 32-46, 32-47 106-214, 106-215 32-48 106-241 32-50-32-54 106-242-106-246 32-54.1 106-247 32-55 106-248 32-56-32-59 106-276-106-279 32-60 106-301 32-63, 32-64 106-302, 106-303 32-66 106-336 32-69-32-72 106-337-106-340 32-72.1-32-72.8 106-376-106-383 32-73-32-76 106-401-106-404 32-78-32-80 106-431-106-433 32-83, 32-84 106-466, 106-467 32-84.1 106-468 32-85 106-491 32-85.1 106-492 32-86 106-493 32-86.1 106-494 32-87 106-495 32-87.1-32-87.5 106-496-106-500 32-88-32-93 106-501-106-506 32-94 106-532 32-94.1 106-531 32-94.2-32-94.5 106-533-106-536 32-94.10 106-507 32-95-32-110 106-571-106-586 32-111-32-119 106-611-106-619 32-120-32-127 106-651-106-658  
CODE DISPOSITION TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1969 Code, as updated through July 8, 1991, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1969 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede July 8, 1991, but which were never included in the 1969 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since July 8, 1991, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
 Date Subject Section  Section 
this Code 11-24-80 Licenses 22-85 14-1 22-38 14-3 22-37 14-6 22-36 14-6.14 22-40 14-7 22-39 14-8-14-40 22-41-22-73 14-40A 22-74 14-41-14-43 22-75-22-77 14-44.1-14-44.3 22-111-22-113 14-45 22-78 14-46 6-1 14-48-14-50 22-79-22-81 14-51 10-67 
22-82 14-52 22-83 14-53 22-84 14-54 22-86  2- 9-81 License tax 14-55.1-14-55.11 82-206-82-216 14-55.13, 14-55.14 82-217, 82-218  9-28-81 Business license ordi- 22-60, 22-63, nance 22-64, 22-68, 22-73, 22-75-22-78, 22-81  3-25-85 Financial service license tax 22-77  6-24-85 Peddler and itinerant merchant license taxes 22-66  7-27-89 Enhanced emergency telephone tax 82-10 11-13-89 Short-term rental business 22-74  8-13-90 Going out of business sales/permit required, etc. 22-85 12-10-90 Penalties and interest for late application and payment on delinquent taxes 22-74 12-14-90 Penalties and interest for late application and payment on delinquent taxes Not Included  1-14-91 22-52 22-74  9-23-91 Issuance of licenses for businesses, etc., for which licenses are required 22-50 10-28-91 Prohibited discharges into public sewers 90-193 11-11-91(1) Authority to transfer funds between several departments to meet unexpected obligations 2-180 11-11-91(2) Creation of certain administrative departments 2-146 11-11-91(3) Payment of tangible personal property taxes and motor decals, generally 82-5  2-10-92 Reissuance of motor vehicle licenses 86-428  2-24-92 Requirements for tax exemptions for elderly and disabled 82-43  3-23-92 Dogs, cats and other animals in city parks or school facilities 14-4  6- 8-92(1) Sewer connection charges 90-128  6- 8-92(2) Erosion and sediment control 8A-1 30-87 8A-2 30-87 8A-3-8A-10 30-88-30-95 8A-11-8A-14 30-116-30-119  6- 8-92(3) Water rates within the city 90-257  6- 8-92(4) Charges for connection to city watermain 90-74  6- 8-92(5) Charges for sewage disposal 16-61 90-303 16-63 90-322  6- 8-92(6) Floodplain provisions 106-534  6-22-92 General subdivision requirements 78-111  8-10-92 Definitions 106-1 10-26-92 Dogs and cats, definitions 4-10.1 14-86 4-12 14-86 14-88 4-14 14-131 4-20 14-137 4-22 14-139 4-23-4-25 14-90-14-92 4-27(a) 14-94 4-27(b) 14-89 4-27(c)-(e) 14-94 4-30, 4-31 14-97, 14-98 4-33-4-35 14-102-14-104 4-35.1-4-35.3 14-151-14-153 4-35.4 14-154, 14-155 11- 9-92 Deposits for utilities 90-237 12-14-92 Amends ch. 2 Not Included 12-14-92(1) Amends combination of departments 2-147 12-14-92(2) Method of appointment for director of finance 2-201  4-26-93(1) Temporary removal and disposition of vehicles involved in accidents 86-375  6-14-93(1) City water main charges 9-74(a)  6-14-93(2) Sewer connection charges 9-128(a)  6-14-93(3) Sewer service charges 90-303(a), (c), 90-322(a)  7-12-93 Adopting ordinance 1-8 Adopting ordinance, p. ix  9-27-93(1) Charitable nonprofit organization sales 22-83.1  9-27-93(2) Sewer use regulations 90-191-90-216  9-27-93(3) Floodplain regulations 106-533(b)  4-25-94 Regional enforcement of motor vehicle license requirements 86-432  6-13-94(1) Water connection charges 90-74(a)  6-13-94(2) Sewer connection charges 90-128(a) 11-14-94(1) Bingo games and raffles       Rpld 10-66-10-70       Added 10-66-10-78 11-14-94(2) Rates 98-151  2-13-95 Service charge on certain dwellings for police and fire protection and for collection and disposal of refuse 82-7  6-12-95(1) Enhanced emergency telephone tax 82-10(a)  6-12-95(2) Charges for sewage disposal 90-303, 90-322  7-10-95(1) Massage 22-136, 22-140(b)  7-10-95(2) Precinct G or South Salem No. 2 Precinct 26-44  8-28-95 Tangible personal property taxes and motor vehicle decals 82-5 10-23-95 Child care 106-1       Added 106-71(6), (7), 106-101(8), (9), 106-136(11), (12), 106-176(11), (12), 106-211(5), (6), 106-241(9)-(11), 106-276(6), 106-301(6), 106-336(8), 106-377(7), 106-401(3), 106-431(20) 11-13-95(1) Keeping hogs, pigs, or swine 14-166 11-13-95(2) Precinct C or North Salem No. 2 Precinct 26-40 11-13-95(3) Precinct J or Beverly Heights Precinct 26-47 11-17-95 Floodplain regulations 106-531, 106-533(b), (d), 106-534(b)(8)       Rpld 106-535(b)(2)-(5)       Added 106-535(f)  2-12-96 Sewer use 90-193(b) 90-194(b)  3-11-96 Certificate of compliance 18-41  6-10-96(1) Charges for connections to city water mains 90-74(a)  6-10-96(2) Sewer connection charges generally 90-128(a)  6-10-96(3) Limitation on location of building to be erected for use as a residence 106-506 11-11-96 Beekeeping       Added 14-181-14-186 12- 9-96(1) Alcoholic beverages       Dltd 6-1 12- 9-96(2) Businesses 22-1 22-36-22-87 22-111-22-113 22-136-22-141 22-166-22-173  2- 9-97 Precinct B or North Salem No. 1 Precinct 26-39  3-10-97(1) Show and sale 22-84(2)  3-10-97(2) Removal of trash, garbage, etc. 30-4  3-10-97(3) Payment of tangible personal property taxes and motor vehicle decals       Added 82-5(d)(5)  3-10-97(4) Regional enforcement of motor vehicle license requirements 86-432(c)  3-10-97(5) Cutting grass, weeds, etc. 94-1  6- 9-97 Water rate schedule 90-257  6-23-97 Carrying concealed weapons       Added 58-145(c)  9- 8-97 Telecommunications equipment 106-1       Added 106-36(9)       Added 106-71(8)       Added 106-101(10)       Added 106-136(13)       Added 106-176(13)       Added 106-211(7)       Added 106-241(12)       Added 106-276(7)       Added 106-301(7)       Added 106-336(9)       Added 106-377(8)       Added 106-401(4)       Added 106-431(21)       Added 106-492.1       Added 106-494(c)  9-22-97 Noise prohibitions 30-1  4-13-98 Child care 106-1 106-71(7) 106-101(9) 106-136(12) 106-176(12) 106-211(6) 106-241(10)  6- 8-98 Child care 106-1  7-13-98 Transient lodging tax 82-137  8-10-98 Parking prohibited in specified places 86-246(16), (17)  9-14-98 Board of zoning appeals generally 106-2 10-12-98 Filing and advertising fee 106-498 12-14-98 Detour of trucks       Added 86-229  6-14-99(1) Enhanced emergency telephone tax 82-10(a)  6-14-99(2) Charges for connection to city water main 90-74(a)  6-14-99(3) Sewer connection charges 90-128(a)  8-23-99 Sewer use; penalty for violation 90-214(a)-(d)       Added 90-214(e)  9-13-99 Cross-connections 90-76 10-11-99 Personal property taxes 82-5(b)(2)e.  1-10-00 Public trees       Added 95-1-95-9  2-14-00(1) Voting precinct A 26-38(b)  2-14-00(2) Voting precinct H 26-45(b)  6-12-00 Tax on prepared food and beverages 82-101-82-113       Rpld 82-114, 82-115  7-10-00(1) Safety equipment for mopeds       Added 86-189  7-10-00(2) Bicycle helmet requirements       Added 86-190  8-28-00 Water rates within city 90-257 10- 9-00(1) Public utilities 22-111 10- 9-00(2) Utility service tax 82-76-82-84 11-27-00 Photographers outside of the state 22-81(a)  6-25-01(1) Amends the water rates and charges within the city 90-257  6-25-01(2) Amends the requirements for tax relief exemption for the elderly and disabled 82-43  7-23-01(1) Amends compensation of members of planning commission 62-39  7-23-01(2) Amends certain sections pertaining to water and sewage disposal 1 90-91, 90-193, 90-194(b), 90-199(b)(1)-(3), (f)(1)-(20), 90-204(g)  2-11-02 Amends regulations pertaining to the collection and disposition of refuse 70-42, 70-44, 70-45, 70-48  6-10-02(1) Revises the lodging tax 82-137  6-10-02(2) Revises regulations pertaining to license tax for motor vehicles and carriers 86-416-86-419       Rpld 86-420 86-421-86-425 86-428  8-26-02 Adds regulations pertaining to cigarette taxes       Added 82-240-82-245 10-14-02 Courthouse security assessment       Added 1-13 10-28-02 Utility service tax 82-77, 82-78 11-11-02 B-2 District regulations 106-301(3)  1-13-03 Erosion and sediment control 30-86-30-95 30-116-30-118       Rpld 30-119  4-28-03 Measurement, sampling, etc., report of discharges 90-203(a), (e)  6- 9-03(1) Charges for connections to city water mains 90-74(a)  6- 9-03(2) Sewer connection charges 90-128(a)  6- 9-03(3) Charges for sewage disposal 90-303(a), (c) 90-322(a)  7-28-03 Courthouse security assessment 1-13  6-28-04 Emergency services       Added 2-319-2-333  1-10-05 Floodplain regulations 106-533(b) 106-533(c)(1)  3-14-05(1) Subdivision Ordinance       Rpld 78-1-78-5, 78-36-78-42, 78-76-78-84, 78-111-78-133, 78-161-78-168, 78-191-78-193, 78-211-78-214       Added 78-100-78-107, 78-200, 78-201, 78-204-78-206, 78-300, 78-400-78-408, 78-416, 78-421, 78-500, 78-501, 78-503, 78-508, 78-600-78-632, 78-634, 78-636, 78-641, 78-642, 78-700-78-706  3-14-05(2) Zoning Ordinance       Rpld 106-1-106-7, 106-36-106-42, 106-71-106-76, 106-101-106-106, 106-136-106-144, 106-176-106-183, 106-211-106-215, 106-241-106-248, 106-276-106-279, 106-301-106-303, 106-336-106-340, 106-376-106-383, 106-401-106-404, 106-431-106-433, 106-466-106-468, 106-491-106-507, 106-531-106-536, 106-571-106-586, 106-611-106-619, 106-651-106-658       Added 106-100-106-112 106-200-106-228 106-300-106-316 106-400-106-406 106-500-106-528 106-600-106-602  6-13-05(1) Charges for connection to city water main 90-74(a)  6-13-05(2) Sewer connection charges generally 90-128(a)  6-13-05(3) Water rates 90-257  6-13-05(4) Sewage charges/Domestic and industrial 90-303(a), (c)       Added 90-303(d) 90-322(a)  6-27-05 Signs 66-252-66-258  7-11-05(1) Location and design of fences 106-406.19(B)  7-11-05(2) Definition-Business entity or unit 106-600(C) 11-14-05 Tax relief for elderly and disabled 82-41 82-43(3) 12-12-05(1) Requirements for design standards       Added 78-610(c) 12-12-05(2) Minimum setback requirements 106-202.3(B)1. 12-12-05(3) Minimum setback requirements 106-208.3(B)1. 12-12-05(4) Development and use in floodplain 106-226.5(A) 12-12-05(5) Single-family dwelling; detached 106-304.15(A)1., 3. 12-12-05(6) Corner and double frontage lots       Added 106-406.15(B) 12-12-05(7) Definitions 106-600(C)  1-23-06(1) Voting place 26-38(b)  1-23-06(2) Prohibited discharges generally 90-193(b)(9)  6-12-06 Charges for sewage disposal 90-303 90-322(a)  8-28-06 Changing voting place of Precinct F or Hidden Valley Precinct 26-43(b) 10- 9-06(1) Adult Business       Added ch. 58, art. VII, 58-180-58-191 10- 9-06(2) Adult Business 106-214.2(b)5.       Added 106-310.17 106-602.9  6-11-07 Courthouse security assessment 1-13  6-25-07 Stormwater Management       Added ch. 30, art. IV, 30-131-30-159  9-10-07 Floodplain Overlay District 106-226.4(A) 106-226.7(B), (C) 106-226.8(A)3.       Added 106-226.8(A)4. 11-26-07 Illicit storm sewer system discharge       Added ch. 30, art. V, §§ 30-181-30-188  2-11-08 Urban forest overlay district       Added 106-230  2-25-08 Fire protection and prevention       Rpld 34-1-34-6, 34-36-34-41, 34-61-34-63, 34-86, 34-87, 34-111-34-116, 34-136-34-139, 34-161, 34-162, 34-201-34-205, 34-226-34-230, 34-251-34-255,       Added 34-1-34-11, 34-36-34-40, 34-61-34-63  3-10-08(1) Design standards and public improvements       Added 78-600(c)  3-10-08(2) Design standards and public improvements       Added 78-607(b)  3-10-08(3) Design standards and public improvements; stormwater management 78-636(a)  3-10-08(4) Mixed use structures-DBD 106-210.2(A)7.       Added 106-314.2 106-602.13  3-10-08(5) Minimum standards and improvements required 106-400.9(F), (G)  3-10-08(6) Interior landscaping standards for parking lots 106-402.13(A)  3-24-08(1) Voting places 26-42(b)  3-24-08(2) Minimum lot width-RSF       Added 106-202.3(A)3.  3-24-08(3) Minimum lot width-RMF       Added 106-204.3(A)3.  9- 8-08(1) Precincts; voting places 26-41(b)  9- 8-08(2) Precincts; voting places 26-46(b)  9- 8-08(3) District regulations 106-202.3(B)1. 106-208.3(B)1. 12- 8-08 Taxation; service charge for police and fire protection, and collection and disposal of refuse 82-7  5-11-09 Taxicab rates 98-151 11-23-09 Homestay inn; 106-310.9(A)1. commercial use types 106-602.9  2- 8-2010(1) Animals; dogs and cats       Rpld 14-1       Rnbd 14-2       as 14-1       Rpld 14-3       Rnbd 14-4       as 14-2 14-86       Rpld 14-87 14-88(a), (c) 14-90(d) 14-91(SLR) 14-92(tit.) 14-93(tit.) 14-94-14-96 14-97(tit.), (a), (b)       Rpld 14-97(c) 14-98 14-101(tit.) 14-102 14-103(tit.)       Rpld 14-151-14-155       Added 14-187-14-192  2- 8-2010(2) Licenses for dogs and cats 14-131, 14-132, 14-134-14-137, 14-138(tit.)  6-28-2010(1) Water connection charges generally 90-74(a)  6-28-2010(2) Utility rates within city 90-257  6-28-2010(3) Domestic and industrial sewage; charges for disposal       Rpld 90-303(a)-(d)       Added 90-303(tit.), (a), (b)       Rpld 90-322  7-12-2010(1) Taxation; administrative fees and costs for collection       Added 82-5.1  7-12-2010(2) Adding Ch. 82, Art. IX, Recordation tax       Added 82-255, 82-256  9-13-2010(3) Fee for inmate processing       Added 1-14  9-13-2010(4) Reimbursement of expenses incurred in responding to certain traffice incidents       Added 86-97  9-13-2010(5) District regulations-Permitted uses; Outpatient mental health and substance abuse clinics; Definitions and use types 106-210.2(A)4., (B)4. 106-212.2(A)4., (B)4. 106-214.2(A)4., (B)4. 106-216.2(A)4., (B)4.       Added 106-308.1 106-602.7  9-27-2010 Businesses-License due dates; Penalties 22-46.1(a), (b) 22-52(c)  2-14-2011(1) Permitted uses-RB; Site development regulations-RB 106-208.2(A)2., 4., 5., (B)2., 4., 5. 106-208.3(B)1.       Added 106-208.3(E)  2-14-2011(2) Permitted uses-HM 106-220.2(B)5.  3-14-2011(1) Permitted uses-RSF; Accessory uses/residential use types-RSF; Residential use types 106-202.2(A)2.       Added 106-316.3(B) 106-602.3  3-14-2011(2) Residential use types 106-602.3  4-11-2011(1) Stopping, standing and parking       Rpld 86-246-86-260       Added 86-246-86-265  4-11-2011(2) Sewer use       Rpld 90-191-90-216       Added 90-191-90-211  6-13-2011 Confinement of animals in vehicles prohibited       Added 14-105 10-24-2011 Water emergencies       Added 90-391-90-397 12-12-2011 Tax on prepared foods and beverages 82-102  1-23-2012 Industrial Park Overlay District       Added 106-232, 106-232.1, 106-232.3, 106-232.5, 106-232.7  2-13-2012 Water rates within city 90-257  2-24-2012 Changing the name of the Industrial Development Authority to the Economic Development Authority 1-4       Added App. C, Art. III  2-27-2012 Credits for water leakage 90-259  6-25-2012(1) Poultry generally       Added 14-38       Added 14-39       Added 14-169  6-25-2012(2) Urban agriculture; keeping of chickens       Added 106-316.3(C)       Added 106-318, 106-318.1       Added 106-602.1 (Cross ref.) 10- 8-2012 Townhouse development standards 106-304.17 10-22-2012(1) Tax on prepared food and beverages 82-101 82-106 82-110(tit.) 82-111       Added 82-113(b)       Rnbd 82-113(b)       as 82-113(c) 10-22-2012(2) Transient lodging tax 82-136 82-137 82-139 82-140 82-143(tit.) 82-144       Added 82-146(b)       Rnbd 82-146(b)       as 82-146(c)  2- 7-2013 District regulations 106-214.2(A)5. 106-218.2(B)5. 106-220.2(B)5. 106-404.17(E) 106-602.9  3-25-2013 Payment of tangible personal property taxes and motor vehicle decals 82-5(tit.), (d) License fee for motor vehicles, trailers, and semitrailers Ch. 86, Art. IX(tit.) 86-416-86-419 86-421-86-425       Rpld 86-426       Rpld 86-427 86-428(tit.) 86-429(tit.) 86-430, 86-431       Rpld 86-432  5-28-2013 Signs 66-1 66-6 66-37 66-72(c)       Added 66-77 66-162 66-254(1)a., c., e., f. 66-256(1)h., (3)a., b., d.       Added 66-258(5) 66-259  6-10-2013 Cigarette tax 82-242  6- 9-2014 Stormwater management       Rpld 
      Added 30-131-30-159 
30-131-30-161  8-11-2014 Permitted uses in Light Manufacturing and Heavy Manufacturing Districts 106-218.2(B) 
106-220.2(B)  8-25-2014 Assessment for electronic summons system       Added 1-15  2- 9-2015 Distribution of handbills, etc.       Added 86-17  3-23-2015 Precinct F or Hidden Valley Precinct 26-43(b) 10-12-2015 Stormwater management plan 30-141(1) 30-145(c) 11- 9-2015(1) Show and sale; flea markets 22-84 11- 9-2015(2) Financial services 22-77(c)  1-25-2016(1) Zoning 106-210.2(A)5. 106-210.3(B)1. 106-212.2(B)5. 106-212.3(B)1. 106-218.2(B)6. 106-218.3(C) 106-220.2(B)6. 106-220.3(C)       Added 106-310.19       Added 106-312.3 106-404.17(E), (F) 106-602.9 106-602.11  1-25-2016(2) Precinct A or Conehurst Precinct 26-38(b)  6-13-2016 Application for retention of tax-exempt status of certain property 82-8(a)  7-25-2016 Law enforcement officers       Added 86-16  8-22-2016(1) Light manufacturing district 106-218.2(B)5.  8-22-2016(2) Heavy manufacturing district 106-220.2(B)5.  8-22-2016(3) Manufactured home parks 106-304.9(A)2.  8-22-2016(4) Maintenance of landscaping 106-402.17  8-22-2016(5) Buffer yards 106-402.3(C)(table 1)  9-26-2016(1) Tax on prepared food and beverages 82-101 82-103 82-107(b) 82-109-82-111 82-113(a), (b)  9-26-2016(2) Transient lodging tax 82-138, 82-139 82-142 82-146(a), (b) 82-147 11-14-2016(1) Admissions tax interest/penalties 82-210 11-14-2016(2) Water use charges 90-74 90-128(a)       Added 90-212 90-236(b) 90-237(b)(6), (c), (d) 90-238(a) 11-14-2016(3) Taxicab driver's license fees/schedule 98-126  1- 9-2017 Fire prevention and protection 34-6 34-40       Added 34-41, 34-42 34-63  1-23-2017(2) Zoning 106-200.2(A)1. 106-210.2(A)3., 5., 7., (B)3. 106-212.1 106-212.2(B)3., 5.       Added 106-213, 106-213.1-106-213.3 106-214.2(B)4. 106-218.2(B)6. 106-220.2(B)6.       Added 106-306.5(B)       Rnbd 106-306.5(B)       as 106-306.5(C)       Added 106-310.21       Added 106-312.5 106-314.2 106-314.5(F), (R)       Added 106-400(A)6. 106-402.3(C)(table)       Added 106-404.11(B)-(D) 106-404.17(A), (E), (F)       Added 106-406.25 106-528.1 106-528.9 106-602.1 106-602.9 106-602.11 106-602.13  2-13-2017(1) Zoning 106-212.2(A)7. 106-314.2(C)       Added 106-314.2(E)       Added 106-402.7(D), (E) 106-404.1(A)  2-13-2017(2) Signs       Rpld 66-1-66-7, 66-36-66-45, 66-71-66-77, 66-101-66-104, 66-126-66-128, 66-146, 66-161-66-164, 66-181-66-189, 66-211-66-221, 66-251-66-259       Added 66-1, 66-3, 66-5, 66-7, 66-9, 66-11, 66-13, 66-15, 66-37, 66-39, 66-41, 66-71, 66-73, 66-75, 66-77, 66-79, 66-81, 66-83, 66-85, 66-101, 66-103, 66-105, 66-107, 66-151  7-10-2017(1) Zoning 106-218.2(B)5. 106-220.2(B)5. 106-310.19  8-14-2017(1) Zoning 106.210.2(B)5. 106-212.1 106-212.2(A)5. 106-214.2(A)5., (B)5. 106-218.2(A)5., (B)5. 106-220.2(A)5., (B)5.       Added 106-310.23       Added 106-402.1(B)       Added 106-402.29 106-602.9  9-25-2017(1) Administrative fees and costs for collection 82-5.1 11-13-2017(1) Massage parlors       Added 58-200-58-213 11-13-2017(2) Massage       Dltd 22-136-22-141, 
22-166-22-173       Added 22-136, 22-137  2-26-2018(1) Removal of defective wire or appliance and unsafe conditions 18-189 Metering 90-278       Added 90-280  4- 9-2018(1) Dogs and cats 14-131(6)  4- 9-2018(2) Signs 66-5 66-7(B)1. 66-103(B) 66-105(A)  4- 9-2018(3) Zoning 106-200.2(A)2. 106-202.2(A)2. 106-204.2(A)2. 106-208.2(A)2., 3., (B)3. 106-210.2(A)4. 106-210.3(B)1. 106-213.2(B)2. 106-214.2(A)3., (B)3. 106-216.2(A)3. 106-218.2(A)3., 5., (B)3. 106-220.2(A)3., 5., (B)3. 106-304.15 106-308       Dltd 106-402.25       Added 106-406.27 106-600(C)  5-14-2018(1) Zoning 106-210.2(B)3.       Added 106-210.3(E)       Added 106-306.7  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Code of Virginia. 
Code of 
Virgina 
Section Section  
this Code 1-10 et seq. Ch. 1 1-13.3 1-2 1-13.3:1 1-2 1-13.6, 1-13.7 1-2 1-13.9 1-6 1-13.13 1-2 1-13.15, 1-13.16 1-2 1-13.19 1-2 1-13.23 1-2 1-13.28 1-2 1-13.32 1-2 1-16 1-9 1-17.1 1-3 2.1-21 2-36 2.1-340 et seq. Ch. 2 2.1-344 Char. § 4.6 2.1-517 Ch. 18 2.1-639.1 et seq. Ch. 2 Char. § 4.10 2.1-639.14 2-88 2.2-3704 106-528.1 2.2-3707(F) 106-528.1 3.1-365 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II Ch. 38, Art. II, 
Div. 2 3.1-562.4 Ch. 22 3.1-796.66 14-3 3.1-796.66 et seq. Ch. 14 Ch. 14, Art. IV 3.1-796.87, 
3.1-796.88 14-131, 14-132 3.1-796.90- 
3.1-796.92 14-135-14-137 3.1-796.93 14-88 3.1-796.97:1 14-95 3.1-796.98 14-87 3.1-796.116 14-91 3.1-796.116 et seq. 14-1 3.1-796.121 14-93 3.1-796.122 14-3 3.1-796.127 14-90 3.1-796.128 Ch. 14 3.2-6540(G) 14-131 tit. 4 6-1 tit. 4.1 et seq. 22-82 4.1-100 et seq. 22-82 4-2 6-1, 6-2 4-45 et seq. Ch. 6 4-78 6-2 4-96 Ch. 6 4-98.1, 4-98.2 10-31 4-99 6-1 8.01-293 18-38 tit. 10.1 90-76 tit. 10.1, ch. 6, art. 1.1 30-181 tit. 10.1, ch. 11 30-133 10.1-560 30-117 10.1-560 et seq. Ch. 30 Ch. 30, Art. III 30-86 10.1-561.1 30-87 10.1-566 Ch. 30, Art. IV, Div. 4 10.1-603.1 et seq. 30-131 30-138 10.1-603.3 Ch. 30 10.1-604 et seq. 30-89 10.1-711 Ch. 102 10.1-1100 et seq. 30-133 10.1-1163 10-89 10.1-1163(B) 30-133 10.1-1321 Ch. 30 Ch. 30, Art. II 10.1-1412 Ch. 70 10.1-1425 Ch. 38 11-14 10-73 11-35 et seq. Ch. 2 Char. § 8.1 14.1-47.2 Char. § 4.5 14.1-66 Char. Chs. 1-12 tit. 15.2 Char. Chs. 1-12 Char. § 2.4 15.2-1 Char. Chs. 1-12 15.2-7.3:1 Ch. 2 15.2-8 Ch. 2 15.2-11 30-4 Ch. 70 Ch. 94 15.2-11.02 Ch. 70 15.2-11.03 Ch. 86 15.2-11.2 Ch. 18 15.2-11.3 Ch. 102 15.2-11.4 Ch. 18 15.2-11.5 Ch. 70 15.2-11.5:01 Ch. 2 15.2-11.5:1- 
15.2-11.5:3 Ch. 70 15.2-11.6 Ch. 22 15.2-13 1-7 Ch. 2 15.2-13.2 Ch. 2 15.2-14(1), (9) Ch. 74 15.2-14(5) Ch. 30 Ch. 38 15.2-14.1, 15.2-14.2 Ch. 94 15.2-15(1) Ch. 18 18-3 15.2-16 Ch. 74 15.2-16.2 Ch. 74 15.2-18.3 Ch. 2 15.2-28 Ch. 86, Art. XI 15.2-28.01, 
15.2-28.02 Ch. 70 15.2-28.1 Ch. 70 15.2-28.2 58-11 15.2-28.3 Ch. 22 15.2-28.4 Ch. 94 15.2-28.5 Ch. 14 15.2-29 Ch. 18 Ch. 18, Art. VI 15.2-29.1:1 Ch. 14 15.2-29.4 Ch. 2 15.2-29.11 Ch. 18 15.2-29.15 Ch. 58 Ch. 58, Art. V 15.2-29.21 Ch. 30 15.2-37 et seq. Ch. 90 15.2-37.3 Ch. 1 1-1 15.2-37.3:1, 
15.2-37.3:2 Ch. 22 15.2-37.3:3 Ch. 98 15.2-37.3:8 Ch. 42 15.2-37.3:9, 
15.2-37.3:12 Ch. 22 15.2-37.4 Ch. 26 15.2-38 Ch. 2 15.2-40.1 Ch. 26 15.2-48.1 Ch. 42 15.2-51 et seq. Char. § 6.8 15.2-131 et seq. Ch. 46 15.2-131.12 Ch. 38 15.2-132 Ch. 6 86-96 15.2-133.01 Ch. 46 46-6 98-55 15.2-133.01:1 Ch. 46 46-6 15.2-138 46-3, 46-4 15.2-159.8 Ch. 2 15.2-159.8 et seq. Ch. 2 15.2-160 Char. § 8.3 15.2-227.1 et seq. Ch. 2 15.2-243 et seq. 2-258 15.2-257 et seq. Ch. 18 15.2-282 Ch. 70 15.2-291.4 Ch. 38 15.2-292 Ch. 30 Ch. 90, Art. III, 
Div. 2, Ch. 90, 
Art. III, Div. 3 90-79 15.2-292 et seq. Ch. 90 15.2-307 et seq. Ch. 22 15.2-317 et seq. Ch. 90 Ch. 90, Art. III, 
Div. 3 15.2-318 Ch. 30 15.2-320 et seq. Ch. 90, Art. III, 
Div. 3 15.2-332.1 et seq. Ch. 90 Ch. 90, Art. III, 
Div. 2 15.2-363 et seq. Ch. 74 15.2-427 et seq. Ch. 62 15.2-427.1 et seq. 62-36 15.2-437 et seq. 62-36 15.2-446.1 et seq. 62-1 15.2-458 et seq. Ch. 74 15.2-501 Char. Chs. 1-12 15.2-796 Ch. 46 15.2-812 Ch. 2 15.2-833 Char. Chs. 1-12 15.2-833 et seq. Char. Chs. 1-12 15.2-836.2 Char. Chs. 1-12 15.2-837 Char. Chs. 1-12 15.2-837-15.2-915 Char. § 2.2 15.2-839 Char. § 2.1 15.2-840 Char. Chs. 1-12 15.2-865, 15.2-866 Ch. 22 15.2-867 74-8 15.2-900 66-5 15.2-901 Ch. 1 1-7 15.2-901 et seq. 1-7 15.2-906 66-5 15.2-908-15.2-915.2 Char. § 2.2 15.2-910 Ch. 22 15.2-912 Ch. 22 15.2-913 Ch. 22 15.2-914 Ch. 22 15.2-958 Ch. 22 15.2-1113 Ch. 22 15.2-1114 Ch. 22 15.2-1115 66-5 15.2-1542 106-528.1 15.2-2100 et seq. Ch. 22 15.2-2201 106-528.1 15.2-2204 106-528.1 15.2-2314 106-528.1 106-528.9 16.1-253 58-112 16.1-253.1 46-4 58-112 16.1-253.4 46-4 16.1-278.2- 
16.1-278.6 58-112 16.1-278.8 58-112 16.1-278.14 58-112 16.1-278.15 58-112 16.1-279.1 46-4 58-112 17.1-279.1 1-15 18.2-11 Ch. 1 1-7 18.2-27, 18.2-28 58-9, 58-10 18.2-51 et seq. 58-8 18.2-95, 18.2-96 58-26 18.2-103 58-29 18.2-105, 18.2-106 58-30, 58-31 18.2-119, 18.2-120 58-112, 58-113 18.2-121 58-117 18.2-125 58-115 18.2-128 58-116 18.2-130 58-114 18.2-132-18.2-136 58-112 18.2-146-18.2-148 58-35-58-37 18.2-174 46-9 18.2-179 58-33 18.2-212 58-7 18.2-212.1 86-348 18.2-223, 18.2-224 Ch. 22 18.2-264 58-18 18.2-266 et seq. 86-96 18.2-268 Ch. 6 18.2-280 58-141 18.2-282 58-144 18.2-284 58-148 18.2-286 58-141 18.2-308 58-145 18.2-309 58-147 18.2-310 46-6 18.2-311 58-146 18.2-318 Ch. 38 18.2-319 58-12 18.2-323 Ch. 14 18.2-324 70-4 18.2-325, 18.2-326 58-61, 58-62 18.2-329-18.2-331 58-63-58-65 18.2-334 58-66 18.2-336 58-67 18.2-340.1 10-66 22-83.1 18.2-340.1 et seq. Ch. 10 18.2-340.2 10-67 18.2-340.3 10-68 18.2-340.4 10-69 18.2-340.5 10-70 18.2-340.6 10-71 18.2-340.7 10-72 18.2-340.9 10-73 18.2-340.9A 10-77 18.2-340.10 10-74 18.2-340.11 10-75 18.2-340.12 10-76 18.2-340.13 10-77 18.2-340.14 10-78 18.2-344 58-3, 58-4 18.2-345 58-21 18.2-346-18.2-350 58-86-58-90 18.2-361 58-86 58-88 18.2-365 58-2 18.2-365, 18.2-366 58-4, 58-5 18.2-387 58-17 18.2-388 58-27 18.2-389 Ch. 58 18.2-403.1 et seq. Ch. 14 18.2-404 et seq. Ch. 58, Art. VI 18.2-405-18.2-407 58-171-58-173 18.2-409 58-175 18.2-410 Ch. 46 18.2-410-18.2-412 58-176-58-178 18.2-415 58-13, 58-14 18.2-416 58-1 18.2-427 58-28 18.2-432, 18.2-433 Ch. 10 18.2-460 58-25 18.2-461 58-15 18.2-463 46-8 18.2-477 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. II 18.2-510 Ch. 14 19.2-59 86-9 19.2-152.1 Ch. 22 22-1 19.2-232 et seq. 22-56 19.2-354 et seq. 1-7 19.2-393 et seq. Ch. 38 20-61 et seq. 46-57 20-103 58-112 22.1-50 Char. § 11.2 22.1-53 Char. § 11.2 24.1-36 26-36 24.1-86 et seq. Ch. 26 24.1-90 et seq. Ch. 26 tit. 25, ch. 1.1 Char. § 2.4 tit. 27, ch. 3 34-42 27-34.2 34-38 27-36 34-38 27-97 34-63 27-98 34-61 29.1-526-29.1-528 Ch. 14 29.1-744 Ch. 102 29.1-744.1 Ch. 102 tit. 31, ch. 4 2-328 32.1-48.1 et seq. 14-87 32.1-163 et seq. Ch. 90 32.1-202 Ch. 38 tit. 33 Char. § 2.4 tit. 33, ch. 1 Char. § 2.4 33-70.1 Char. § 2.4 33-70.3-33-70.11 Char. § 2.4 tit. 33.1 Char. § 2.4 33.1-119 Char. § 2.4 33.1-121-33.1-129 Char. § 2.4 33.1-224 et seq. Ch. 74 33.1-346 70-2 33.1-348 30-41 Ch. 86, Art. XI 86-471 33.1-351 et seq. Ch. 66 35.1-1 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II Ch. 38, Art. II, 
Div. 2 Ch. 54, Art. II Title 36 106-600 36-70 et seq. Ch. 18 36-85.11 Ch. 54 36-96.1 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. II 36-96.2-36-96.5 42-37-42-40 36-96.7 42-41 36-96.9 42-42 36-96.18 42-42 36-96.21 Ch. 42 36-97 et seq. Ch. 18 18-36 36-99.1 Ch. 18 37.1-67.1 46-4 38.2-120 10-73 38.2-2400 et seq. 22-1 42.1-33 et seq. Ch. 50 42.1-76 et seq. Ch. 2 tit. 46.2 86-370 86-425 tit. 46.2, ch. 6 14-105 46.2-3.2-46.2-1215 86-259 46.2-100 82-176 86-1 86-93 86-189 86-190 46.2-103 86-9 46.2-111(A)- 
46.2-111(C) 86-301-86-303 46.2-113 86-5 86-45 46.2-121 86-246(16), (17) 46.2-300 86-86 46.2-300 et seq. 86-89 46.2-300-46.2-363 86-122 46.2-301, 46.2-302 86-87, 86-88 46.2-303-46.2-309 86-86 46.2-304 86-87 46.2-310 Ch. 98 Ch. 98, Art. II, 
Div. 3 46.2-349, 46.2-350 86-89 46.2-357 86-87 46.2-364 et seq. 86-373 46.2-368 86-185 46.2-389 86-123 46.2-392, 46.2-393 86-122, 86-123 46.2-398 86-118 86-120 86-122, 86-123 86-373 46.2-472 98-38 46.2-600 86-250 46.2-600 et seq. 86-11 46.2-662 et seq. 86-396 46.2-731 86-246 46.2-739 86-425 46.2-739(B) 86-247 46.2-752 86-429 46.2-752 et seq. Ch. 86 46.2-752(G) 86-426 46.2-752(H) 86-425 46.2-755 86-425 46.2-800 86-3 46.2-801 86-2 46.2-802 86-161 46.2-803, 46.2-804 86-163, 86-164 46.2-807 86-162 46.2-811 86-92 46.2-816 86-172 46.2-817 86-120 46.2-820 86-180 46.2-825-46.2-827 86-181-86-183 46.2-829 86-184 46.2-830 86-62, 86-63 46.2-831, 46.2-832 86-68, 86-69 46.2-833, 46.2-834 86-65, 86-66 46.2-837, 46.2-838 86-165, 86-166 46.2-840-46.2-843 86-167-86-170 46.2-845, 46.2-846 86-173, 86-174 46.2-848-46.2-850 86-175-86-177 46.2-851 86-179 46.2-852 86-116 46.2-853-46.2-864 86-117 46.2-865 86-118 46.2-868 86-119 46.2-869 86-121 46.2-870 86-141 46.2-873 86-141 46.2-873-46.2-875 86-141 46.2-873-46.2-878 86-141 46.2-882 86-142 86-185 46.2-884 86-94 46.2-885(B) 86-95 46.2-888-46.2-891 86-252-86-255 46.2-894 86-366 46.2-894-46.2-897 86-373 46.2-895-46.2-902 86-367-86-374 46.2-903-46.2-908 86-188 46.2-909-46.2-911 86-93 46.2-920 86-183-86-185 46.2-921, 46.2-922 86-186, 86-187 46.2-923, 46.2-924 86-321, 86-322 46.2-926-46.2-928 86-323-86-325 46.2-929 86-328 46.2-931 86-17 46.2-932 86-326 46.2-933, 46.2-934 86-346, 86-347 46.2-935 86-327 46.2-936 86-41 46.2-940 86-41, 86-42 46.2-941 86-249 46.2-1022- 
46.2-1024 86-184, 86-185 46.2-1030 86-301 46.2-1047 86-395 46.2-1049, 46.2-1050 86-393, 86-394 46.2-1052(A) 86-426 46.2-1060 86-392 46.2-1081 86-169 46.2-1090 86-117 46.2-1121 86-398 46.2-1155 86-397 46.2-1156 86-396 46.2-1158 86-10 46.2-1172, 46.2-1173 86-10 46.2-1200 et seq. Ch. 86 86-261 46.2-1212 86-375 46.2-1213 86-261 46.2-1215 86-262 86-263 46.2-1216 Ch. 86 46.2-1217 86-262 46.2-1220 Ch. 86 86-4 46.2-1225 86-248 86-249 46.2-1239 86-250 46.2-1241 86-247 46.2-1300 86-45 46.2-1300 et seq. Ch. 86 46.2-1301 86-6 46.2-1302 86-391 46.2-1304 Ch. 86, Art. IV, 
Div. 6 46.2-1309 86-64 46.2-1313 Ch. 6 86-96 tit. 48 14-2 49-1 Ch. 2 53.1-120 1-13 53.1-128 Ch. 46, Art. II, 
Div. 2 54.1-400 et seq. 30-86 30-141 54.1-1117 Ch. 18 54.1-2100 et seq. 42-36 54.1-4000 et seq. 22-80 54.1-4111 Ch. 22 54.1-4200 et seq. Ch. 22 55-202 et seq. Ch. 14 55-248.49 Ch. 54 55-298.1 et seq. 14-168 55-336 et seq. Ch. 78 56-257 et seq. Ch. 74 56-291.3:1 et seq. Ch. 98 56-412.1 86-453 56-414 et seq. 86-451, 86-452 tit. 58.1 22-61, 22-62 22-66 22-70 22-72 22-79, 22-80 22-84 58.1-3.1 22-48 58.1-6 et seq. Ch. 82 58.1-15 30-146 tit. 58.1, ch. 31, art. I 82-110 58.1-520 et seq. Ch. 82 58.1-600 et seq. 82-115 82-176 82-182 58.1-605 82-179 58.1-605 et seq. Ch. 82 58.1-609.7(2) 82-182 58.1-1208 et seq. Ch. 82 58.1-3000 Ch. 82 58.1-3210 et seq. Ch. 82, Art. II 58.1-3222 82-9 58.1-3310 et seq. 82-7 58.1-3370 Char. § 2.6 58.1-3370-58.1-3389 Char. § 2.6 58.1-3382 Char. § 2.6 58.1-3400 et seq. 82-7 58.1-3503 82-176 58.1-3510 82-176 58.1-3510.1 Ch. 82, Art. VI 82-176 58.1-3510.2 82-183 58.1-3600 et seq. 82-6 82-8 58.1-3605 82-6 82-8 58.1-3606(A)(1) 82-7 58.1-3700 et seq. Ch. 22 Ch. 22, Art. II 22-39 58.1-3715 22-36 22-43.1(3) 22-64(b) 58.1-3716 22-69 58.1-3724 22-1 58.1-3726 22-62 58.1-3727 22-81 58.1-3733 22-65 58.1-3805 et seq. 82-2 58.1-3812 82-82 58.1-3812 et seq. Ch. 82, Art. III 58.1-3813 82-10 58.1-3840 Ch. 82, Art. IV, 
Ch. 82, Art. V Ch. 82, Art. VII 82-115 82-210 58.1-3900 et seq. 82-181 58.1-3906 82-107 58.1-3919 82-5.1 58.1-3982 Char. § 2.6 58.1-3984 Char. § 2.6 82-7 tit. 62.1, ch. 3.1, art. 2.3 30-131 62.1-44.2 et seq. 30-137 Ch. 90 Ch. 90, Art. III, 
Div. 2 62.1-44.15:24 et seq. 30-137 62.1-44.15:35 30-141 62.1-44.15:40 30-148 62.1-44.15:58 30-148 62.1-155 et seq. Ch. 102  
