


THE CHARTER*

CHAPTER I. CITY INCORPORATED

Section 1    Body politic; name; corporate powers granted; corporate boundaries.

Section 2    Term of those holding office at time of adoption of Charter.

CHAPTER II. GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION

Section 3    How vested.

Section 4    (Repealed by Acts 1976, Ch. 631, § 2.)

Section 4.1    Composition of council; elections and terms of councilmen; election upon question of increase or decrease in number of councilmen.

Section 5    Election, term, powers and duties of president and vice-president.

Section 6    When regular meetings held; business at special meetings; adjournment of regular meetings.

Section 7    How special meetings called and held.

Section 8    Ordinances or resolutions appropriating money, imposing taxes, etc. – Procedure for passage.

Section 9    Same – Motion to reconsider.

Section 10    Election, term, duties and compensation of city clerk, city attorney, constable and city collector.

Section 11    General powers of council; ordinances for exercise of police power; enumeration of specific powers.

CHAPTER III. WARDS AND VACANCIES IN OFFICE

Section 12    Division of city into wards.

Section 13    Procedure for filling vacancies in certain offices.

CHAPTER IV. ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE

Section 14    Election, duties generally, qualifications, compensation and term of city manager; city manager pro tem.

Section 15    Responsibilities and powers of city manager generally.

Section 16    Appointment to office of persons elected to council.

CHAPTER V. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE

Section 17    Bond, duties, powers and compensation of city treasurer.

Section 18    Bond, duties, powers and compensation of commissioner of the revenue.

Section 19    Appointment and compensation of deputies of treasurer and commissioner of the revenue.

Section 20    Collection of taxes by treasurer, city collector, etc.

Section 21    Disposition of moneys received and collected for use of city.

Section 22    Lien on real estate for taxes and assessments.

Section 23    How debts contracted.

Section 24    Creation, appointment, compensation, powers and duties of debt commission.

Section 25    Sinking fund – Generally.

Section 26    Same – Appropriations.

Section 27    Ordinances creating debt.

CHAPTER VI. PUBLIC HIGHWAYS, ETC.

Section 28    Compensation for taking or damaging private property; condemnation.

Section 29    Injunctions, etc., staying city in exercise of power over streets.

Section 30    Encroachments upon streets.

Section 31    Dedication and user for five years of streets; streets in subdivisions.

Section 32    City planning commission.

Section 33    Notice to city of damages as prerequisite to action.

Section 34    Repeal of inconsistent acts and former Charters; continuance of acts not inconsistent with Charter.

Section 35    Continuance of ordinances.

CHAPTER VII. MUNICIPAL COURT

Section 36    Established; jurisdiction.

Section 37    Appointment of municipal judge, substitute judges, etc.; term of first municipal judge; tenure, qualifications, etc., of clerks and deputy clerks.

*Editor’s note – The Charter is derived from Chapter 239 of the 1934 Acts of the General Assembly and amendments thereto and is set out herein as it appeared in the 1964 Staunton City Code, as supplemented through November 13, 1980, and the 1985 Staunton City Code, as supplemented through June 13, 2003. The amendments are indicated by history notes appearing in parentheses following the amended sections. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is derived, unamended, from Acts 1934, Chapter 239.

The first Staunton Charter and references to other former Charters are set out in Article II of Appendix A of this Code.

AN ACT TO PROVIDE A NEW CHARTER FOR THE CITY OF STAUNTON.

(1)

CHARTER

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia, That all acts creating and amending the Charter of the City of Staunton be, and the same are hereby, amended and re-enacted in the manner and form following:


CHAPTER I. CITY INCORPORATED


Section 1 Body politic; name; corporate powers granted; corporate boundaries.

The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the present limits of the City of Staunton as hereinafter described or as the same may be hereafter altered and established by law, shall continue to be one body politic in fact and in name under the style and denomination of the City of Staunton, and as such shall have and may exercise all powers which are now or hereafter may be conferred upon or delegated to cities under the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, as fully and completely as though said powers were specifically enumerated herein, and no enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall be held to be exclusive, and shall have, exercise and enjoy all the rights, immunities, powers and privileges and be subject to all the duties and obligations now appertaining to and incumbent on said city as a municipal corporation, and the said City of Staunton, as such, shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with and may have a corporate seal, which it may alter, renew or mend at its pleasure; the present boundaries of the said city being as follows, to-wit: Beginning at a point in the northwest side of the Valley turnpike between the lands of H. L. Lang and the property known as Mary Baldwin College; thence south thirty° forty-five minutes east two thousand feet, to a point at the intersection of Edgewood road and Coalter street extended; thence south fifty-six° fifteen minutes east one thousand feet, to a point in the north side of Catt’s road at the southwest side of a bridge over a stream; thence south four° thirty minutes east sixteen hundred and thirty feet to a point in the east side of the Baltimore and Ohio railroad track; thence south twenty-six° fifteen minutes west thirty-six feet to a point in the line of the graveyard of the Western State Hospital, so as not to embrace the property known as Basic Furniture Company (this being the modification hereinbefore mentioned); thence south sixty-eight° thirty minutes west nineteen hundred and twenty feet, to Pritchard’s extreme northeastern corner in the west side of the Greenville road; thence with Pritchard’s line north eighty-eight° thirty minutes west fifteen hundred and seventy five feet, to Pritchard’s corner with the land of A. H. H. Stuart’s heirs; then south eighty-seven° west fifteen hundred and eighty-five feet to the mouth of a cave just above and south of the Middlebrook road; thence north thirty-seven° twenty-one minutes west thirty-one hundred and fifty feet to a point in the middle of Peck’s lane between Peck’s crossing on the Chesapeake and Ohio railroad and the bridge over Peyton’s Creek; thence north twenty° west three hundred feet, to the northeast corner of a brick storehouse on the south side of the Parkersburg road; thence north fifty° forty-five minutes east fifty-three hundred and fifty feet, to a point in the middle of the Spring Hill or Mount Solon road; thence south eighty-four° east thirty hundred and fifty feet, to the point of beginning (the lines as described to this point being the new corporate line); thence, in order to reach the present corporate line south thirty° forty-five minutes west nine hundred and twenty feet to a point in the Valley turnpike; thence south forty-six° forty-five minutes west one hundred and twenty-five feet to a corner of the old corporate line on the north side of the Valley turnpike, where stands or stood an aspen tree; thence (according to the original survey made by A. D. Trotter, surveyor, in the year eighteen hundred and sixty, as set out in Act of Assembly of that year), south forty-one° east two hundred and sixteen poles to a stake; thence south twenty° west one hundred and fifty and four-tenths poles to a post in the south side of Staunton and Richmond turnpike (or National Cemetery road); thence south forty° west fifty-seven and six-tenths poles to the south corner of the wall of the Western State Hospital; thence south seventy and one-fourth° west one hundred and thirty-six and one-fourth poles to a large black oak (now a stump of the same in the street); thence north fifty-seven and one-fourth° west one hundred and forty-four and one-half poles to a walnut tree; thence north thirty-one and one-half° west one hundred and nineteen and seven-tenths poles to a stake on the east side of a road (now Peck’s lane); thence along the said road north sixty-five° east twenty-seven and sixteen one-hundredths poles, crossing the Parkersburg road, to a stake on the north edge of the road; thence north thirty-seven and three-fourths° east two hundred and fifty poles to a large white oak on the hill; thence north eighty-seven and three-fourths° east eighty-five and two-tenths poles to the beginning point of the old corporate line.

Editor’s note – For annexation orders extending the corporate limits, see Appendix B of this Code.


Section 2 Term of those holding office at time of adoption of Charter.

Unless otherwise specifically provided, the persons holding any of the offices provided for in this Charter, which offices have existed under the Charter heretofore in force, shall continue to hold the same under their previous election or appointment until the term of such office as herein provided shall expire, dating the commencement of such term from the time fixed in said former Charter.


CHAPTER II. GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION


Section 3 How vested.

The government and administration of the city shall be vested in one body, to be called the council of the City of Staunton, and in one administrative officer, to be styled city manager, and in such other departments, boards and other officers as are hereinafter provided for, or as are permitted or required by law to be appointed by the council, as the council may deem expedient.


Section 4 (Repealed by Acts 1976, Ch. 631, § 2.)


Section 4.1 Composition of council; elections and terms of councilmen; election upon question of increase or decrease in number of councilmen.

The council shall consist of five members until the election to be held in May, nineteen hundred seventy-eight and thereafter the council shall consist of seven members, who shall be elected at large from qualified voters of the city and they shall serve for a term of four years from the first day of July next following the date of their election and until their successors shall have been duly elected and qualified subject to the following provisions:

1. At the election held on May four, nineteen hundred seventy-six, four of the five members to be elected to council shall be elected for a term of three years ten months to commence on September one, nineteen hundred seventy-six, and to end on June thirty, nineteen hundred eighty, and the remaining member of council elected at said election shall serve a term of two years beginning on September one, nineteen hundred seventy-six, and ending August thirty, nineteen hundred seventy-eight. The said three-year ten-month terms shall be for the four candidates for membership on council receiving the four highest number of votes and the two-year term shall be for the candidate for membership on council receiving the fifth highest number of votes.

2. At the councilmanic election held in May of nineteen hundred seventy-eight there shall be elected three members of council who shall serve for a term of three years ten months from the first day of September, nineteen hundred seventy-eight, through June thirty, nineteen hundred eighty-two.

3. Thereafter all members of council shall be elected to serve four-year terms.

4. All members of council shall serve, even though their terms have expired, until their successors shall have been duly elected and qualified.

5. If any member of council becomes mentally or physically incapacitated so as to render him incapable of performing his duties as a council member and to render him incapable of attending regular council meetings for a period of at least four months, then council may, upon request of the incapacitated council member or by unanimous vote of the remaining members of council, elect to name a temporary replacement to serve on council until such time as the incapacitated council member is able to resume his duties, or until the expiration of the incapacitated member’s term, whichever occurs first. The replacement council member shall be chosen by a majority vote of council and shall have the same voting privileges as an elected member of council.

6. The membership of the council may be decreased from seven to five or increased from seven to nine if a majority of the qualified voters of the city shall so determine at an election held on the question as next herein provided. Upon the presentation to the circuit court of the city, or to the judge thereof in vacation, of a petition signed by all the members of the then existing council, or by at least five hundred qualified voters of the city, asking that the membership of the council be decreased from seven to five or increased from seven to nine, and calling for an election on the question, the said court, or judge thereof in vacation, shall, by an order entered of record, direct an election to be held on the day fixed in the order, submitting to the qualified voters of the city the question of whether or not the membership of the council shall be decreased from seven to five or increased from seven to nine, according to the number requested in the petition. If two petitions are presented to the said court or judge thereof in vacation, one asking for a decrease in council as provided herein and the other asking for an increase in council as provided herein, then the court or judge thereof, in vacation may order both questions to be submitted to the qualified voters of the city at the same election. Such election shall be held and conducted by the regular election officers of the city in the manner prescribed by law for holding other elections, and the result thereof shall be certified by the electoral board to said court, or to the judge thereof in vacation. Upon receipt whereof, the court or judge, shall enter an order setting forth such result and declaring the effect thereof. If a majority of the votes cast be in favor of decreasing the membership of the council to five, then at the next regular election for members of council when the number of seats on council subject to being filled for full terms would be four, the number to be elected at that election and thereafter on that election cycle shall be two. If a majority of the votes cast be in favor of increasing the membership of the council from seven to nine then the additional number shall be elected at the next regular election of members of council in the City of Staunton when three seats on council are subject to election for full regular terms.

Any election under this section shall be in accordance with the provisions and procedures established by state law.

Persons holding the office of a member of council as of the date of this act shall continue to hold the same under their previous election or appointment until the term of such office shall expire. (Acts 1976, Ch. 631, § 1; Acts 1991)


Section 5 Election, term, powers and duties of president and vice-president.

The council shall elect one of its members to preside over its meetings, who shall be entitled president and who shall be ex officio mayor of the city, and shall also elect another member to be vice-president of the council, to act in the place of the president in his absence or incapacity. The president and vice-president of the council shall be elected for a term of two years, and any vacancy in the offices shall be filled by the election by the council for the unexpired term. The mayor shall have the same powers and duties as other members of the council with a vote, but no veto, and shall be the official head of the city. With the exception of those officers required by the Constitution of the state to be elected by popular vote, the members of the council shall be the only elective city officials.


Section 6 When regular meetings held; business at special meetings; adjournment of regular meetings.

The council shall meet at such times as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution, provided, however, that it shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. No business shall be transacted at a special meeting except that for which it shall have been called, unless all members of the council attend such special meeting or give their written consent thereto. For lack of quorum, any regular meeting may be postponed to such time as the council may determine.


Section 7 How special meetings called and held.

The president or any other two members of the council may call special meetings of the council at any time upon at least twelve hours’ written notice to each member served personally or left at his usual place of business or residence, but special meetings may be held at any time without notice, provided all members of the council attend said meetings or waive notice thereof.


Section 8 Ordinances or resolutions appropriating money, imposing taxes, etc. – Procedure for passage.

No ordinance or resolution appropriating money exceeding the sum of one thousand dollars, imposing taxes, or authorizing the borrowing of money, shall be passed by the council on the same day on which it is introduced, nor shall any such ordinance or resolution be valid unless at least three days intervene between its introduction and date of passage. No ordinance or resolution appropriating money exceeding the sum of one hundred dollars, imposing taxes or authorizing the borrowing of money shall be passed except by recorded affirmative vote of a majority of all members elected to the council.


Section 9 Same – Motion to reconsider.

Upon the announcement by the president of the adoption of resolutions or ordinances having for their object the increase of the indebtedness of the city, or the expenditure of its revenues, except for the payment of its salaried officers and employees, any two councilmen may give notice of a motion to reconsider, which motion shall delay the question until said reconsideration shall be finally acted on at the next regular meeting of the council.


Section 10 Election, term, duties and compensation of city clerk, city attorney, constable and city collector.

The council shall elect a city clerk, who shall also be clerk of the council, and a city attorney, and may elect a constable and a city collector, each of whom shall serve for such term as may be provided by the council, and until his successor has been elected and qualified.

They shall perform such duties and receive such compensation as shall be prescribed by the council.


Section 11 General powers of council; ordinances for exercise of police power; enumeration of specific powers.

The council shall have all the general powers vested in it by the Constitution and laws of the state, and it shall have power to enact ordinances providing for the exercise within its jurisdiction of all police powers which the state itself may exercise under the Constitution, except such as may be specifically denied by act of the General Assembly; and shall further have power:

FIRST. To control and manage the fiscal and municipal affairs of the city, and all property, real and personal, belonging to the city, and make such ordinances, orders and bylaws, relating to the same as it may deem proper and necessary.

SECOND. To acquire by purchase, gift, devise, condemnation, or otherwise, property, real and personal, or any estate or interest therein, within or without the city or state and for any of the purposes of the city as provided by law; and to hold, improve, sell, lease, mortgage or pledge the same or any part thereof, including any property now owned by the city; to issue purchase money obligations without a vote of the people provided such obligations shall not be general obligations of the City of Staunton, but shall be secured solely by the property purchased; and such obligations as may be from time to time issued for the purchase of property shall clearly show that such obligations are not general obligations of the city, but are secured only as herein provided, provided that nothing herein contained is contrary to or inconsistent with the Constitution of Virginia.

THIRD. To establish markets in the city and regulate the same.

FOURTH. To erect in or near the city limits suitable workhouses, jails*, houses of correction or reformation, and houses for the reception and maintenance of the poor and destitute. It shall appoint necessary officers and other persons proper to be connected with any institution or house which it may establish, and regulate pauperism within the limits of the city, and the council, through such agencies as it may appoint for the direction and management of the poor of the city, shall exercise the powers and perform the duties vested by law in overseers of the poor.

*State law reference – Jail or jailor of the County of Augusta to be jail or jailor for the City of Staunton, Code of Virginia, § 53-144.

FIFTH. To erect and keep in order all necessary public buildings; to establish and regulate public squares, airports, playgrounds and parks in or near the city, and to acquire by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, the land it may deem necessary for such uses, and to construct in such public squares, playgrounds, or parks, as it may maintain, or upon any city property, stadiums, swimming pools, and recreation or amusement buildings, structures, or enclosures of every character, refreshment stands and restaurants; to charge for admissions, and to rent out or lease the privileges of construction or using such swimming pools, recreation or amusement buildings, structures or enclosures of every character, refreshment stands or restaurants.

SIXTH. To acquire, establish, maintain and enlarge water works within or without said city; to contract with the owners of land, water and riparian rights, for the use or purchase thereof, for an estate, or interest in lands or, any right or easement therein, or to have the same condemned for the location or enlargement of said works or the pipe, pipe lines, and fixtures thereof, and to acquire by purchase or condemnation such quantity of the watershed land adjacent to the intake or source of supply, as in the judgment of the said council may be necessary to insure a sufficient supply of water for the said city, and to protect the same from pollution; and to prevent by injunction any pollution or threatened pollution of such water supply, and any and all acts likely to impair the purity thereof; to acquire by purchase or condemnation from lower riparian owners the right to divert streams into the present or any future reservoir; and to protect said water supply, works, pipes, reservoirs and fixtures, whether within or without the city, against injury and pollution, by appropriate ordinances and penalties, to be enforced as are other ordinances of said city. The said city may sell or supply to persons, firms or industries residing or located outside of the city limits any surplus of water it may have over and above the amount required to supply its own inhabitants.

SEVENTH. To establish or acquire by purchase and to maintain and operate within and without the corporate limits suitable works for gas and the generation of electricity for illumination or other purposes, and to supply the same to consumers, in or near the city, at such price and on such terms as it may prescribe, and to that end may contract with owners of land and water power for the use thereof, or may have the same condemned.

EIGHTH. To establish, or acquire by purchase, such other public utilities, abattoirs, and other enterprises, either within or without the city, as may in its judgment be in the public interest, and to that end may contract with owners of land, with or without buildings, for the use or the purchase thereof, or may have the same condemned.

NINTH. To establish, open, widen, extend, grade, improve, construct, maintain, light, and clean public highways, streets, alleys and sidewalks, boulevards and parkways, and to alter or close the same; make or construct sewers or public ducts through the same or wherever else they may deem expedient; build bridges in or culverts under said streets or alleys, prevent or remove obstructions or encroachments over, under, or in the same; plant shade trees along the same, and prevent the cumbering of streets, alleys, walks, public squares, lanes or bridges in any manner whatsoever.

TENTH. To acquire and own land suitable for stone quarries, or the quarry rights in such lands; to take stone therefrom and to manufacture the same into crushed stone for city uses.

ELEVENTH. To grant aid to military companies and to contribute to the support of a band maintained within the city, to grant aid to literary, educational or benevolent organizations or institutions, and to a public library, provided such action is not prohibited by the Constitution of the state, and that such organizations or institutions be located in the city.

TWELFTH. To secure the inhabitants from contagious, infectious or other dangerous diseases; to establish a quarantine ground; to provide, regulate and maintain hospitals; to compel the removal of patients to said hospitals; to appoint and organize a board of health and a department of public welfare*; to define their duties and grant to them the necessary authority effectually to discharge them, including the authority to coordinate their duties and efforts with appropriate agencies and departments of State of Virginia and other of its political subdivisions.

*Editor’s note – The title of the department of public welfare was changed to the department of social services by an ordinance adopted pursuant to § 63.1-38.1 of the Code of Virginia on December 11, 1975. See Chapter 2.90 SCC.

THIRTEENTH. To compel the abatement and removal of all nuisances within the city at the expense of the person or persons causing the same, or of the owner or occupant of the ground or premises whereon the same may be; to require all lands, lots and other premises within the city to be kept clean, sanitary and free from weeds or stagnant water, or to make them so at the expense of the owners or occupants thereof; to regulate or prevent slaughter houses or other noisome or offensive business within the said city, the keeping of animals, poultry or other fowl therein, or the exercise of any dangerous or unwelcome business, trade or employment therein; to compel the abatement of smoke and dust; to prevent unnecessary noise therein; to regulate the location of stables, garages and gasoline filling stations, and the manner in which they shall be kept and constructed; and generally to define, prohibit, abate, suppress and prevent all things detrimental to the health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city.

FOURTEENTH. To direct the location of all buildings for storing explosives or combustible substances; to regulate the sale and use of gunpowder, nitroglycerine, dynamite, fireworks, kerosene, oil, gasoline or other combustible material; to regulate the exhibition of fireworks, the discharge of firearms and the making of bonfires in the streets and yards.

FIFTEENTH. To prescribe traffic regulations upon the streets, alleys, and parkways of the city, not in conflict with general law, and shall have full authority by ordinance to require all public conveyances, cabs, buses, and trucks, operated by motor or other power, within the city, or in and out of the city, to provide terminals at such points as shall meet with the approval of the council, and to provide all reasonable regulations governing the same, to regulate the operation and speed of engines and cars upon the railroads within the city; to prevent any sort of employment or sports in the public streets which is dangerous or annoying to passersby, and to prohibit and punish the abuse of animals.

SIXTEENTH. To restrain and punish vagrants and mendicants; to prevent vice and immorality; to preserve public peace and good order; to prevent and quell riots, disturbances and disorderly assemblages; to suppress houses of ill-fame and gaming houses and gambling devices of all kinds; to prevent lewd, indecent and disorderly conduct or exhibitions in the city, and to expel therefrom persons guilty of such conduct who have resided therein less than one year.

SEVENTEENTH. To remove, or require to be removed, any building, walls, structure, or addition thereto which, by reason of dilapidation, defect or structure, or other causes, may have become dangerous to life or property, or which may be erected contrary to law.

EIGHTEENTH. To provide for the regular and safe construction of houses in the city for the future, and to provide a complete building code for the city, and to provide setback lines on the streets beyond which no building may be constructed.

NINETEENTH. To designate and prescribe from time to time the parts of the city within which no buildings of wood shall be erected, and to regulate the construction of buildings in the city so as to protect it against danger from fire; and to enact an ordinance dividing the city into zones under the provisions of the state law; and to provide for a city planning commission* and define its powers.

*Editor’s note – As to planning commission generally, see § 32 of this Charter.

TWENTIETH. To provide any penalty for the violation of any city ordinance, not exceeding one thousand dollars, or twelve months’ imprisonment in the city or Augusta County jail, or both.

TWENTY-FIRST. To pass all bylaws, rules and ordinances not repugnant to the Constitution and laws of the state which it may deem necessary for the good order and government of the city, the management of its property, the conduct of its fiscal and municipal affairs, the peace, comfort, convenience, order, morals, health and protection of its citizens or their property, and do such other things and pass such other laws as may be necessary or proper to carry into full effect any power, authority, capacity, or jurisdiction, which is or shall be granted to or vested in said city, or in the council, court, or officers thereof, or which may be necessarily incident to a municipal corporation.

TWENTY-SECOND. To provide for the due publication in the newspapers or otherwise of its ordinances and resolutions.

TWENTY-THIRD. No ordinance hereafter passed or amended by the council for the violation of which any penalty is imposed shall take effect until the same shall have been published for five days consecutively in one of the daily newspapers of said city to be designated by the said council, or posted in at least two public places in the city; a certificate of such posting shall be filed by the sergeant in the city clerk’s office; provided, however, that this requirement as to publication shall not apply to any ordinance reordained or restated in or by a compilation or codification of said ordinances provided the ordinance adopting such codification or restatement shall have been duly published as aforesaid.

TWENTY-FOURTH. For the execution of its powers and duties the council may raise annually, by taxes and assessments in said city, such sums of money as it shall deem necessary to defray the expenses of the same, and in such manner as it shall deem expedient, in accordance with the laws of this state and of the United States, and may by curative ordinance, ratify and confirm regular assessments and levies of taxes heretofore or hereafter made, and the acts of all ministerial officers in connection therewith, and any such ordinance heretofore passed is hereby ratified and confirmed.

TWENTY-FIFTH. The council may provide, by ordinance, for the collection of city taxes or levies on property at such times and with such penalties for nonpayment in time as may be fixed by ordinance.

TWENTY-SIXTH. The council may levy a tax or a license on any person, firm, or corporation conducting any business or profession whatsoever in the city, except when prohibited by general law, whether a license may be required therefore by the state or not, and may exceed the state license, if any be required.

TWENTY-SEVENTH. The council may provide by ordinance for the levy of an admission tax on persons paying an admission charge or persons admitted free, when an admission charge is paid by others, to places of amusement or entertainment, for the amount of such tax, for the collection thereof and for penalties for the failure to pay such tax so levied. For the purpose of this subsection, admission charge and place of amusement or entertainment shall mean.

(a) Admission Charge. The charge made for admission to any entertainment, exclusive of any federal tax thereon, including a charge made for season tickets whether obtained by contribution or subscription, a cover charge or a charge made for the use of seats or tables, reserved or otherwise, and similar accommodations, in the city.

(b) Place of Amusement or Entertainment. Any place in the city wherein or whereat any of the following are located, conducted, performed, exhibited or operated and for which an admission charge is made: a circus, a carnival, a menagerie, a moving picture show, a fair, a show or an exhibition of any kind, a dance; a baseball, basketball or football game; a wrestling match or a boxing match or a sport of any kind; a swimming contest or exhibition; a swimming pool; a concert; a theatrical, vaudeville, dramatic, operatic or musical performance or a performance similar thereto; a lecture, talk, literary reading or performance similar thereto; an attraction such as a merry-go-round, ferris wheel, roller coaster, leap-the-dips or the like; an automobile race, a midget auto race, or a horse race; a horse show; an ice skating or roller skating rink or arena; or any other public amusement, performance or exhibition. The foregoing enumeration of specific amusements and entertainments shall not be deemed to exclude other amusements and entertainments otherwise within the meaning of those words.

TWENTY-EIGHTH. In addition to the other powers conferred by law, the city shall have power to impose, levy and collect, in such manner as its council shall deem expedient, a consumer or subscriber tax upon the amount paid for the use within the city of water, electricity, gas, telephone and any other public utility service or upon the amount paid for any one or more of such public utility services, used within the city and the council may provide that such tax shall be added to and collected with bills rendered consumers for such services.

(Acts 1950, Ch. 249; Acts 1964, Ch. 107; Acts 1972, Ch. 545, § 1)


CHAPTER III. WARDS AND VACANCIES IN OFFICE


Section 12 Division of city into wards.

The said city shall be divided into as many wards as the council may determine in such manner as to include as nearly as may be consistent with the well defined limits of said wards, an equal number of votes in each ward.


Section 13 Procedure for filling vacancies in certain offices.

In case of a vacancy in the office of city treasurer, commissioner of the revenue, or justices of the peace*, the council shall, subject to approval by the judge of the circuit court of the city, elect a qualified person to fill the office in which such vacancy occurs until the next general election which may be held in the city when the vacancy may be filled by election for the unexpired term, and in case of a vacancy in the office of Commonwealth’s attorney, clerk of the circuit court, or sheriff, the judge of the circuit court shall appoint a qualified person to fill the office in which such vacancy occurs until the next general election which may be held in the city when the vacancy may be filled by election for the unexpired term. (Acts 1972, Ch. 545, § 1)

*Editor’s note – The above reference to “justices of the peace” is obsolete.


CHAPTER IV. ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE


Section 14 Election, duties generally, qualifications, compensation and term of city manager; city manager pro tem.

The city council shall elect a city manager, who shall be the administrative head of the municipal government. He shall be chosen by the council without regard to his political belief and solely upon the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. The choice shall not be limited to the inhabitants of the city or state unless otherwise required by the Constitution of the state. The city manager shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the council by ordinance or resolution. He shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall serve at the will of the council. During the absence or disability of the city manager, the council shall designate some properly qualified person to perform his duties.


Section 15 Responsibilities and powers of city manager generally.

The city manager shall be responsible to the council for the efficient administration of all affairs of the city, and he shall be vested with such administrative and executive powers of the municipal government as are provided in sections two thousand nine hundred and forty-three, two thousand nine hundred and forty-four, and two thousand nine hundred and forty-five, under the city manager plan of the Code of Virginia, and acts amendatory thereto, except that all appointments made by the city manager shall be subject to the approval of the council.


Section 16 Appointment to office of persons elected to council.

No person elected to the council, whether he qualify or not, shall during the term for which he was elected or twelve months after the expiration of that time be elected by the council or appointed by the city manager to any position of trust or office of trust or profit of the city.


CHAPTER V. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE


Section 17 Bond, duties, powers and compensation of city treasurer.

The city treasurer shall give bond in such sums as the council may prescribe, with surety to be approved by the council, conditioned for the faithful discharge of his official duties in relation to the revenue of the city and of such other official duties as may be imposed upon him by this Charter and the ordinances of the city. He shall perform such duties, have such powers and be liable to such penalties as are now or may hereafter be prescribed by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city made in pursuance thereof, and for all services performed for the city, the treasurer shall receive such compensation as the council may from time to time prescribe by ordinance, subject to approval by the state fee commission, and in the event said commission and the council shall not be able to agree on the amount of such compensation, the matter shall be submitted to the judge of the corporation court of the city for final determination.

Editor’s note – The references above and in §§ 18 and 19 to the “state fee commission” should now read “state compensation board” and the reference to “corporation court” should read “circuit court.”


Section 18 Bond, duties, powers and compensation of commissioner of the revenue.

The commissioner of the revenue shall give bond in such sum as the council may by ordinance prescribe, with surety to be approved by the council, conditioned for the faithful performance of all of his duties under this Charter and under any ordinance of the city. He shall perform such duties, have such powers, and be liable to such penalties as may be prescribed by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city made in pursuance thereof; and for all services performed for the city the said commissioner of the revenue shall receive such compensation as the council may from time to time prescribe by ordinance, subject to approval by the state fee commission, and in the event said commission and the council shall not be able to agree on the amount of such compensation, the matter shall be submitted to the judge of the corporation court of the city for final determination.

Note – See editor’s note following § 17.


Section 19 Appointment and compensation of deputies of treasurer and commissioner of the revenue.

The treasurer and commissioner of revenue may each appoint one or more deputies provided the number of such appointments and the expenses of such offices shall be subject to approval of the council and state fee commission; provided that if the council and the commission fail to agree, the matter shall be submitted to the judge of the corporation court of the city for final determination, but the sureties of said officers, respectively, shall be equally liable for the acts of said deputies as for those of their principals.

Note – See editor’s note following § 17.


Section 20 Collection of taxes by treasurer, city collector, etc.

The treasurer, city collector, or their deputies shall have any or all of the powers which are now or may be hereafter vested in any officer of the state charged with the collection of state taxes, and may collect the same in the same manner in which the state taxes are collected by any officer of the state.


Section 21 Disposition of moneys received and collected for use of city.

All moneys received or collected for the use of the city shall be paid over, held and disbursed as the council may order or prescribe.


Section 22 Lien on real estate for taxes and assessments.

There shall be a lien on real estate for the taxes as assessed thereon from the commencement of the year from which they were assessed, and there shall also be a lien on the real estate on which local assessments for improvements may be made for the amount of such assessments from the time the same is levied by the council.


Section 23 How debts contracted.

The council may, in the name and for the use of the city, contract debts, and cause to be issued therefore notes or bonds, in the manner prescribed by law and subject to all the restrictions imposed upon cities by the Constitution and general laws of the state.


Section 24 Creation, appointment, compensation, powers and duties of debt commission.

There shall be a city debt commission appointed by the council, to serve without compensation, one of the members of which shall be the city treasurer, under such regulations as may be established by ordinance, and in conformity with any laws of the state applicable to the city and providing for or fixing the duties of a city debt or sinking fund commission. It shall be the duty of the debt commission to have charge of the administration of any fund for the payment of the principal and interest of any bonds of the city, and to perform such other duties regarding the debt of the city as may be required by ordinance.


Section 25 Sinking fund – Generally.

There shall be set aside annually from the revenues of the city a sinking fund equal to not less than one per centum on the aggregate outstanding debt of the city in addition to the annual interest agreed to be paid thereon, and whenever hereafter there shall be contracted by the council any debt not payable in one year, there shall annually be paid from the revenues of the city into the sinking fund, for the payment of said bonds, an amount sufficient to pay said bonds at or before maturity, which annual payment shall in no case be less than one per centum of the par or face value of said bonds in addition to the annual interest to be paid thereon. Said sinking fund shall be applied to the debt or debts for the discharge of which it was created, and until so applied shall be invested, with its accumulations of interest, in bonds of the United States, or of the State of Virginia or of the City of Staunton, or of any city or county in the State of Virginia.


Section 26 Same – Appropriations.

The council shall not appropriate any part of the sinking fund or its accruing interest otherwise than as mentioned in the preceding section, except in time of war, insurrection or invasion, and then only by a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to such council.


Section 27 Ordinances creating debt.

No debt shall be created by the council for a longer period than four months unless the ordinance creating the same shall have been introduced at some meeting of the council at least thirty days before the same is passed; but an amendment to such an ordinance need not lie over for an additional thirty days.


CHAPTER VI. PUBLIC HIGHWAYS, ETC.


Section 28 Compensation for taking or damaging private property; condemnation.

The city shall not take, damage, or use any private property for streets or any other public purposes without making just compensation for the same, but where the city cannot obtain the title to ground necessary for its purpose, it may proceed to condemn the same in the mode prescribed by law.


Section 29 Injunctions, etc., staying city in exercise of power over streets.

No order shall be made and no injunction shall be granted by any judge or court of this Commonwealth to stay the proceedings of the city in the exercise of any power herein granted it over its streets, unless it be manifest that it is exceeding its powers and that the interposition of the court is necessary to prevent injury which cannot be adequately compensated in damages.


Section 30 Encroachments upon streets.

In every case where a street in said city has been or shall be encroached upon by any fence, building or otherwise, the council may require the owner, if known, or if unknown, the occupant of the premises encroaching, to remove the same, and if such removal be not made within the time prescribed by the council, they may impose a penalty of five dollars for each and every day it is allowed to continue thereafter, and may cause the encroachment to be removed and collected from the owner all reasonable charge therefore, with costs, by the same process that they are hereinbefore empowered to collect taxes. No encroachment upon any street, however long continued, shall constitute an adverse possession to or confer any rights upon the person claiming thereunder as against the said city.


Section 31 Dedication and use for five years of streets; streets in subdivisions.

Whenever any street, alley or lane in said city shall have been opened to and used as such by the public for the period of five years, the council may declare the same a street, alley or lane for public purposes, and the council shall have the same authority and jurisdiction over and rights and interest therein, as they have by law over the streets, alleys and lanes laid out by them, and any street or alley reserved in the division or subdivision into lots of any portion of the territory within the corporate limits of said city by a plot or plan of record, shall be deemed and held to be dedicated to public use, unless it appears by said record that the said street or alley so reserved is designed for private use; but upon a petition of a majority of the persons interested therein, the council shall have the power to open the same for the use of the public. (Acts 1934, Ch. 239, § 31; Acts 1.950, Ch. 249)

Annotation – In the case of Staunton v. Augusta Corp., 169 Va. 424, 193 S. E. 695, a suit to quiet title to a strip of land which had been unoccupied by any structure for almost fifty years, and was paved uniformly with the sidewalk, the city contended that by virtue of the above section, as it appeared prior to the 1950 amendment, the prescriptive period was reduced to five years, and the strip had become a part of the sidewalk. It was, however, held that, there being no proof of an adverse use, it was immaterial whether the use was for a period of five years or twenty years. This provision required the same evidence of dedication, to put it in operation, as the law requires to raise an implication of a common law dedication from mere user of a way.


Section 32 City planning commission.

The council may appoint a city planning commission of five citizens, chosen because of their interest in and knowledge of city planning, whose powers and duties shall be prescribed by the council by ordinance, who shall serve without compensation.

Editor’s note – For further authority to provide for a planning commission, see § 11(19) of this Charter.


Section 33 Notice to city of damages as prerequisite to action.

No action shall be maintained against the said city for damages for any injury to any person or property alleged to have been sustained by reason of the negligence of the city or of any officer, agent, or employee thereof, unless a written statement, verified by the oath of the claimant, his agent or attorney, or the personal representative of any decedent, whose death is the result of the alleged negligence of the city, its officers, agents, or employees, of the nature of the claim and the time and place at which the injury is alleged to have occurred to have been received, shall have been filed with the city attorney of said city within sixty days after such cause or action shall have occurred. And no officers, agents or employees of the city shall have authority to waive such conditions precedent or any of them.


Section 34 Repeal of inconsistent acts and former Charters; continuance of acts not inconsistent with Charter.

All acts and parts of acts inconsistent with this act and former Charters and amendments thereof for the City of Staunton are hereby repealed; and all acts and parts of acts in any way concerning the City of Staunton and the rights of the people thereof, or any of them, not inconsistent with this act, shall be in full force, to all intents and purposes, as if this act had never been passed.


Section 35 Continuance of ordinances.

All ordinances now in force in said city, not inconsistent with this act, the laws of this state and of the United States, shall be and remain in force until altered, amended or repealed by said council.


CHAPTER VII. MUNICIPAL COURT


Section 36 Established; jurisdiction.

There shall be a municipal court for the city which shall be known as the Municipal Court of Staunton. The jurisdiction of such court in civil matters shall be as provided by general law for courts not of record. The jurisdiction of such court in criminal matters shall be as provided by general law for municipal courts not of record. (Acts 1972, Ch. 545, § 1)


Section 37 Appointment of municipal judge, substitute judges, etc.; term of first municipal judge; tenure, qualifications, etc., of clerks and deputy clerks.

The council shall appoint a municipal judge for a term of four years, and may appoint one or more substitute judges, a clerk of the municipal court and such assistant or deputy clerks as council deems expedient. The appointment of the municipal judge and any substitute judges shall be subject to the approval of the judge of the circuit court of the City of Staunton. The term of the first municipal judge appointed hereunder shall commence January one, nineteen hundred seventy-four.

Tenure of clerks and deputy clerks shall be established by ordinance or resolution of council. Qualifications, oaths and bonds of such clerks and deputy clerks shall be as provided by general law. (Acts 1972, Ch. 545, § 1)

*Editor’s note – Municipal courts have been abolished and replaced by general district courts under the current judicial system.

See Code of Virginia, Title 16.l.

EFFECTIVE DATE

An emergency existing, this Act shall be in force from its passage.

Editor’s note – This Act, Chapter 239 of the 1934 Acts, was approved March 27, 1934.


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.05    General Provisions

1.10    Wards


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Code adoption.

State law reference – Authority of city to codify and recodify its ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433.


1.01.010 Code adoption.

The ordinances contained in this and the following chapters, sections, compiled by Code Publishing Company of Seattle, Washington, in 2004 and containing general ordinances through Ordinance 2004-11 are hereby adopted as the “Code of the City of Staunton, Virginia,” and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as the “Staunton City Code.”

This code is subject to the general provisions set forth in Chapter 1.05 SCC, General Provisions. 

This code supersedes any prior code, including in particular the 1964 code and the 1985 code to the extent they are inconsistent. (Ord. 2004-20 § 1).


Chapter 1.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

1.05.010    Repealed.

1.05.020    Definitions and rules of construction.

1.05.030    Catchlines of sections.

1.05.040    Severability of parts of code.

1.05.050    Provisions of code considered as continuations of existing ordinances.

1.05.060    Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by code.

1.05.070    Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc.

1.05.080    Supplementation of code.

1.05.090    Copies of code and supplements to be available for public inspection.

1.05.100    Classification of and penalties for violations – Continuing violations.

1.05.110    Liability of corporations, etc., and agents for violations.

1.05.120    Procedure on default in payment of fine or installment thereof.

1.05.130    Payment of costs and expenses incurred by city in connection with violations.

1.05.140    Corporate seal – Design.

1.05.150    Same – Duties of city clerk.

1.05.160    Coat of arms of city.

Charter reference – Application of publication requirements to codification of ordinances, § 11(23).

Cross reference – Interfering with enforcement of code, SCC 9.05.040.


1.05.010 How code designated and cited.

Repealed by Ord. 2004-20. (Code 1964, § 1-1; Code 1985, § 1-1).


1.05.020 Definitions and rules of construction.

In the interpretation and construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise:

Generally. The rules of construction given in Sections 1-202 through 1-257 of the Code of Virginia shall govern, so far as applicable, the construction of words not defined in this section.

Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient.

“Charter” shall mean the Charter of the city as it now exists or as amended in the future.

“City” or “the city” shall mean the city of Staunton, in the state of Virginia.

Code. Whenever the term “code” or “this code” is used without further qualification, it shall mean the code of the city of Staunton, Virginia.

Computation of Time. When a notice is required to be given or any other act to be done a certain time before any proceeding, there must be that time, exclusive of the day for such proceeding, but the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, may be counted as part of the time; but when a notice is required to be given or any other act to be done within a certain time after any event, that time shall be allowed in addition to the day on which the event occurred. When under provisions of this code an act, order of the court, or administrative regulation or order requires, either by specification of a date or by a prescribed period of time, that an act be performed or an action be filed on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday or on any day or part of a day on which city offices are closed, the act may be performed or the action may be filed on the next business day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or day on which city offices are closed.

Council; city council. Wherever the term “council” or “city council” is used, it shall be construed to mean the council of the city of Staunton.

“Following,” when used by way of reference to any section or sections in the code, shall be construed to mean next following that in which such reference is made.

Gender. A word importing the masculine gender shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males.

“In the city” shall mean any territory jurisdiction of which, for the exercise of its regulatory power, has been conferred on the city by public or private law.

“Month” shall mean a calendar month.

Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing, as well as to several persons or things.

“Oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath.

“Occupant,” applied to a building or land, shall mean any person who holds a written or oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.

Officers, Boards, Etc. Whenever reference is made to a particular officer, department, board, commission or other agency, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words “of the city of Staunton.” Reference to a specific officer shall be deemed to include his duly authorized agents, deputies or representatives, subject, however, to the provisions of Section 15.2-1502 of the Code of Virginia.

Official Time Standard. Whenever particular hours are referred to, the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight saving time, whichever is in current use in the city.

“Owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.

“Person” shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.

“Preceding,” when used by way of reference to any section or sections in this code, shall be construed to mean next preceding that in which such reference is made.

“Sidewalk” shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

“Signature” or “subscription” includes a mark when a person cannot write.

“State” or “commonwealth” shall be construed as if followed by the words “of Virginia.”

“State code” or “Code of Virginia” shall mean the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended.

“Street” shall include avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto, and all other public thoroughfares in the city, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines. It shall also be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council.

“Swear” or “sworn” shall be equivalent to the word “affirm” or “affirmed” in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath.

Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.

“Written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.

“Year” shall mean a calendar year. (Ord. 2018-09; Code 1964, § 1-2; Code 1985, § 1-2).

State law reference – Similar definitions and rules of construction, Code of Virginia, § 1-200 et seq.


1.05.030 Catchlines of sections.

The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. (Code 1964, § 1-3; Code 1985, § 1-3).

State law reference – Similar provisions as to sections of state code, Code of Virginia, §§ 1-200, 1-244.


1.05.040 Severability of parts of code.

If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason, declared to be unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Code 1964, § 1-5; Code 1985, § 1-4).


1.05.050 Provisions of code considered as continuations of existing ordinances.

The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those of the Staunton City Code approved August 13, 1964, and of ordinances adopted subsequent to such code and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Code 1964, § 1-4; Code 1985, § 1-5).


1.05.060 Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by code.

Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect:

(1) Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city’s indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city;

(2) Any ordinance granting any franchise or right;

(3) Any ordinance appropriating funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to an annual budget;

(4) Any ordinance providing for or otherwise relating to licenses and license taxes;

(5) Any ordinance relating to salaries or compensation of city officers and employees or members of city boards or commissions or to compensation or pay plans or classification plans for such officers or employees;

(6) Any ordinance establishing, extending or contracting the corporate limits of the city;

(7) Any ordinance authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any specific public improvement or making any assessment;

(8) The Staunton Community Antenna Television Ordinance, introduced on first reading November 12, 1981, and approved November 24, 1981, and any amendment thereto; *

(9) Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; or

(10) Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code. (Code 1985, § 1-6).

*Cross reference – Unlawful connections to CATV system, SCC 9.05.220.


1.05.070 Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc.

Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered on or before the effective date of this code. (Code 1985, § 1-7).


1.05.080 Supplementation of code.

(1) By contract or by municipal personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.

(2) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code, which have been replaced, shall be excluded from the code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.

(3) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:

(a) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;

(b) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections; and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;

(c) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;

(d) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,” “this division,” etc., as the case may be, or to “sections _________ to __________” (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the code); and

(e) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code. (Code 1985, § 1-8).

State law reference – Authority to supplement code, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433.


1.05.090 Copies of code and supplements to be available for public inspection.

At least three copies of this code and every supplement thereto shall be kept in the office of the clerk of the council and shall there be available for public inspection, during normal business hours. (Code 1985, § 1-9).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433.


1.05.100 Classification of and penalties for violations – Continuing violations.

(1) Whenever in this code or any other ordinance of the city or any rule or regulation promulgated by any officer or agency of the city, under authority duly vested in such officer or agency, it is provided that a violation of any provision thereof shall constitute a Class 3 or 4 misdemeanor, such violation shall be punished as follows:

(a) Class 3 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $500.00.

(b) Class 4 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $250.00.

(2) Whenever in any provision of this code or in any other ordinance of the city or any rule or regulation promulgated by an officer or agency of the city, under authority duly vested in such officer or agency, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided for the violation of such provision and such violation is not described as being of a particular class of misdemeanor, such violation shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor punishable as prescribed in subsection (1)(b) of this section.

(3) Notwithstanding any provision of this section or any other section of this code, no penalty for a violation of this code or other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city shall exceed that prescribed by state law for a like offense.

(4) Each day any violation of this code or any ordinance, rule or regulation referred to in this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, except where otherwise provided. (Code 1964, §§ 11-1 – 11-1.2; Code 1985, § 1-10; Ord. 3-11-93).

Charter reference – Authority of council to provide penalty for ordinance violations, § 11(20).

State law references – Classification of misdemeanors and punishment therefore, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-9, 18.2-11; authority of city to provide penalties for violation of ordinances and provisions similar to subsection (3) of this section, § 15.2-1429; authority of court trying case, upon conviction, to require bond conditioned that the person convicted will not violate the ordinance for the breach of which he was convicted for a period of not more than one year, § 15.2-1430; injunctive relief for continuing violations of ordinances, § 15.2-1432.


1.05.110 Liability of corporations, etc., and agents for violations.

(1) Any violation of this code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization.

(2) Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment, as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization, for the violation by it of any provision of this code, where such violation was the act or omission or the result of the act, omission or order of any such person. (Code 1964, § 1-6; Code 1985, § 1-11).


1.05.120 Procedure on default in payment of fine or installment thereof.

(1) Where a person convicted of a violation of any provision of this code or other ordinance of the city is sentenced to pay a fine and such person defaults in the payment of such fine or an installment thereof, the court, upon the motion of the city or upon its own motion, may require him to show cause why he should not be imprisoned or fined for nonpayment.

(2) Following an order to show cause, unless the defendant shows that his default was not attributable to an intentional refusal to obey the sentence of the court, or not attributable to a failure on his part to make a good faith effort to obtain the necessary funds for payment, the court may order the defendant imprisoned as for a contempt for a term not to exceed 60 days or impose a fine not to exceed $500.00. The court may provide in its order that payment or satisfaction of the fine in default at any time will entitle the defendant to his release from such imprisonment or, after entering the order, may at any time reduce the sentence for good cause shown, including payment or satisfaction of such fine.

(3) If it appears that the default is excusable under the standards set forth in subsection (2) of this section, the court may enter an order allowing the defendant additional time for payment, reducing the amount of the fine or of each installment, or remitting the unpaid portion in whole or in part.

(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to alter or interfere with employment, for collection of fines, of any means authorized for the enforcement of money judgments rendered in favor of the city. (Code 1985, § 1-12).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-358. See also, § 15.2-1431.


1.05.130 Payment of costs and expenses incurred by city in connection with violations.

Any person convicted of violating any provision of this code or any ordinance of the city, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him or it, shall pay all costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with such violation. (Code 1964, § 11-4; Code 1985, § 1-13).


1.05.140 Corporate seal – Design.

The corporate seal of the city shall be represented by a circular design with the word “Seal” in raised letters across the face thereof and the words “City of Staunton, Virginia,” in raised letters about the outer edge of the circle, this design being the same as that heretofore in use as the seal of the city. (Code 1964, § 1-7; Code 1985, § 1-14).

Charter reference – Authority of city to have corporate seal, § 1.


1.05.150 Same – Duties of city clerk.

The city clerk shall be the custodian of the corporate seal of the city, and shall affix it to all papers issued by municipal authority which require the seal of the city to be attached. (Code 1964, § 1-8; Code 1985, § 1-15).


1.05.160 Coat of arms of city.

The coat of arms of the city, adopted January 22, 1926, being the coat of arms of Lady Rebecca Staunton, after whom the town was named in 1748, shall be accepted and used as such. The design, argent, two chevrons sable, within a border engrailed of the same, the crest being a fox statant proper, and the name “Staunton” in Old English letters shall appear under the coat of arms as a part of the same in accordance with that reproduced below:


[IMAGE]


(Code 1964, § 1-9; Code 1985, § 1-16).

OFFICIAL FLAG

of the

CITY OF STAUNTON, VIRGINIA

Adopted January 26, 1926


[IMAGE]


(Code 1964, § 1-10; Code 1985, § 1-16).


Chapter 1.10 WARDS*

Sections:

1.10.010    Absentee voter election district.

1.10.020    Wards generally.

1.10.030    Composition of wards – Ward No. 1.

1.10.040    Composition of wards – Ward No. 2.

1.10.050    Composition of wards – Ward No. 3.

1.10.060    Composition of wards – Ward No. 4.

1.10.070    Composition of wards – Ward No. 5.

1.10.080    Polling place – Ward No. 1.

1.10.090    Polling place – Ward No. 2.

1.10.100    Polling place – Ward No. 3.

1.10.110    Polling place – Ward No. 4.

1.10.120    Polling place – Ward No. 5.

*State law reference – Elections, Code of Virginia, Title 24.1.


1.10.010 Absentee voter election district.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, for the purpose of counting and recording absentee ballots in all general elections including, but not limited to, those general elections held in May and November, there is hereby established one central absentee voter election district in the city hall of the city, which shall receive, count and record all absentee ballots cast within the city, as provided by the Code of Virginia, Sections 24.2-710, 24.2-711, 24.2-712. (Ord. 3-25-82; Code 1985, § 10-1).


1.10.020 Wards generally.

The city shall be divided into five wards, designated as Ward No. 1, Ward No. 2, Ward No. 3, Ward No. 4 and Ward No. 5. There is hereby incorporated into such wards all the territory embraced within the corporate limits of the city. (Code 1964, § 28-1; Code 1985, § 10-2).

Charter reference – Division of city into wards, § 12.

State law reference – Election districts, Code of Virginia, § 24.1-36 et seq.


1.10.030 Composition of wards – Ward No. 1.

Ward No. 1 shall embrace all that portion of the city within the following bounds: The center line of Buttermilk Spring Road from the western corporate limits of the city to the intersection of Buttermilk Spring Road and Pierce Street, the center line of Pierce Street from its intersection with Buttermilk Spring Road to its intersection with Wayne Avenue, the center line of Wayne Avenue from its intersection with Pierce Street to its intersection with Straith Street, the center line of Straith Street from its intersection with Wayne Avenue to its intersection with West Beverley Street, the center line of West Beverley Street from its intersection with Straith Street to its intersection with Jefferson Street, the centerline of Jefferson Street from its intersection with West Beverley Street to its intersection with Green Street, the center line of Green Street from its intersection with Jefferson Street to its intersection with Bridge Street and Stuart Street and the CSX railway line, east along the centerline of the CSX railway line from its intersection with Bridge Street and Stuart Street to its intersection with Middlebrook Avenue, the centerline of Middlebrook Avenue from its intersection with the CSX railway line to its intersection with South Augusta Street, the center line of South Augusta Street from its intersection with Middlebrook Avenue to its intersection with Johnson Street, the center line of Johnson Street from its intersection with South Augusta Street to its intersection with Greenville Avenue, the center line of Greenville Avenue from its intersection with Johnson Street to its intersection with Richmond Road, the center line of Richmond Road from its intersection with Greenville Avenue to its intersection with the east corporate limits of the city, the corporate limits of the city southward, westward and northward to its intersection with the center line of Buttermilk Spring Road. (Ord. 2011-17. Code 1985, § 10-8; Ord. 9-25-86, § 1).


1.10.040 Composition of wards – Ward No. 2.

Ward No. 2 shall embrace all that portion of the city within the following bounds: The center line of Buttermilk Spring Road from the western corporate limits of the city to the intersection of Buttermilk Spring Road and Pierce Street, the center line of Pierce Street from its intersection with Buttermilk Spring Road to its intersection with Wayne Avenue, the center line of Wayne Avenue from its intersection with Pierce Street to its intersection with Straith Street, the center line of Straith Street from its intersection with Wayne Avenue to its intersection with West Beverly Street, the center line of West Beverly from its intersection with Straith Street to its intersection with Thornrose Avenue, the center line of Thornrose Avenue from its intersection with West Beverley Street to its intersection with the Thornrose Avenue entrance to the Staunton Fairgrounds, the Staunton Fairgrounds Road from the Thornrose Avenue entrance to the Staunton Fairgrounds to its intersection with Armory Drive, Armory Drive from its intersection with the Staunton Fairgrounds Road to its intersection with Deaver Drive, Deaver Drive northwest from its intersection with Armory Drive to its intersection with Constitution Drive, Constitution Drive from its intersection with Deaver Drive to the Poplar Street entrance to Gypsy Hill Park, the center line of Poplar Street from the Poplar Street entrance to Gypsy Hill Park to its intersection with A Street, the center line of A Street from its intersection with Poplar Street to its intersection with Churchville Avenue, the center line of Churchville Avenue from its intersection with A Street to the northwestern corporate limits of the city, and the corporate limits of the city southward to its intersection with the center line of Buttermilk Spring Road. (Ord. 2011-17. Code 1985, § 10-9; Ord. 9-25-86, § 1; Ord. 9-13-90).


1.10.050 Composition of wards – Ward No. 3.

Ward No. 3 shall embrace all that portion of the city within the following bounds: The center line of Churchville Avenue from the northwestern corporate limits of the city to its intersection with A Street, the center line of A Street from its intersection with the Churchville Avenue to its intersection with Poplar Street, the center line of Poplar Street from its intersection with A Street to the Poplar Street entrance to Gypsy Hill Park, Constitution Drive from the Poplar Street entrance to Gypsy Hill Park to its intersection with Deaver Drive, Deaver Drive from its intersection with Constitution Drive to its intersection with Armory Drive, Armory Drive from its intersection with Deaver Drive to its intersection with the Staunton Fairgrounds Road, the Staunton Fairgrounds Road from its intersection with Armory Drive to the Thornrose Avenue entrance to the Staunton Fairgrounds, the center line of Thornrose Avenue from the Thornrose Avenue entrance to the Staunton Fairgrounds to its intersection with Churchville Avenue, the center line of Churchville Avenue from its intersection with Thornrose Avenue to its intersection with North Augusta Street, the center line of North Augusta Street from its intersection with Churchville Avenue to its intersection with Virginia Avenue, the center line of Virginia Avenue from its intersection with North Augusta Street to its intersection with Mt. Elliot Avenue, the center line of Mt. Elliot Avenue from its intersection with Virginia Avenue to its intersection with Lynn-haven Drive, the center line of Lynnhaven Drive west from its intersection with Mt. Elliot Avenue to its intersection with Lambert Street, the center line of Lambert Street from its intersection with Lynn-haven Drive to its intersection with Donaghe Street Extended, the center line of Donaghe Street Extended from its intersection with Lambert Street to its intersection with Springhill Road, the center line of Springhill Road from its intersection with Donaghe Street Extended, to the northern corporate limits of the city, the corporate limits of the city westward to its intersection with the center line of Churchville Avenue. (Code 1985, § 10-10; Ord. 9-25-86, § 1; Ord. 9-13-90).


1.10.060 Composition of wards – Ward No. 4.

Ward No. 4 shall embrace all that portion of the city within the following bounds: The center line of Springhill Road from the northern corporate limits of the city to its intersection with Donaghe Street Extended, the center line of Donaghe Street Extended from its intersection with Springhill Road to its intersection with Lambert Street, the center line of Lambert Street from its intersection with Donaghe Street Extended to its western intersection with Lynnhaven Drive, the center line of Lynnhaven Drive from its western intersection with Lambert Street to its intersection with Mt. Elliot Avenue, the center line of Mt. Elliot Avenue from its intersection with Lynnhaven Drive to its intersection with Virginia Avenue, the center line of Virginia Avenue from its intersection with Mt. Elliot Avenue to its intersection with North Augusta Street, the center line of North Augusta Street from its intersection with Virginia Avenue to its intersection with Taylor Street, the center line of Taylor Street from its intersection with North Augusta Street to its intersection with East Beverley Street, the center line of East Beverley Street to its intersection with Statler Boulevard, the center line of Statler Boulevard from its intersection with East Beverley Street to its intersection with Commerce Road, the center line of Commerce Road from its intersection with Statler Boulevard to the point where Commerce Road and North Augusta Street merge and, along the center line of the merged streets, continues as U.S. Route 11, to the northeast corporate limits of the city, the corporate limits of the city westward to its intersection with the center line of Springhill Road. (Ord. 2011-17. Code 1985, § 10-11; Ord. 9-25-86, § 1).


1.10.070 Composition of wards – Ward No. 5.

Ward No. 5 shall embrace all that portion of the city within the following bounds: The center line of Richmond Road from the east corporate limits of the city to its intersection with Greenville Avenue, the center line of Greenville Avenue from its intersection with Richmond Road to its intersection with Johnson Street, the center line of Johnson Street from its intersection with Greenville Avenue to its intersection with South Augusta Street, the center line of South Augusta Street to its intersection with Middlebrook Avenue, the center line of Middlebrook Avenue from its intersection with South Augusta Street to its intersection with the CSX railway line, west along the center line of the CSX railway line from its intersection with Middlebrook Avenue to its intersection with Bridge Street, Stuart Street and Green Street, the center line of Green Street from its intersection with Bridge Street, Stuart Street and the CSX railway line to its intersection with Jefferson Street, the center line of Jefferson Street from its intersection with Green Street to its intersection with West Beverley Street, the center line of West Beverley Street from its intersection with Jefferson Street to its intersection with Thornrose Avenue, the center line of Thornrose Avenue from its intersection with West Beverley Street to its intersection with Churchville Avenue, the center line of Churchville Avenue from its intersection with Thornrose Avenue to its intersection with North Augusta Street, the center line of North Augusta Street from its intersection at Churchville Avenue to its intersection with Taylor Street, the center line of Taylor Street from its intersection with North Augusta Street to its intersection with East Beverley Street, the center line of East Beverley Street from its intersection with Taylor Street to its intersection with Statler Boulevard, the center line of Statler Boulevard from its intersection with East Beverley Street to its intersection with Commerce Road, the center line of Commerce Road from its intersection with Statler Boulevard to the point where Commerce Road and North Augusta Street merge and, along the center line of the merged streets, continues as U.S. Route 11, to the northeast corporate limits of the city, and the corporate limits of the city southward to its intersection with the center line of Richmond Road. (Ord. 2011-17. Code 1985, § 10-12; Ord. 9-25-86, § 1).


1.10.080 Polling place – Ward No. 1.

Third Presbyterian Church, 1313 Barterbrook Road, in the city of Staunton, Virginia, is hereby designated as the polling place for Ward No. 1. (Ord. 2017-04. Code 1985, § 10-13; Ord. 9-25-86, § 1).


1.10.090 Polling place – Ward No. 2.

Christ United Methodist Church, 1512 Churchville Avenue in the city of Staunton, Virginia, is hereby designated as the polling place for Ward No. 2. (Ord. 2005-07. Code 1985, § 10-14; Ord. 9-25-86, § 1).


1.10.100 Polling place – Ward No. 3.

The Gypsy Hill Park Gymnasium in the city of Staunton, Virginia, is hereby designated as the polling place for Ward No. 3. (Ord. 2008-21. Code 1985, § 10-15; Ord. 9-25-86, § 1).


1.10.110 Polling place – Ward No. 4.

Seventh-Day Adventist Church, 1000 N. Coalter Street, in the city of Staunton, Virginia, is hereby designated as the polling place for Ward No. 4. (Ord. 2013-03. Code 1985, § 10-16; Ord. 9-25-86, § 1).


1.10.120 Polling place – Ward No. 5.

Memorial Baptist Church, 224 Taylor Street in the city of Staunton, Virginia, is hereby designated as the polling place for Ward No. 5. (Ord. 2005-07. Code 1985, § 10-17; Ord. 9-25-86, § 1).


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION*

Chapters:

2.05    In General

2.10    City Council

2.15    Official Bonds

2.20    City Manager

2.25    City Treasurer

2.30    City Clerk

2.35    City Attorney

2.40    Commissioner of Revenue

2.45    Chief Finance Officer

2.50    Health Department

2.55    Planning Commission

2.60    Economic Development Authority

2.65    Office on Youth

2.70    Fire and Rescue Department

2.75    Libraries

2.80    Parks and Recreation

2.85    Police

2.90    Social Services

2.95    Aviation

2.100    Valley Alcohol Safety Action Program Board

*Cross references – Elections, Ch. 1.10 SCC; city treasurer, SCC 2.25.010 et seq.; commissioner of revenue, SCC 2.40.010 et seq.; chief finance officer, SCC 2.45.010 et seq.; fire department, SCC 2.70.010 et seq.; library board, SCC 2.75.010, 2.75.020; Shenandoah Valley Airport Commission, SCC 2.95.010 et seq.; director of recreation, SCC 2.80.010; Director of Recreation, Parks and Playgrounds, SCC 2.80.020 et seq.; police department, SCC 2.85.020 et seq.; social services, Ch. 2.90 SCC; animal warden, SCC 6.05.030; interfering with or obstructing city officers or employees or persons doing work for city, SCC 9.05.030; damaging city property, SCC 9.05.060; department of building inspection and building official, SCC 15.05.020; board of building code appeals, SCC 15.10.050; electrical review board, SCC 15.10.060; plumbing and mechanical review board, SCC 15.10.070; material of historical interest, App. A.


Chapter 2.05 IN GENERAL

Sections:

2.05.010    Oath of city officers.

2.05.020    Deferred compensation plan for city employees – Generally.

2.05.030    Same – Deferred compensation committee.

2.05.040    Agencies recognized as part of city’s official safety program.


2.05.010 Oath of city officers.

Every person elected or appointed to any office in the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take the oath of office prescribed by the laws of the state to be taken by persons holding offices under the state. Such oath shall be taken before any person duly qualified to administer it under the laws of the state and his certificate that such oath has been taken shall be filed with the clerk of the circuit court for the city of Staunton. The clerk of council who shall enter the same upon the journal to be kept of the proceedings of the meetings of the council, and the school board shall enter the same in the minutes of their meeting. Any person appointed or elected to any office in the city may qualify by taking such oath up to and including the date of the initial meeting of the new governing body, or elected school board, as the case may be. (Ord. 8-22-02; Code 1985, § 2-1).

State law references – Oath of local officers required, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1522; oath of state officers prescribed, § 49-1.


2.05.020 Deferred compensation plan for city employees – Generally.

(1) Pursuant to the Government Employees Deferred Compensation Act, Section 51.1-600 et seq., of the Code of Virginia, the city hereby adopts and establishes a plan of deferred compensation for its employees. The purpose of the plan shall be to provide for the deferral of compensation to the participants. The plan shall exist in addition to all other requirement, pension or other benefit systems available to the participants and shall not supersede, make inoperative or reduce any benefits provided by any other retirement, pension or benefit program established by law.

(2) On behalf of the employer, the city manager is hereby authorized and directed to execute and deliver the plan referred to in subsection (1) of this section to the plan administrator. The plan shall contain such terms and amendments as the city manager may, from time to time, approve, such approval to be conclusively evidenced by his execution thereof. (Ord. 6-13-81; Code 1985, § 2-3).

Cross reference – Ordinances prescribing compensation for officers and employees not affected by code or ordinance adopting code, SCC 1.05.060.

State law reference – Authority to adopt deferred compensation plan, Code of Virginia, § 51.1-603.


2.05.030 Same – Deferred compensation committee.

There is hereby created a deferred compensation committee to be appointed by the city manager. Such committee is hereby granted the power to do all things by way of supervision, administration and implementation of the plan of deferred compensation, including, but not limited to, the power to contract with private corporations or institutions for service in connection therewith; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to authorize the deferred compensation committee to act beyond the limits of the plan. (Ord. 7-13-81; Code 1985, § 2-4).


2.05.040 Agencies recognized as part of city’s official safety program.

For the purpose of fulfilling the provisions of Sections 15.2-1701 and 27-6.1 of the Code of Virginia, the police department, the police reserve force, the fire and rescue department, the fire and rescue reserve force, and the volunteer fire company are hereby recognized as an integral part of the safety program of the city, along with other agencies so recognized by any other ordinance. (Code 1964, § 2-45; Code 1985, § 2-5; Ord. 8-8-00).

Cross references – Fire department, SCC 2.70.010 et seq.; police department, SCC 2.85.020 et seq.


Chapter 2.10 CITY COUNCIL*

Sections:

Article I. Generally

2.10.010    Election and duties of president and vice-president.

2.10.020    Filling of vacancies.

2.10.030    Members ineligible to certain offices.

2.10.040    Disorderly behavior of members – Malfeasance or misfeasance in office.

2.10.050    Removal of officers.

2.10.060    Authority as to extension of water and sewer lines and improvement of streets to promote industrial development.

Article II. Meetings

2.10.070    When regular meetings held – Adjourned or postponed meetings.

2.10.080    Quorum.

2.10.090    Rules of procedure generally.

2.10.100    Suspension of rules of procedure.

2.10.110    Form of petitions and communications.

2.10.120    Members required to vote – Exceptions.

2.10.130    Reconsideration of vote.

2.10.140    Viva-voce vote in elections by council.

Article III. Ordinances and Resolutions

2.10.150    Passage, amendment and repeal generally – Signature of presiding officer.

2.10.160    Style.

2.10.170    Special requirements for appropriations, tax levies, etc.

2.10.180    Required vote on ordinance disposing of property or franchise.

2.10.190    Effect of new ordinance on prior offenses, penalties, rights, etc.

2.10.200    Repeal not to revive former ordinance.

*Charter reference – Council generally, Ch. II.

Article I. Generally


2.10.010 Election and duties of president and vice-president.

The council shall, at its first meeting in September, 1950, and biennially thereafter on July 1st, elect one of its members as president, who shall be, ex officio, mayor of the city who shall be the presiding officer of the council and official head of the city, and who shall perform such duties as shall be prescribed by the laws of the state or may be imposed by the council not inconsistent therewith. The council shall, at the same time, elect a vice-president, who shall perform the duties of the president or mayor in his absence or incapacity. (Code 1964, § 2-10; Code 1985, § 2-16).

Charter reference – President and vice-president of council, § 5.


2.10.020 Filling of vacancies.

When any vacancy in the membership of the council shall occur by death, resignation, expulsion, removal from the city, failure to qualify or from any other cause, the remaining members of the council shall, by majority vote, elect a qualified citizen to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. (Code 1964, § 2-3; Ord. 9-27-84; Code 1985, § 2-17).

State law reference – Vacancies in council, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1424. See also, § 24.2-226.


2.10.030 Members ineligible to certain offices.

No member of the council shall be eligible, during his tenure of office as such member and for one year thereafter, to any office to be filled by the council, by election or by appointment. (Code 1964, § 24; Code 1985, § 2-18).

Charter reference – Similar provisions, § 16.


2.10.040 Disorderly behavior of members – Malfeasance or misfeasance in office.

The council may, by a majority vote, punish a member for disorderly behavior by a fine not exceeding $100.00 and, by a four-fifths vote of its whole membership, expel a member for malfeasance or misfeasance in office. Fines imposed under this section shall be collected in the same manner as fines imposed by the general district court. (Code 1964, § 2-5; Code 1985, § 2-19).


2.10.050 Removal of officers.

For malfeasance, misfeasance, neglect of duty, incapacity or any other good cause, the council may remove from office any officer elected or appointed by it. (Code 1964, § 2-25; Code 1985, § 2-20).

State law reference – Removal of public officers, Code of Virginia, §24.2-230 through 24.2-238.


2.10.060 Authority as to extension of water and sewer lines and improvement of streets to promote industrial development.

Notwithstanding the provisions of any other provision of this code or ordinance or regulation of the city, the city council, whenever it may deem it advisable in order to promote industrial development within the corporate limits of the city, may provide for the extension of water lines and sewer mains and the construction of streets to any manufacturing plant site within the corporate limits of the city and may provide that the cost of such extension of utilities and improvements be borne by the city alone or by the city and the manufacturing plant in question in such proportions as may be deemed reasonable by the council. (Code 1964, § 2-23; Code 1985, § 2-21).

Cross references – Streets, Title 12; water supply, Title 13, Division II; sewers, Title 13, Division III.

Article II. Meetings*

*Charter reference – Council meetings, § 6 et seq.

Cross reference – Disrupting or disturbing council meetings, SCC 9.05.050.


2.10.070 When regular meetings held – Adjourned or postponed meetings.

The council shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Thursdays of each month, at such hour, as it may designate, and shall meet at any other time to which it may be regularly adjourned or postponed. If a quorum fails to attend, those attending may adjourn to such other time prior to the next regular meeting as they may determine and the clerk shall enter such adjournment in the journal of the council and shall notify absent members thereof, in the same manner as is required for special meetings. (Code 1964, § 2-6; Code 1985, § 2-27).

Charter references – At least one regular meeting per month required, § 6; call of special meetings, § 7. 


2.10.080 Quorum.

A majority of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business that does not require more than a majority vote of those present to determine. For the transaction of business requiring more than a majority vote of those present to determine, a quorum shall consist of such number of members as are required by law for the determination of such business. (Code 1964, § 2-7; Code 1985, § 2-28).


2.10.090 Rules of procedure generally.

The rules of parliamentary procedure as comprised in “Robert’s Rules of Order” shall govern the council in all its deliberations, except in cases where they are in conflict with the laws of the state or of special rules adopted by the council. (Code 1964, § 2-11; Code 1985, § 2-30).


2.10.100 Suspension of rules of procedure.

Any rule of procedure set forth in this article may be suspended for the time being by the affirmative vote of at least four members of the council. (Code 1964, § 2-16; Code 1985, § 2-31).


2.10.110 Form of petitions and communications.

All petitions and communications addressed to the council shall be in respectful language and in writing. (Code 1964, § 2-13; Code 1985, § 2-32).


2.10.120 Members required to vote – Exceptions.

Every member of the council present shall vote upon all questions upon which a vote may be taken, unless excused from voting by the council. No member, however, shall be permitted to vote upon any matter in which he shall have an immediate personal or financial interest. (Code 1964, § 2-9; Code 1985, § 2-33).


2.10.130 Reconsideration of vote.

Any member of the council voting on the prevailing side of any question voted on by the council may move a reconsideration thereof at such meeting or at the next succeeding regular meeting, but no vote of a former meeting shall be reconsidered unless there be present at the subsequent meeting as many members as were present at the former meeting when the vote was taken. (Code 1964, § 2-8; Code 1985, § 2-34).

Charter reference – Motion to reconsider adoption of ordinance or resolution increasing city indebtedness or expending revenues, § 9.


2.10.140 Viva-voce vote in elections by council.

Every election to office made by the council shall be by a viva-voce vote. (Code 1964, § 2-15; Code 1985, § 2-35).

Article III. Ordinances and Resolutions*

*Charter references – General authority of council to pass ordinances, bylaws and rules, § 11(21); publication of ordinances, § 11(22, 23).

Cross reference – Interference with enforcement of ordinances, SCC 9.05.040.


2.10.150 Passage, amendment and repeal generally – Signature of presiding officer.

No ordinance shall be passed, amended or repealed, except by ordinance regularly introduced and passed, nor shall any subsection of an ordinance be amended, unless the whole subsection be re-ordained, and all ordinances, amendments or resolutions which are duly passed shall bear the signature of the presiding officer at the meeting at which they are passed. (Code 1964, § 2-17; Code 1985, § 2-41).


2.10.160 Style.

The style in which ordinances shall be passed shall be: “Be it ordained by the Council of the City of Staunton” and that in which resolutions shall be passed shall be: “Be it resolved by the Council of the City of Staunton.” (Code 1964, § 2-20; Code 1985, § 2-42).


2.10.170 Special requirements for appropriations, tax levies, etc.

(1) No ordinance or resolution appropriating money exceeding the sum of $1,000, imposing taxes or authorizing the borrowing of money shall be passed by the council on the same day on which it is introduced, nor shall any such ordinance or resolution be valid unless at least three days intervene between its introduction and the date of final passage.

(2) No ordinance or resolution appropriating money exceeding $100.00, imposing or releasing taxes, authorizing the borrowing of money or donating any property of the city, where the value of such property is $100.00 or more, or increasing the salary or pay of any employee, when the aggregate of such increase in salary is $100.00 or more for any one year, shall be passed except by recorded affirmative vote of a majority of all members elected to the council. (Code 1964, § 2-18; Code 1985, § 2-43).

Charter reference – Similar provisions, § 8.

State law reference – Provisions similar to subsection (2) above, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1428.


2.10.180 Required vote on ordinance disposing of property or franchise.

No ordinance granting, leasing, selling or otherwise disposing of any public property or franchise shall be valid, unless passed by the council by a recorded affirmative vote of three-fourths of all the members elected to the council. (Code 1964, § 2-19; Code 1985, § 2-44).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2100.


2.10.190 Effect of new ordinance on prior offenses, penalties, rights, etc.

No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to any offense committed against the former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or done, or penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued, or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter had shall conform, so far as practicable, to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceedings. (Code 1964, § 2-21; Code 1985, § 2-45).


2.10.200 Repeal not to revive former ordinance.

When an ordinance which has repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. (Code 1964, § 2-22; Code 1985, § 2-46).


Chapter 2.15 OFFICIAL BONDS*

Sections:

2.15.010    Required for specific officers.

2.15.020    May be required for other officers and employees.

2.15.030    Effect of failure to give.

2.15.040    To be payable to city – Surety – Conditions – Preservation.

2.15.050    Payment of premiums.

*Cross reference – Proceedings against sureties of officers whose duties include collection of money due city, SCC 3.05.060.

State law reference – General authority of council to require official bonds, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1527 through 15.2-1533.


2.15.010 Required for specific officers.

Official bonds shall be required of the following officials and in the penalties indicated, respectively:

	Treasurer	$100,000

	Chief finance officer	$5,000

	Commissioner of revenue	$3,000

	City clerk	$1,000 

	Chief of police	$1,000

	City manager	$5,000

	Chief clerk to city manager	$1,000

(Code 1964, § 2-28; Code 1985, § 2-57).

Charter reference – Treasurer and commissioner of revenue to give bond in amount prescribed by council, §§ 17, 18.

Cross references – City treasurer, SCC 2.25.010 et seq.; commissioner of revenue, SCC 2.40.010 et seq.; chief finance officer, SCC 2.45.010 et seq.; police department, SCC 2.85.020 et seq.

State law reference – Bond of treasurer and commissioner of revenue, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1527, 15.2-1528, 15.2-1530.


2.15.020 May be required for other officers and employees.

Official bonds may be required by the council or by the city manager of officers or employees, other than those listed in SCC 2.15.010, in such penalty as may be requisite to protect the city. (Code 1964, § 2-28; Code 1985, § 2-58).


2.15.030 Effect of failure to give.

Any person elected or appointed to any office who shall, for 30 days after notification of his election or appointment, neglect to give such bond and surety as may be required of him, shall thereby vacate his office. (Code 1964, § 2-29; Code 1985, § 2-59).


2.15.040 To be payable to city – Surety – Conditions – Preservation.

(1) Every bond required by the provisions of this code or other ordinance of the city to be taken or approved by the council, or any body or person acting under the authority of the city government, shall, unless otherwise provided, be made payable to the city, with surety deemed sufficient by the council. Every such bond required of any such person elected or appointed to any office, post or trust shall, unless otherwise provided, be conditioned on the faithful discharge by such person of the duties of his office or trust, and unless otherwise directed by the council, shall be returned to the city clerk and preserved among the official records.

(2) All city officials or employees who are required to give an official bond shall furnish, as surety thereon, some trust or guaranty company duly authorized to transact business in this state, which shall be deemed satisfactory by the council.

(3) All persons who may be required to give bond in excess of $500.00 for the faithful compliance with any contract made with the city shall furnish, as surety on such bond, some trust or guaranty company duly authorized to transact business in this state, which shall be deemed satisfactory by the council. (Code 1964, § 2-28; Code 1985, § 2-60).


2.15.050 Payment of premiums.

The premiums on all bonds given under this chapter, except those referred to in SCC 2.15.040(3), shall be paid by the city. (Code 1964, § 2-30; Code 1985, § 2-61).

State law reference – Authority of city to pay premiums on bonds, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1527, 15.2-1532.


Chapter 2.20 CITY MANAGER*

Sections:

2.20.010    Appointment – Qualifications – Term.

2.20.020    Compensation.

2.20.030    General powers and duties.

2.20.040    Powers and duties with respect to officers and employees.

2.20.050    Designation of acting manager.

*Charter reference – City manager generally, §§ 14-16.


2.20.010 Appointment – Qualifications – Term.

The council shall, whenever there is a vacancy, appoint a city manager, who shall be the administrative head of the municipal government. He shall be chosen by the council without regard to his political beliefs and solely upon the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. The choice shall not be limited to the inhabitants of the city or state. He shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall serve at the will of the council. (Code 1964, § 2-33; Code 1985, § 2-72).

Charter reference – Similar provisions, § 14.


2.20.020 Compensation.

The council shall, by resolution, fix the yearly compensation of the city manager, to be paid in monthly installments out of the city treasury. (Code 1964, § 2-34; Code 1985, § 2-73).

Charter reference – Manager’s compensation to be fixed by ordinance or resolution, § 14.


2.20.030 General powers and duties.

(1) The city manager shall be responsible to the council for the efficient administration of all affairs of the city. He shall see that all laws and ordinances are enforced. He shall exercise supervision and control over all departments and divisions created under the provisions of the Charter or which may be created by the council. He shall attend all meetings of the council, with the right to take part in the discussion, but with no vote.

(2) The city manager shall recommend to the council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. He shall see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed and, upon knowledge of any violation thereof, he shall call the same to the attention of the council and of the city attorney. He shall make and execute all contracts on behalf of the city, except as may be otherwise provided by the Charter or by ordinance or resolution of the council. He shall act as budget commissioner, and as such shall prepare and submit to the council the annual budget, after receiving estimates made by the heads or directors of the departments or of any board or commission not within a department. He shall keep the council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. He shall perform all such other duties as may be prescribed by law or be required of him by ordinance or resolution of the council. (Code 1964, § 2-35; Code 1985, § 2-74).

Charter reference – General responsibilities and powers of city manager, § 15.

Cross reference – Finance, Title 3.


2.20.040 Powers and duties with respect to officers and employees.

Subject to provisions of annual budgets, current classification and compensation plans and ordinances of the city, the city manager shall appoint, promote and, when necessary for the good of the city, suspend, demote or remove officers and employees from the service of the city. This section does not apply to the city attorney, the city clerk, officers and employees of the public school system, constitutional officers and employees for which other provisions have been included under state law. (Code 1964, § 2-37; Code 1985, § 2-75).


2.20.050 Designation of acting manager.

During the absence or disability of the city manager, the council shall designate some properly qualified person to perform his duties. (Code 1964, § 2-38; Code 1985, § 2-76).

Charter reference – Similar provisions, § 14.


Chapter 2.25 CITY TREASURER*

Sections:

2.25.010    Duties, powers and penalties generally – Compensation.

2.25.020    Office location – Receipt and disbursement of funds generally.

2.25.030    Inspection of books, accounts, etc. – Delivery of books, accounts, money, etc., to successor.

2.25.040    Special assessments to be held in special funds.

2.25.050    General limitations on payment of city funds.

2.25.060    Payments not to be made to persons indebted to city.

2.25.070    Repealed.

2.25.080    Authority with respect to collection of assessments, taxes, etc., generally.

2.25.090    Collection of delinquent license taxes.

2.25.100    Payment of administrative costs.

*Charter reference – City treasurer, § 17.

Cross references – Bond of city treasurer, SCC 2.15.010; city clerk to furnish treasurer with copies of appropriation ordinances and ordinances authorizing payment of money, SCC 2.30.030.

State law reference – Election of treasurer, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1600, 24.2-217.


2.25.010 Duties, powers and penalties generally – Compensation.

(1) The city treasurer shall perform such duties, have such powers and be liable to such penalties as are now or may hereafter be prescribed by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city made in pursuance thereof, and for all services performed for the city, the treasurer shall receive such compensation, payable biweekly, as is approved by the state compensation board.

(2) The treasurer, in addition to the duties imposed by this chapter, shall discharge such other duties as are required by law or which may be imposed on him by the council and shall be subject to all the duties and penalties of city treasurers under existing laws of the state, so far as they are consistent with this chapter. (Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, § 10-8; Code 1985, § 12-18).


2.25.020 Office location – Receipt and disbursement of funds generally.

The treasurer shall keep the treasurer’s office in such place as shall be provided by the council and shall receive all taxes, including license taxes and vehicle license taxes, and other revenues and monies, except utility-related use and user charges (water, sewer, and refuse), which is the treasurer’s duty to collect from persons owing the same to the city, or which it is the duty of the other officers of the city to collect and pay over to the treasurer, and to facilitate payment processing expeditiously as the ordinances and resolutions of the council or as the director of finance may authorize or direct. (Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, § 10-9; Code 1985, § 12-19).


2.25.030 Inspection of books, accounts, etc. – Delivery of books, accounts, money, etc., to successor.

The books and accounts of the city treasurer and all papers and files relating to the accounts and transactions of the city shall be at all times subject to the immediate inspection of the city manager or the director of finance and such person as the city manager, director of finance or the council may designate to examine the same, and, together with any balance of monies on hand, shall be transferred by the treasurer to a successor. (Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, § 10-11; Code 1985, § 12-20).


2.25.040 Special assessments to be held in special funds.

All monies received on any special assessment shall be held by the city treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment for which the assessment was made and for no other purpose. (Code 1964, § 10-47; Code 1985, § 12-21).


2.25.050 General limitations on payment of city funds.

The chief finance officer shall not approve any claims against the city and the city treasurer shall make no payments from city funds which have not been authorized by city ordinances and state law and approved by the appropriate city official in the manner established by the policies of the city. (Code 1964, § 10-19; Code 1985, § 12-22).


2.25.060 Payments not to be made to persons indebted to city.

The treasurer shall refuse payment of any city warrant presented when the person to whom such warrant is payable is delinquent in the payment of taxes or levies or is indebted in any other manner to the city. The treasurer shall withhold payment of such warrant until such taxes, levies or indebtedness is paid. (Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, § 10-22; Code 1985, § 12-23).


2.25.070 Payment of matured serial bonds and interest on city debt.

Repealed by Ord. 2005-03. (Code 1964, § 10-46; Code 1985, § 12-24).


2.25.080 Authority with respect to collection of assessments, taxes, etc., generally.

(1) For the purpose of collecting all sidewalk and sewer assessments and any other dues owing to the city, the city treasurer and his deputies shall have the same right of distress and levy as the laws of the state vest in those whose duty it is to collect the taxes, levies, assessments and other dues owing to the state and all properties subject to levies to satisfy taxes due the state may be taken to satisfy any taxes, assessments or dues to the city. No deed of trust or mortgage upon goods and chattels shall prevent the same from being distrained or sold for taxes assessed against the grantor in such deed, while such goods and chattels remain in the possession of the grantor, nor shall any such deed prevent the goods and chattels conveyed from being distrained and sold for the taxes assessed thereon, no matter in whose possession they may be found.

(2) At any time after taxes, assessments, levies or dues owing to the city shall have become delinquent and unpaid and after the penalty provided by law has been added thereto, the city treasurer and all officers of the city authorized to collect taxes or levies due the city shall have the power of distress, garnishment or other action, and any other power now possessed by, or that may hereafter be given to, any other person charged with the collection of state taxes. (Code 1964, § 10-15; Code 1985, § 12-25).

State law reference – Collection of taxes generally, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1800 et seq.


2.25.090 Collection of delinquent license taxes.

Whenever any license taxes or installments thereof become delinquent, it shall be the duty of the commissioner of revenue to furnish a list to the chief finance officer showing the names, addresses and amounts of taxes and penalties due. The chief finance officer, upon receipt of such list, shall charge the city treasurer with the bills for the above taxes and penalties, and if the bills or any of them are not paid within 10 days, the city treasurer shall proceed to collect the bills as provided for other city taxes. (Code 1964, § 10-16; Code 1985, § 12-26).


2.25.100 Payment of administrative costs.

Whenever the city treasurer or other officers of the city authorized to collect taxes or levies due the city elect to proceed with the collection of delinquent taxes, then, in addition to all penalties and interest pertaining to such delinquent tax account, there shall be imposed a fee to cover the administrative costs associated with such collection. Such fee shall not exceed $20.00 for taxes collected subsequent to the filing of a warrant or other appropriate legal document, but prior to judgment, and $25.00 for taxes collected subsequent to judgment. (Code 1985, § 12-27; Ord. 12-17-92).

State law reference – Code of Virginia § 58.1-3958.


Chapter 2.30 CITY CLERK

Sections:

2.30.010    Appointment – General duties.

2.30.020    Duties with respect to notices, ordinances and resolutions.

2.30.030    Furnishing copies of appropriations, etc., to certain officers.


2.30.010 Appointment – General duties.

(1) The council shall appoint a city clerk, who shall serve as clerk of the council, clerk of the planning commission, clerk of the board of zoning appeals and clerk to such other boards and commissions as the council may designate.

(2) The city clerk shall maintain an accurate record of the proceedings of the council and of the boards and commissions which he has been designated by the council to serve. The clerk shall attend all such meetings, unless excused by the mayor or the chairman of the respective board or commission. It shall be the duty of the clerk to index all such proceedings for easy reference, to maintain a record of the proceedings in permanent record form, to file and maintain, in a secure manner, copies of franchise agreements, long-term contracts, contracts having major significance involving the city, written opinions of the city attorney for the benefit of the council, petitions, judicial decisions involving the city and other documents which may normally be considered long-term or permanent records of the city. He shall perform such other duties as properly appertain to the office or as are prescribed by the council. (Code 1964, § 2-39; Code 1985, § 2-87).

Charter reference – Appointment of city clerk, § 10.


2.30.020 Duties with respect to notices, ordinances and resolutions.

(1) The city clerk shall be responsible for the posting and publishing of notices of official actions of the council and for compilation of ordinances and resolutions having long-term or permanent effect for indexing, codification and publication.

(2) The city clerk shall maintain a book in which shall be recorded all ordinances and resolutions which establish long-term policy, adopt fire, construction or other codes or regulations, grant franchises or establish municipal boundaries or duties and responsibilities of officers of the city. (Code 1964, §§ 2-39, 2-40; Code 1985, § 2-88).


2.30.030 Furnishing copies of appropriations, etc., to certain officers.

The city clerk shall, within two working days after each session of the council, furnish to the chief finance officer and the treasurer copies of ordinances or resolutions making appropriations or authorizing the payment of money. (Code 1964, § 2-41; Code 1985, § 2-89).

Cross references – City treasurer, SCC 2.25.010 et seq.; chief finance officer, SCC 2.45.010 et seq.


Chapter 2.35 CITY ATTORNEY*

Sections:

2.35.010    General powers and duties.

2.35.020    Duty to draft legal instruments.

2.35.030    Duties with respect to litigation.

2.35.040    Travel expenses.

*Charter reference – Appointment of city attorney, § 10.


2.35.010 General powers and duties.

The city attorney, unless otherwise directed by the council, shall have the management, charge and control of all law business of the city and be the legal adviser of the mayor, council, city manager and the several departments of the city government, and when required, shall furnish written or verbal opinions upon any subject involving questions of law submitted to him by them. The city attorney shall perform such other duties as are or may be required of him by ordinance or resolution of the council. (Code 1964, § 2-42; Code 1985, § 2-100).


2.35.020 Duty to draft legal instruments.

It shall be the duty of the city attorney to draft all bonds, deeds, obligations, contracts, leases, conveyances, agreements and other legal instruments of whatsoever nature, which may be required of him by any ordinance or order of the council, or which, by any ordinance or order heretofore passed, may be required to be done and made by the city, or which may be required by any person contracting with the city in its corporate capacity and which, by law, usage or agreement, the city is to incur the expense of drawing. (Code 1964, § 2-42; Code 1985, § 2-101).


2.35.030 Duties with respect to litigation.

It shall be the duty of the city attorney, unless otherwise directed by the council, to commence and prosecute all actions and suits to be commenced by the city before any tribunal in this state, whether in law or in equity, and to appear in defense and to advocate the rights and interests of the city, or of any officer of the city, in any suit or prosecution for any act in the discharge of his official duties wherein any estate, right, privilege, ordinance or acts of the city government may be brought in question. When the city manager shall direct a prosecution for a nuisance, the city attorney shall appear for the prosecution when the case shall come into court, and if the court shall require it, the city attorney shall appear for the prosecution in such case. (Code 1964, § 2-42; Code 1985, § 2-102).


2.35.040 Travel expenses.

Whenever the attendance of the city attorney is required out of the city, his travel expenses shall be allowed him. (Code 1964, § 2-43; Code 1985, § 2-103).


Chapter 2.40 COMMISSIONER OF REVENUE*

Sections:

2.40.010    Election – Vacancy in office.

2.40.020    Compensation.

2.40.030    Deputy commissioners.

2.40.040    Books, forms, office equipment, etc.

*Charter reference – Commissioner of revenue, § 18.

Cross reference – Bond of commissioner of revenue, SCC 2.15.010.


2.40.010 Election – Vacancy in office.

The commissioner of revenue for the city shall be elected at such time and in such manner as is or may hereafter be fixed by law. Any vacancy arising in such office shall be filled in accordance with the laws of this state. (Code 1964, § 10-23; Code 1985, § 12-37).

State law reference – Election of commissioner of revenue, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1600, 24.2-217.


2.40.020 Compensation.

For his services, the commissioner of revenue shall receive such compensation, payable monthly, as is approved by the state compensation board. (Code 1964, § 10-31; Code 1985, § 12-38).


2.40.030 Deputy commissioners.

The commissioner of revenue may, with the approval of the council, appoint one or more deputies, but he and his sureties shall be responsible for their acts. (Code 1964, § 10-32; Code 1985, § 12-39).

Charter reference – Appointment of deputy commissioner, § 19.


2.40.040 Books, forms, office equipment, etc.

The commissioner of revenue shall use the land and personal property books and other tax books and forms sent him by the State Department of Taxation as provided by law, unless lawful changes in such books and forms are directed by the council, in which case he shall use the books and forms prescribed and furnished by the city. He shall be furnished by the city with all other books, forms and all necessary printing, stationery, office supplies and equipment for the proper conduct of his office. (Code 1964, § 10-24; Code 1985, § 12-40).


Chapter 2.45 CHIEF FINANCE OFFICER*

Sections:

2.45.010    Defined.

2.45.020    Position created – Appointment – General powers and duties.

2.45.030    Duties as budgetary control officer.

2.45.040    Authority to obtain financial records.

2.45.050    Establishment and maintenance of accounting system generally.

2.45.060    System of accounting for obligations incurred by city.

2.45.070    Duties with respect to city utilities.

2.45.080    Charge and credit for accounts receivable.

2.45.090    Certification of claims for payment.

2.45.100    Prompt payment of obligations.

2.45.110    Overdrawal of appropriation by account.

2.45.120    Purchasing agent and purchases generally.

2.45.130    Purchases to be in compliance with federal and state law.

2.45.140    Warrant register to be kept.

2.45.150    Monthly and special financial reports.

*Cross references – Bond of chief finance officer, SCC 2.15.010; city clerk to furnish chief finance officer with copies of appropriation ordinances and ordinances authorizing payment of money, SCC 2.30.030.


2.45.010 Defined.

The term “chief finance officer,” as used in this code, shall refer to the director of finance or other position of the organizational structure of the city having general responsibility and authority for the city’s fiscal affairs, financial and accounting systems, procedures and reporting, data, records, selection and oversight of public depositories, financial institutions and adviser(s), assessing, purchasing, financial planning, budgetary review and other overall financial matters, and being the senior supervisory official under the city manager in the field of finance and accounting. (Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, § 10-1.1; Code 1985, § 12-51).


2.45.020 Position created – Appointment – General powers and duties.

(1) There is hereby created the position of chief finance officer of the city, to be known as the director of finance. The appointment to the position is the responsibility of the city manager. The powers, duties and responsibilities of the position shall be those established by this chapter, other ordinances of the city, appropriate federal and state statutes and directives of the city manager.

(2) Subject to limitations imposed by the state constitution and statutes of the city, the chief finance officer shall provide general supervision over the development and maintenance of financial and accounting systems, procedures and reporting, data, records, selection and oversight of public depositories, financial institutions, firms and adviser(s), investment management, cash management, bond and other debt transactions, and management, auditing, control of stores’ inventories and procurement and acquisition of materials, supplies and equipment, and shall also serve as budget officer, subject to supervision by the city manager. The decisions of the chief finance officer as to all such matters shall be final, subject to the authority of the city manager and council. (Ord. 2020-11; Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, § 10-33; Code 1985, § 12-52).


2.45.030 Duties as budgetary control officer.

The chief finance officer shall serve as budgetary control officer and shall assist the city manager in developing and assembling the necessary information and planning and prioritizing financial commitments for the preparation of the annual budget. (Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, § 10-41; Code 1985, § 12-53).


2.45.040 Authority to obtain financial records.

To the fullest extent permitted by law, the chief finance officer is hereby authorized to obtain or access any financial records, data, files, reports, software, and hardware and to prescribe and require compliance with procedures necessary for the fulfillment of the responsibility for overall financial or fiscal affairs supervisor of the city, and all city officers and employees are hereby directed to cooperate and comply immediately with such officer in the fulfillment of this responsibility. (Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, § 10-42; Code 1985, § 12-54).


2.45.050 Establishment and maintenance of accounting system generally.

The chief finance officer shall cause to be established and maintained a complete, integrated financial and accounting system which shall generally conform with the recommended standards of the Government Finance Officers Association, published in Governmental Accounting, Auditing, and Financial Reporting, except as otherwise required by law. (Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, §§ 10-1.2,10-34; Code 1985, § 12-55).


2.45.060 System of accounting for obligations incurred by city.

An encumbrance system of accounting for obligations incurred by the city shall be maintained under the supervision of the chief finance officer. Before purchases are made or obligations committed against the city, requisitions shall be cleared through the chief finance officer or designated assistant to determine that adequate funds are available in the appropriate account or accounts to cover the cost of the items included in the requisition. When goods, services or equipment have been received in good condition, as specified by the instructions to vendors, the chief finance officer or designated assistant may then approve payment of approved obligations. (Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, § 10-3; Code 1985, § 12-56).


2.45.070 Duties with respect to city utilities.

The chief finance officer shall develop and maintain appropriate accounting and finance records and procedures for city-owned or -operated utilities, including the billing for and receipt of payment from utility customers of the city. The chief finance officer shall bill and receive payment from each user for use or user fees in connection with such utilities, including use or user fees for water, sewer, and refuse. (Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, § 10-36; Code 1985, § 12-57).

Cross references – Water bills, SCC 13.20.050 et seq.; billing and records pertaining to sewer user fee, SCC 13.45.050.


2.45.080 Charge and credit for accounts receivable.

The chief finance officer shall charge the treasurer or other officer whose duty it is to collect the revenues of the city and other accounts receivable items and shall give credit for all collections reported in the manner prescribed by the chief finance officer or otherwise as according to law. (Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, § 10-38; Code 1985, § 12-58).


2.45.090 Certification of claims for payment.

The chief finance officer shall determine that all claims against the city are properly certified for payment by responsible officials or employees before payment is made and that adequate appropriations are available in the respective accounts to cover the cost of such payments. When the chief finance officer finds it necessary to deny payment of a claim against the city, the chief finance officer shall return the requesting document to the responsible city officer or employee with an explanation as to why payment has been denied. (Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, § 10-35; Code 1985, § 12-59).


2.45.100 Prompt payment of obligations.

All legitimate obligations against the city which have been committed according to ordinances and policies of the city shall be paid promptly; provided, that funds have been appropriated for the purpose for which the commitment was made and that the cash balance of the respective fund from which payment is to be made is adequate to cover the cost involved. (Code 1964, § 10-4; Code 1985, § 12-60).


2.45.110 Overdrawal of appropriation by account.

Unless authorized by the council, no account shall be audited for allowance which will overdraw the appropriation to the credit of the department against which such claim is chargeable, and the chief finance officer shall refuse payment of any such account or claim without the express direction of the council. (Code 1964, § 10-5; Code 1985, § 12-61).


2.45.120 Purchasing agent and purchases generally.

(1) There is hereby created, in the office of the chief finance officer, the position of purchasing agent for the city, who shall be designated by the chief finance officer. It shall be the duty of the purchasing agent, subject to the policies of the city council and the general administrative supervision of the city manager and chief finance officer, to establish specifications for materials, supplies and equipment, to solicit competitive quotations on items to be purchased, to maintain control over stores’ inventories of the city and to procure items used by the city in the most economical manner available. Specifications shall be prepared so that the greatest competition can be generated among vendors, consistent with the quality needed by the city and most economical cost over the anticipated life of the items acquired.

(2) A record shall be maintained, for not less than five years, of all bids or quotations on items which have successful quoted prices of more than $10,000.

(3) Where there is only one known source of supply for an item, competitive quotations will not be required; provided, however, that written approval for this exception to the bidding requirements shall be obtained from the city manager. (Ord. 2020-11; Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, § 2-38.1; Code 1985, § 12-62; Ord. 7-11-02).


2.45.130 Purchases to be in compliance with federal and state law.

All contracts for labor, materials, supplies and equipment shall be made in compliance with appropriate federal and state laws, city ordinances, current city policies and appropriations. The chief finance officer shall determine that the conditions herein stated are followed. (Ord. 2020-11; Code 1964, § 10-6; Code 1985, § 12-63).

State law reference – Virginia Public Procurement Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-43 et seq. (Ord. 7-11-02).


2.45.140 Warrant register to be kept.

The chief finance officer shall keep a register of all warrants, showing their date, amount, the fund from which paid, the person to whom paid, and the time of payment. (Code 1964, § 10-20; Code 1985, § 12-64).


2.45.150 Monthly and special financial reports.

The chief finance officer shall cause to be prepared monthly financial reports showing not less than the budgeted anticipated receipts, actual receipts, appropriations, encumbrances and expenditures through the month for which the report was prepared. Such reports shall be available and provided to the city manager and council by the second Thursday of each month. Special financial reports shall be prepared by the chief finance officer upon the request of the city manager or the council. (Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, §§ 10-1.3, 10-39; Code 1985, § 12-65).


Chapter 2.50 HEALTH DEPARTMENT*

Sections:

2.50.010    Created – Appointment and qualifications of health officer.

2.50.020    Appointment and term of sanitary inspector.

2.50.030    Enforcement of health, sanitation, etc., ordinances by health officer.

2.50.040    Health officer’s book of complaints and forms.

2.50.050    Inspections and remedial action by department personnel.

*State law reference – Local health departments, Code of Virginia, §§ 32.1-30 – 32.1-34.


2.50.010 Created – Appointment and qualifications of health officer.

There is hereby created a health department for the city, the head of which shall be the health officer, who shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to the approval of the council. The health officer shall be a physician licensed to practice in the commonwealth. The health officer shall be deemed to be the local health director within the meaning of Section 32.1-.30 of the Code of Virginia. (Code 1964, § 13-2; Code 1985, § 2-114).


2.50.020 Appointment and term of sanitary inspector.

The city manager shall appoint, subject to approval by the council, an inspector for the health department, who shall be known as the sanitary inspector, who shall hold office at the will of the council. (Code 1964, § 13-8; Code 1985, § 2-115).


2.50.030 Enforcement of health, sanitation, etc., ordinances by health officer.

The health officer shall see that the ordinances of the city relating to health, sanitation and foodstuffs are enforced and it shall be his duty to cause the arrest of any offenders against such ordinances. For the purpose of enforcing such ordinances, the health officer shall have police powers. (Code 1964, §§ 13-3, 13-4; Code 1985, § 2-116).


2.50.040 Health officer’s book of complaints and forms.

The health officer shall keep a book of complaints in which shall be recorded all complaints made and any action thereon and shall provide convenient printed forms for use in connection with his duties, to be paid for out of the city’s funds. (Code 1964, § 13-7; Code 1985, § 2-117).


2.50.050 Inspections and remedial action by department personnel.

(1) It shall be the duty of the health officer to make, or have made by the sanitary inspector, periodic and frequent inspections of all premises, public and private, in the city and keep a record thereof. The health officer shall have power to inspect, or have inspected, and analyze, or have analyzed, all food offered for sale in the city and to condemn, seize and destroy, or have condemned, seized or destroyed, such as may be in any way injurious to health, and to cause the disinfection, where necessary, of all houses, places or rooms in which infectious or contagious diseases or conditions exist or have existed. He shall supervise the enforcement of measures for the prevention, treatment and extermination of infectious or contagious diseases, and shall have power to cause to be removed, destroyed or remedied any source of infection or unsanitary condition, at the expense of the person responsible therefor, unless the city manager shall determine that such expense shall be borne by the city.

(2) It shall be the duty of the sanitary inspector, under the direction of the health officer, to inspect from time to time all public buildings and places, churches, schools, theaters, food establishments, factories, stores, stables and other places where livestock is kept, cellars and the premises appurtenant thereto, dry and water closets, plumbing, water spigots and water connections on such premises, watersheds, reservoirs, springs, spring houses, streams, fountains and pumps and all premises which are required by state laws, city ordinances or rules and regulations of the health department to be kept in a sanitary and clean condition. (Code 1964, §§ 13-6, 13-9; Code 1985, § 2-118).


Chapter 2.55 PLANNING COMMISSION*

Sections:

2.55.010    Created – Powers and duties.

2.55.020    Composition – Appointment and qualifications of members.

2.55.030    Terms of members.

2.55.040    Filling vacancies.

2.55.050    Reimbursement of members for expenses.

*Charter references – Authority of council to provide for a planning commission, § 11(19); planning commission generally, § 32.

Cross references – Subdivisions, Title 17; zoning, Title 18.


2.55.010 Created – Powers and duties.

By authority of the appropriate sections of the state law and under Section 32 of the Charter, there is hereby created a planning commission for the city, with powers and duties as set forth in the appropriate sections of the state law. (Code 1964, § 18-1; Code 1985, § 2-129).

State law references – Duty to create planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2210; powers and duties of such commission, § 15.2-2214 et seq.


2.55.020 Composition – Appointment and qualifications of members.

The planning commission shall consist of five members appointed by the city council, one of whom may be a member of the city council and one of whom may be an administrative official of the city. The remaining members shall be residents of the city, qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions of the community growth and development. At least three members shall be owners of real property within the city of Staunton, Virginia. (Code 1964, § 18-2; Code 1985, § 2-130; Ord. 9-14-89).

Charter reference – Planning commission to consist of five members appointed by council, § 32.

State law reference – Composition, etc., of planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212.


2.55.030 Terms of members.

The terms of office of the members of the planning commission, other than the member of the council and the administrative official, shall be one, two, three and four years, respectively, from the date of the first appointment under this chapter, and thereafter for terms of four years. (Code 1964, § 18-3; Code 1985, § 2-131).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212.


2.55.040 Filling vacancies.

Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the planning commission shall be filled by the city council. (Code 1964, § 18-4; Code 1985, § 2-132).


2.55.050 Reimbursement of members for expenses.

Members of the planning commission shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred, as authorized by Section 15.2-2212 of the Code of Virginia. (Code 1964, § 18-5; Code 1985, § 2-133).


Chapter 2.60 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY

Sections:

2.60.010    Created – Powers.

2.60.020    Name.


2.60.010 Created – Powers.

There is hereby created a political subdivision of the commonwealth of Virginia with such public and corporate powers as are set forth in the Industrial Development and Revenue Bond Act, constituting Chapter 49 of Title 15.2 (Section 15.2-4900 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia. (Ord. 2010-18. Ord. 1-26-84, § 1; Code 1985, § 2-144).


2.60.020 Name.

The name of the political subdivision created by SCC 2.60.010 shall be the economic development authority of the city of Staunton, Virginia. (Ord. 2010-18. Ord. 1-26-84, § 2; Code 1985, § 2-145).


Chapter 2.65 OFFICE ON YOUTH

Sections:

2.65.010    Regional youth commission – Office on youth.

2.65.020    Principal administrative officers.

2.65.030    Staff duties – Expenditures.

2.65.040    Authority and responsibilities of the regional youth commission.


2.65.010 Regional youth commission – Office on youth.

Subject to continuing agreement among the governing bodies of Augusta County, Staunton, and Waynesboro, and subject to the provisions of the Code of Virginia (1950), Section 66-29, as amended (except that no participating locality shall withdraw its portion of the budgeted funding of the regional youth commission/office hereby established, except at the beginning of any fiscal year and then only after 90 days’ written notice to the other participants), there is hereby established a regional youth commission, which shall consist of 15 members, five of which shall be representatives of Staunton appointed by the Staunton city council. The regional youth commission shall adopt its own bylaws, subject to approval of the three governing bodies, which bylaws may be amended from time to time, subject to the same approval.

There is hereby established a regional office on youth, covering these three localities, established for the purpose of facilitating the wholesome development of the youth of the region and to ensure the provision of comprehensive delinquency prevention and youth development programs. (Code 1985, § 2-146).


2.65.020 Principal administrative officers.

The principal administrative officers for the office on youth shall be the city managers and county administrator of the participating localities. These principal administrative officers shall delegate administrative authority to the regional director of the office on youth. 

The principal administrative officers, in conjunction with the regional director, shall determine the size of the staff, job descriptions, and the hiring of staff for the office on youth. (Code 1985, § 2-147).


2.65.030 Staff duties – Expenditures.

(1) The regional youth commission, office on youth and its director shall be cognizant of and comply with all requirements of the Code of Virginia, including, but not limited to, the minimum standards and the rules and regulations for the Virginia Delinquency Prevention and Youth Development Act, as adopted by the Department of Juvenile Justice, as the same may be promulgated from time to time, and all other mandatory state or federal codes.

(2) The regional director shall consult with the county administrator and city managers in developing each respective locality’s portion of the regional office on youth’s overall operating budget, which portion must be approved by the respective governing body before the adoption of the consolidated operating budget by the youth commission and its submission to the state.

(3) This regional office on youth shall conduct its business in accordance with the personnel, auditing, and budgeting practices as deemed agreeable by the city managers and county administrator of the three localities. These administrators shall designate one fiscal agent for the funding received through the Department of Juvenile Justice. The principal administrative officer for the fiscal agent is delegated the authority to sign to receive or disburse such funding on behalf of the region. Expenditures are limited to the sums allotted for such purposes by the respective governing bodies and additional sums received from public or private sources subject to approval by the governing bodies. (Code 1985, § 2-148).


2.65.040 Authority and responsibilities of the regional youth commission.

(1) The regional youth commission shall function in an advisory capacity in the establishment of goals and objectives of the regional office on youth. The commission shall derive its authority from the two city councils and board of supervisors and shall assist the principal administrative officers of these localities in overseeing the work of the office on youth;

(2) The regional youth commission shall assess and evaluate local needs and resources relative to youth;

(3) The regional youth commission shall assist with the development of comprehensive, community-wide delinquency prevention plans;

(4) The regional youth commission shall form, coordinate and support any task forces or other committees as necessary to accomplish the goals and objectives of the office on youth; 

(5) The regional youth commission shall be consulted and give input into the size of the office on youth staff, job descriptions and the hiring of staff for the office on youth;

(6) The regional youth commission shall approve annual budgets prior to submission to the respective localities and shall review on a quarterly basis revenues and expenditures of the office on youth;

(7) The regional youth commission shall make annual reports to the local governing bodies regarding the accomplishments of the office on youth;

(8) Members of the regional youth commission shall serve without compensation. (Code 1985, § 2-149; Ord. 4-13-88; Ord. 5-25-00).


Chapter 2.70 FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.70.010    Composition.

2.70.020    Appointment and term of chief.

2.70.030    Appointment and terms of assistant chief, other officers and privates.

2.70.040    Appointment of emergency firemen.

2.70.050    Police powers of officers and members at time of fire.

2.70.060    Driving vehicle where department is assembled to fight fire.

2.70.070    Obedience to officer in command at fire.


2.70.010 Composition.

The fire department of the city shall consist of a chief, assistant chief and such other officers and privates as the council may, on recommendation of the city manager, deem necessary for proper fire prevention and protection of property in the city. (Code 1964, § 12-13; Code 1985, § 13-12; Ord. 8-8-00).

Cross reference – Fire department designated as part of city’s official safety program, SCC 2.05.040.


2.70.020 Appointment and term of chief.

The city manager shall appoint, subject to approval of the council, a chief of the fire department, whose term of office shall be at the pleasure of the city manager. (Code 1964, § 12-14; Code 1985, § 13-13; Ord. 8-8-00).


2.70.030 Appointment and terms of assistant chief, other officers and privates.

The city manager shall appoint, subject to approval by the council, an assistant chief and such officers and privates as the efficiency of the department requires and the appropriation for the department justifies. Their terms of office shall be at the pleasure of the city manager. (Code 1964, § 12-15; Code 1985, § 13-14; Ord. 8-8-00).


2.70.040 Appointment of emergency firemen. 

In times of emergency, the chief of the fire department may appoint such additional number of firemen as may seem necessary, report of which shall be made to the city manager. (Code 1964, § 12-16; Code 1985, § 13-15; Ord. 8-8-00).


2.70.050 Police powers of officers and members at time of fire.

The officers and members of the fire department are hereby granted, during the time of a fire, the powers and functions of policemen and in such capacity may do all things necessary for the public safety. (Code 1964, § 12-18; Code 1985, § 13-16; Ord. 8-8-00).

Cross reference – Authority of fire department officers to direct traffic at scene of fire, SCC 10.05.070.


2.70.060 Driving vehicle where department is assembled to fight fire.

(1) It shall be unlawful, without the authority of the officer in command, for any person to drive a vehicle through the streets in which the fire department is assembled for the purpose of extinguishing a fire.

(2) A violation of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. (Code 1964, § 12-19; Code 1985, § 13-17; Ord. 8-8-00).


2.70.070 Obedience to officer in command at fire.

If any person at a fire shall refuse or neglect to obey any order duly given by the fire department officer in command, he shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. (Code 1964, § 12-20; Code 1985, § 13-18; Ord. 8-8-00).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


Chapter 2.75 LIBRARIES*

Sections:

Article I. In General

2.75.010    Supervision, management and control of public library – Functions of library board.

2.75.020    Right of library board to accept and use gifts, bequests, etc.

2.75.030    Supervision of public library program.

Article II. Staunton-Augusta Law Library

2.75.040    Established – Use by public.

2.75.050    Contribution of books and periodicals accepted.

2.75.060    Special assessment for library as part of costs in civil actions.

*Charter reference – Authority of council to grant aid to public library, § 11(11).

State law reference – Local libraries, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-33 et seq.

Article I. In General


2.75.010 Supervision, management and control of public library – Functions of library board.

The general supervision, management and control of the city’s public library is hereby transferred to the city manager, with the library board being retained in an advisory capacity to the librarian. The library board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the librarian on the development and revision of policies, the selection of reading and recorded materials, evaluation of priorities which should be given to different library materials and programs and the encouragement of optimum utilization of the library programs by the citizens of the city. (Code 1964, § 2-46; Code 1985, § 15-1; Amended during the 2003 reformat).

Cross reference – Time limit for parking at public library, SCC 10.25.090.


2.75.020 Right of library board to accept and use gifts, bequests, etc.

The library board shall have the right to accept donations, gifts, demises and bequests of money, tangible and intangible personal property and real estate and to use such, or the income therefrom, for the benefit of the public library. (Code 1964, § 2-47; Code 1985, § 15-2).


2.75.030 Supervision of public library program.

The library director, who shall be appointed by and report to the city manager, shall supervise the city’s public library program. (Code 1964, § 17-8.1; Code 1985, § 15-3; Ord. 1-14-8).

Article II. Staunton-Augusta Law Library*

*State law reference – Law libraries, Code of Virginia, §§ 42.1-60 – 42.1-71.


2.75.040 Established – Use by public.

A law library is hereby established under the name of “Staunton-Augusta Law Library” and the same shall be open for the use of the public under such rules and regulations as may be established by the judge of the circuit court of Augusta County, by order, from time to time; provided, however, that the use of the books owned by the Supreme Court of Virginia shall conform to such rules and regulations as the Supreme Court of Virginia may prescribe, from time to time, for the use of such library and the times it shall be kept opened. (Ord. 9-9-82, § 2; Code 1985, § 15-14).


2.75.050 Contribution of books and periodicals accepted.

The contribution of the Augusta County Bar Association of all the law books and law periodicals owned by such association and located within the Supreme Court of Virginia Law Library on the third floor of the Masonic Building is hereby accepted. (Ord. 9-9-82, § 1; Code 1985, § 15-15).


2.75.060 Special assessment for library as part of costs in civil actions.

(1) There is hereby assessed as part of the costs incident to each civil action filed in the circuit court of the city and the general district court of the city the sum of $2.00. Such assessment shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed and remitted to the treasurer of the city and held by such treasurer in a separate fund, subject to disbursements by the judge of the circuit court of Augusta County for the acquisition of law books and law periodicals and other lawful disbursements for the use and maintenance of the law library established by this article.

(2) The assessment provided for in this section shall be in addition to all other costs prescribed by law, but shall not apply to any action in which the commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof or the federal government is a party and in which costs are assessed against the commonwealth, any such political subdivision or the federal government. (Ord. 9-9-82, § 3; Code 1985, § 15-16).

State law reference – Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70. 


Chapter 2.80 PARKS AND RECREATION*

Sections:

Article I. In General

2.80.010    Appointment and general duties of director of recreation.

Article II. Director of Recreation, Parks and Playgrounds

2.80.020    Appointment – Term.

2.80.030    Powers and duties generally.

2.80.040    Police power.

2.80.050    Direction to close parks.

*Charter reference – Authority of council relative to parks and recreational facilities, § 11(5).

Cross references –  Dogs to be leashed when in city park or playground, SCC 6.10.200; littering in parks, SCC 8.30.020; damaging park property, SCC 9.05.070; prohibited conduct in parks generally, SCC 9.05.080; taking or offering drink of alcoholic beverage in park, SCC 9.05.120; meetings, parades, etc., in parks, SCC 9.05.130; speed limits in parks, SCC 10.15.020; reservation of land in subdivisions for park purposes, SCC 17.15.230.

State law reference – Authority of city to establish and maintain parks and playgrounds, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1806.

Article I. In General


2.80.010 Appointment and general duties of director of recreation.

The city manager may, subject to provision for the position in the annual budget, appoint a director of recreation. The director of recreation shall plan a comprehensive community recreation program, provide supervision over such program, utilizing municipal park and playground facilities and public school and other facilities available, and coordinate such recreation program with programs provided by other agencies within the city. Such programs shall be adapted to appropriations adopted by city council. (Code 1964, § 17-8.1; Code 1985, § 19-1; Amended during the 2003 reformat).

Article II. Director of Recreation, Parks and Playgrounds


2.80.020 Appointment – Term.

The city manager may appoint an officer or director of recreation and parks and playgrounds of the city. Such appointee shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. (Code 1964, § 17-9; Code 1985, § 19-12; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


2.80.030 Powers and duties generally.

The director of recreation, parks and playgrounds shall have general supervision of all city parks and shall be charged with the enforcement of all rules and ordinances adopted for the regulation and government thereof. (Code 1964, § 17-11; Code 1985, § 19-13).


2.80.040 Police power.

The director of recreation and parks and playgrounds shall have police power. (Code 1964, § 17-10; Code 1985, § 19-14; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


2.80.050 Direction to close parks.

The director of recreation and parks and playgrounds may direct that the entrances to the city parks may be closed at any time. (Code 1964, § 17-12; Code 1985, § 19-15; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


Chapter 2.85 POLICE*

Sections:

Article I. In General

2.85.010    Cemetery superintendents as ex officio police officers.

Article II. Police Department Generally

2.85.020    Composition.

2.85.030    Control by city manager.

2.85.040    Appointment and terms of members generally – Increasing membership in emergencies.

2.85.050    Qualifications for appointment.

2.85.060    General powers and duties of chief.

2.85.070    General powers and duties of members.

2.85.075    Designation of police to enforce trespass violations.

2.85.080    Operation of lockup facility.

2.85.090    Answering appeals when officer off duty.

2.85.100    Officers engaging in off-duty employment.

2.85.110    Repealed.

Article III. Lost, Stolen, etc., Property in Police Department’s Possession

2.85.120    Definition.

2.85.130    Identification and storage.

2.85.140    Location of owner and return of property.

2.85.150    Disposal of unclaimed property.

2.85.160    Same – Disposition of proceeds.

2.85.170    Same – Records to be kept.

2.85.180    Destruction of certain property.

2.85.190    Article subordinate to conflicting statutes or ordinances.

*Cross references – Use of radios capable of receiving police calls in taxicabs, SCC 5.30.090; police alarm systems, Ch. 8.10 SCC; driving to scene of police investigation, SCC 10.15.120.

Article I. In General


2.85.010 Cemetery superintendents as ex officio police officers.

To secure the more effectual enforcement of Sections 18.2-125 – 18.2-127 of the Code of Virginia, the superintendent of any cemetery in the city shall be, ex officio, a police officer with power, without warrant, to summon the offender to answer before the appropriate district court. (Code 1964, § 16-9; Code 1985, § 20-1).

Article II. Police Department Generally

Cross references – Police department designated as part of city’s official safety program, SCC 2.05.040; registration of bicycles with police department, SCC 10.40.020.

State law reference – General powers and duties of local police force, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1704.


2.85.020 Composition.

The police department shall consist of a chief of police, such regular officers and employees as may be specified by the city manager and a reserve police force of volunteer policemen to supplement the staffing of the regular officers and employees. (Code 1964, § 21-1; Code 1985, § 20-12).

Cross reference – Bond of chief of police, SCC 2.15.010.


2.85.030 Control by city manager.

The police department shall be under the general supervision of the city manager pursuant to the ordinances of the city. The city manager, with the assistance of the chief of police, shall issue rules and regulations for the department, prescribe the uniforms and report to the city council from time to time on the operation of the department, and make suggestions for improvement as he may see fit. (Code 1964, § 21-2; Code 1985, § 20-13).


2.85.040 Appointment and terms of members generally – Increasing membership in emergencies.

(1) Subject to the provisions and limitations of appropriations of the annual budget, the city manager shall make appointments to the various positions of the police department. Such appointments shall be for indefinite terms and the appointees shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager.

(2) The city manager may, when he deems it necessary in an emergency, increase the number of officers in the police department to any extent the public necessity may require. He shall report any such increase and his reasons for so doing to the next regular meeting of the council. (Code 1964, §§ 21-3, 21-4; Code 1985, § 20-14).


2.85.050 Qualifications for appointment.

(1) The city manager, with the cooperation of the chief of police and subject to the restrictions of the law, shall establish standards for appointments to membership in the police department. No person shall be appointed to the police department who is known by the chief of police or the city manager to have been convicted of a felony or an offense involving domestic violence.

(2) Applicants for appointment to the police department shall be examined by some physician designated by the city manager and no such applicant shall be appointed, until the physician has certified that, in his opinion, the applicant is physically able to perform police duties. (Code 1964, § 21-5; Code 1985, § 20-15; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


2.85.060 General powers and duties of chief.

(1) The chief of police shall be the chief executive officer of the police department and he shall, at all times, enforce the rules and regulations for the government of the department prescribed by the city manager, not inconsistent with the ordinances of the city. He shall have general charge of the peace and good order of the city, see to the observance of the ordinances of the city and laws of the state relative to it and, in any emergency, he may direct the whole police force, or any part thereof, to any place in the city he may deem proper. He shall give information to the city manager of the violation of the laws of the state and ordinances of the city concerning any matter of police regulations. He shall report all misconduct or neglect of duty by any officer, and shall pay frequent visits, at uncertain hours, to various portions of the city, and thus be able to supervise the conduct of all subordinates.

(2) The chief of police may call into service the reserve police force, or particular members thereof, as he may deem necessary:

(a) In time of public emergency;

(b) At such times as there are insufficient numbers of regular policemen to preserve the peace, safety and good order of the community; or

(c) At any time for the purpose of training such reserve policemen. (Code 1964, § 21-8; Code 1985, § 20-16; Ord. 8-25-88).


2.85.070 General powers and duties of members.

The members of the police department shall endeavor to prevent the commission of offenses in the city, to preserve the good order and peace thereof and to secure its inhabitants from personal violence and their property from loss and injury. They shall earnestly endeavor, when any offense is committed in the city, to detect and arrest the offender, to enforce all laws of the state, ordinances of the city and rules and regulations prescribed by the department of health for the preservation of health. (Code 1964, § 21-7; Code 1985, § 20-17).


2.85.075 Designation of police to enforce trespass violations.

(1) The Staunton police department is hereby authorized to establish a procedure whereby the owner, lessee, custodian, or person lawfully in charge, as those terms are used in Section 18.2-119 of the Code of Virginia, of any real property may designate the Staunton police department as a person lawfully in charge of the property for the purpose of forbidding another to go on or remain upon the lands, buildings, or premises of the owner as specified in the designation, pursuant to provisions of Section 15.2-1717.1 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, or subsequently amended. 

 (2) Such designation shall be in writing and shall be kept on file by the Staunton police department, in accordance with such procedure. (Ord. 2011-05).


2.85.080 Operation of lockup facility.

(Code 1985, § 20-18; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


2.85.090 Answering appeals when officer off duty.

Although a police officer is appealed to when it is not his time for regular duty, he shall, upon application, whether in the night or day, do all the emergency requires. (Code 1964, § 21-12; Code 1985, § 20-19).


2.85.100 Officers engaging in off-duty employment.

Police officers may engage in off-duty employment which may occasionally require the use of their police powers in the performance of such employment. All off-duty employment, whether requiring the use of such powers or not, shall be in accordance with rules and regulations set forth by the chief of police and approved by the city manager. (Code 1985, § 20-20).


2.85.110 Political activity by members.

Repealed by Ord. 2018-06. (Code 1964, § 21-17; Code 1985, § 20-21).

Article III. Lost, Stolen, etc., Property in Police Department’s Possession


2.85.120 Definition.

For the purposes of this article, the term “unclaimed personal property” shall mean any personal property belonging to another which has been acquired by a police officer pursuant to his duties, which is not needed in any criminal prosecution, which has not been claimed by its rightful owner and which the state treasurer has indicated will be declined, if remitted under the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act (Section 55-210.1 et seq., of the Code of Virginia). (Code 1985, § 20-32).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1719.


2.85.130 Identification and storage.

Lost, stolen, abandoned and legally confiscated personal property and other personal property which comes into the possession of the police department shall be adequately identified, so that a record can be established by the department showing the time, date, place and circumstances under which possession of the property was acquired, as well as an appropriate description of the property, to readily identify it at a later date. Such property shall be safely stored so that it will not be damaged, misplaced or stolen while in the possession of the police department. (Code 1964, § 21-18; Code 1985, § 20-33).


2.85.140 Location of owner and return of property.

The chief of police shall endeavor to locate the owner of any property referred to in SCC 2.85.130 and return it to the owner, if there is no justification by law to retain the property in the custody of the department. (Code 1964, § 21-19; Code 1985, § 20-34).


2.85.150 Disposal of unclaimed property.

(1) Generally.

(a) Any unclaimed personal property which has been in the possession of the police department and unclaimed for a period of more than 60 days may be disposed of by the chief of police by public sale.

(b) Prior to the sale of any unclaimed property under this section, the chief of police shall make reasonable attempts to notify the rightful owner of the property, obtain from the commonwealth’s attorney, in writing, a statement advising that the property is not needed in any criminal prosecution and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, once a week for two successive weeks, notice that there will be a public sale of such unclaimed personal property. Such property shall be described generally in the notice, together with the date, time and place of the sale.

(2) Bicycles, Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices, Electric Power-Assisted Bicycles or Mopeds.

(a) Any bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle or moped that has been in the possession of the police department, unclaimed, for more than 30 days may be donated to a charitable organization.

(b) Prior to such donation, the chief of police or designee shall post notice on the city’s website and at one other public place for at least two weeks of the reported location and the description of the bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle or moped. (Ord. 2009-17. Code 1964, §§ 21-20, 21-22; Code 1985, § 20-35).

State law reference – Authority for subsection (1) and provisions similar to subsection (2) of this section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1719.


2.85.160 Same – Disposition of proceeds.

The chief of police shall pay from the proceeds of a sale pursuant to SCC 2.85.150, the costs of advertisement, removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens and notice of sale. The balance of the funds shall be held by the chief of police for the owner of the property sold and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. If no claim has been made by the owner for the proceeds of such sale within 60 days of the sale, the remaining funds shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the city, within three years from the date of the sale, and if timely application is made therefor, the city shall pay the remaining proceeds of the sale to the owner, without interest or other charges. No claim shall be made nor any suit, action or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds after three years from the date of the sale. (Code 1985, § 20-36).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1719.


2.85.170 Same – Records to be kept.

The chief of police shall keep adequate records, in a manner prescribed by the city manager, of all sales made pursuant to SCC 2.85.150. (Code 1964, § 21-21; Code 1985, § 20-37).


2.85.180 Destruction of certain property.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, property in the possession of the police department which has no value, which is inherently dangerous or which is prohibited from possession by law may be destroyed in the manner prescribed by the chief of police; provided, however, if such property came into the possession of the police department as evidence, it may be so destroyed only with the approval of the commonwealth’s attorney. (Code 1964, §§ 21-20, 21-22; Code 1985, § 20-38).


2.85.190 Article subordinate to conflicting statutes or ordinances.

When state statutes or city ordinances provide for policies or procedures for the disposal of property which would otherwise be covered by this article, the provisions of this article shall be subordinate to any conflicting provisions of such statutes or ordinances. (Code 1964, § 21-23; Code 1985, § 20-39).


Chapter 2.90 SOCIAL SERVICES*

Sections:

Article I. In General

2.90.010    Control of department of social services – Designation of city manager or assistant/deputy city manager as board of social services.

Article II. Director of Social Services

2.90.020    Appointment, term and compensation.

2.90.030    General powers and duties.

2.90.040    Appointment of departmental employees.

2.90.050    Accountability for funds – Limitation on incurring indebtedness.

2.90.060    Reports and information to be provided city manager.

*State law reference – Welfare, Code of Virginia, Title 63.1.

Article I. In General


2.90.010 Control of department of social services – Designation of city manager or assistant/deputy city manager as board of social services.

The operations of the department of social services are jointly administered with the similar operations of county of Augusta and the city of Waynesboro under one director as may be agreed, as authorized by the respective governing bodies, subject to the policies of the State Department of Social Services and applicable laws. The city manager or, if so designated by the city manager with notice to city council, the assistant/deputy city manager shall constitute and be deemed the local board of social services and the designee of the city manager for all purposes, to the fullest extent permitted by Section 63.2-304 of the Code of Virginia, with any such designee having complete authority as the local board no less than would the city manager as a local government official. (Ord. 2013-14. Code 1964, § 22-1; Code 1985, § 23-1).

Article II. Director of Social Services*

*State law reference – Designation of local superintendent of public welfare as director of social services, Code of Virginia, § 63.1-59.1.


2.90.020 Appointment, term and compensation.

The director of social services shall be appointed by, and shall serve at the will of, the local board(s) of the localities, as agreed, as authorized by the respective governing bodies. Compensation for such position shall be as approved by the local boards within such funds appropriated for that purpose. (Ord. 2013-14. Code 1964, §§ 22-2, 22-3; Code 1985, § 23-12).


2.90.030 General powers and duties.

(1) The director of social services shall supervise the total social services program of the city.

(2) The director of social services, subject to provisions of state law and regulations of the state department of social services, shall have control and direction of the public charities of the city and shall see that those persons receiving public assistance or making application to receive public assistance are worthy cases. The director of social services shall perform such other duties as are or may hereafter be prescribed by state law, the city council or the city manager. (Code 1964, §§ 22-3, 22-4; Code 1985, § 23-13).


2.90.040 Appointment of departmental employees.

The director of social services, subject to approval of the city manager and the availability of appropriated funds, shall appoint such social services employees as may be necessary to fulfill the responsibility of the department of social services. (Code 1964, § 22-2; Code 1985, § 23-14).


2.90.050 Accountability for funds – Limitation on incurring indebtedness.

The director of social services shall be responsible and accountable for the proper expenditure of funds and shall account for all funds appropriated for social services purposes. No indebtedness shall be incurred by the director of social services beyond the amount appropriated in the annual budget. (Code 1964, § 22-5; Code 1985, § 23-15).


2.90.060 Reports and information to be provided city manager.

The director of social services shall cause to be made, on or before the tenth day of each month, to the city manager a written report of the activities of the department for the preceding month in the form desired by the city manager. Such additional information as may be needed or desired by the city manager shall be provided as required. (Code 1964, § 22-6; Code 1985, § 23-16). 


Chapter 2.95 AVIATION*

Sections:

2.95.010    Definition.

2.95.020    Shenandoah Valley airport commission established – Name – Participating localities.

2.95.030    Composition – Appointment, term and removal of members.

2.95.040    Members to serve without compensation.

2.95.050    Election of chairman, secretary and treasurer.

2.95.060    Procedural rules and regulations.

2.95.070    General powers and duties.

2.95.080    Agreement as to financial basis.

2.95.090    Budget and appropriations.

2.95.100    Disbursements.

2.95.110    Records.

2.95.120    Reports.

2.95.130    Indemnification of members and commission from loss resulting from suit or claim.

*Charter reference – Authority of council to establish and regulate airports, § 11(5).

State law references – Aviation, Code of Virginia, Title 5.1; municipal airports, § 5.1-31 et seq.


2.95.010 Definition.

For the purposes of this chapter, the term “airport commission” or “commission” shall mean the Shenandoah Valley airport commission. (Code 1964, § 3-9; Code 1985, § 7-11).


2.95.020 Shenandoah Valley airport commission established – Name – Participating localities.

There is hereby established, in conjunction with the participating cities and counties, a joint airport commission, to be known as the Shenandoah Valley airport commission, for the counties of Augusta and Rockingham and the cities of Harrisonburg, Staunton and Waynesboro, Virginia, and such commission shall exercise its powers and functions therein. (Code 1964, § 3-10; Code 1985, § 7-12).


2.95.030 Composition – Appointment, term and removal of members.

The airport commission shall consist of one member from each of the participating counties and cities, appointed by the governing bodies thereof respectively. Original appointments shall be for terms as follows: from Rockingham County and the city of Harrisonburg, one year; from Augusta County and the city of Staunton, two years; and from the city of Waynesboro, three years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for three-year terms, except appointments to fill vacancies, which shall be for the unexpired terms. The governing body appointing any member may remove such member at any time and appoint his successor. (Code 1964, § 3-11; Code 1985, § 7-13).

State law reference – Authority of two or more political subdivisions to jointly exercise their powers as to airports, including creation of a joint board or commission, Code of Virginia, §§ 5.1-35, 5.1-36.


2.95.040 Members to serve without compensation.

All members of the airport commission shall serve without compensation. (Code 1964, § 3-12; Code 1985, § 7-14).


2.95.050 Election of chairman, secretary and treasurer.

The airport commission shall have power to elect a chairman, a secretary and a treasurer. (Code 1964, § 3-13; Code 1985, § 7-15).


2.95.060 Procedural rules and regulations.

The airport commission shall have power to adopt rules and regulations for its own procedure and government. (Code 1964, § 3-14; Code 1985, § 7-16).


2.95.070 General powers and duties.

The airport commission shall have the power to employ such technical experts and such other agents and employees as it may require for the purpose of making studies, surveys and investigations of a suitable site on which to establish, construct and maintain an airport or landing field; to recommend to the governing bodies of the participating counties and cities a suitable site for such airport or landing field; upon the acquisition of title to such site for such airport by the participating counties and cities to care for, manage and control the airport property and its facilities including, but not by way of limitation, the authority to enter into leases, as lessor, for any land or facility embraced within such property, but not extending over a term of more than two years, including renewals, unless approved by the governing bodies; to contract for mail, cargo and passenger service with the United States Government, commercial airlines and others; to enter into employment contracts for any purpose embraced within this authority; to enter into contracts with concessionaires, but not extending over a term of more than two years, unless approved by such governing bodies; to contract for all necessary utility services; to establish and enforce all rules and regulations pertaining to the use of the airport and its facilities; to establish and charge fees or other charges for the use of the airport, the landing field and accompanying facilities; to accept gifts and grants from the state or any political subdivision thereof, and from the United States and any of its agencies or from any person, firm or corporation; and to designate the state corporation commission agent for the airport commission and the participating counties and cities to accept, receive, receipt for and disburse such funds as may be granted by the United States under the Federal Airport Act in accordance with the applicable laws, rules and regulations. (Code 1964, § 3-15; Code 1985, § 7-17).


2.95.080 Agreement as to financial basis.

The financial basis upon which each of the participating counties and cities referred to in this chapter shall participate shall be determined by agreement between their governing bodies. (Code 1964, § 3-16; Code 1985, § 7-18).


2.95.090 Budget and appropriations.

The airport commission shall prepare annually and submit to the governing bodies of the respective participating counties and cities a proposed budget showing the estimated revenues it may reasonably expect to receive for such year and its estimated expenses for all purposes for such period. After approval of such budget, the commission shall be limited in its expenditures for such year to the estimated expenses shown therein and shall not commit the participating counties and cities beyond appropriations actually made. The participating counties and cities shall appropriate funds necessary to meet any deficit in the proportions in which they are financially interested in the operations of the airport commission. (Code 1964, § 3-17; Code 1985, § 7-19).


2.95.100 Disbursements.

All disbursements by the airport commission shall be by check drawn by the treasurer and approved by the chairman. (Code 1964, § 3-18; Code 1985, § 7-20).


2.95.110 Records.

The airport commission shall keep proper records of its operations, dealings, transactions and meetings, which records shall be open to inspection by the participating counties and cities at all times. (Code 1964, § 3-19; Code 1985, § 7-21).


2.95.120 Reports.

The airport commission shall make reports to the participating counties and cities annually and at such other times as they may require. (Code 1964, § 3-20; Code 1985, § 7-22).


2.95.130 Indemnification of members and commission from loss resulting from suit or claim.

In serving on the airport commission and when acting within the scope of the authority herein conferred, no member of the airport commission shall be personally subject to liability upon any suit or claim by any person contracting with the airport commission or using the airport or its facilities or damaged by the use of the airport or its facilities; and in the event of any such suit or claim against the commission or any of its members, the participating counties and cities shall be obligated, in the proportions in which they are financially interested in the operation of the commission, to indemnify such member or the commission from any loss which he or the commission may sustain. (Code 1964, § 3-21; Code 1985, § 7-23).


Chapter 2.100 VALLEY ALCOHOL SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM BOARD

Sections:

2.100.010    Policy board established.

2.100.020    Membership – Term.

2.100.030    Officers.

2.100.040    Responsibilities.

2.100.050    Meetings.

2.100.060    Budget.

2.100.070    Audits.

2.100.080    Annual report.

2.100.090    VASAP compliance.

2.100.100    Title to property.

2.100.110    Duration.


2.100.010 Policy board established.

The city does hereby join the city of Waynesboro and the county of Augusta to establish the Valley Alcohol Safety Action Program policy board as administrative and fiscal agent subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-25).


2.100.020 Membership – Term.

The board shall consist of not more than six members. Two persons shall be appointed by the governing body of each participating locality and will serve for a term of three years. (Ord. 2005-25 § 1).


2.100.030 Officers.

The officers of the board shall consist of a chairman, a vice-chairman, a secretary-treasurer, and such subordinate officers as may from time to time be elected or appointed by the board. Each of said officers shall serve without compensation. The offices of chairman and vice-chairman shall be held by members from different participating localities. Each officer shall be elected at the annual meeting of the board to serve for a term of one year unless sooner removed by the board, or until his successor be elected and qualify. (Ord. 2005-25 § 2).


2.100.040 Responsibilities.

The board shall be responsible for the operation of the program within the participating localities, and shall hire and supervise an executive director who shall be responsible for implementing operational policies for the program, hiring and supervising the staff of the program, and controlling all revenue and expenditures of the program. (Ord. 2005-25 § 3).


2.100.050 Meetings.

Regular meetings of the board shall be held quarterly and are open to the public. Special meetings may be called by the chairman at his or her discretion or by any four board members upon five days’ notice to all members in writing or by telephone of the time, place, and purpose of the special meeting. A simple majority of members of the board shall constitute a quorum for transaction of any and all business. (Ord. 2005-25 § 4).


2.100.060 Budget.

The executive director shall prepare and submit an operating budget for approval by the board each fiscal year. The budget shall include projected revenue from client fees and other available funds as deemed appropriate by the board and operating expenses. The participating localities will at no time incur any costs for the operation of the program. The commission on VASAP shall be responsible for funding any deficit occurring in the operation of the program. (Ord. 2005-25 § 5).


2.100.070 Audits.

The commission on VASAP shall be responsible for conducting financial audits of the program at such times as determined by the commission. (Ord. 2005-25 § 6).


2.100.080 Annual report.

The executive director shall prepare and submit an annual report for approval by the board within 90 days of the close of the fiscal year. The annual report shall be presented to the governing body of each participating locality after approval by the board. (Ord. 2005-25 § 7).


2.100.090 VASAP compliance.

The program shall be operated by the board in compliance with the commission on VASAP policies and procedures. (Ord. 2005-25 § 8).


2.100.100 Title to property.

Title to all property acquired by Valley ASAP shall be vested with the alcohol safety action program so long as two or more localities continue to participate in its operation. In the event that all localities withdraw and the commission on VASAP withdraws its endorsement, the property owned by the program shall be disposed of in accordance with the then applicable provisions of the Code of Virginia. (Ord. 2005-25 § 9).


2.100.110 Duration.

This agreement shall remain in effect continuously from year to year until termination. Participating localities may withdraw at any time by official action of the governing body and after 90 days’ written notice to the board. If a locality withdraws, its representative shall no longer serve on the board. (Ord. 2005-25 § 10).


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE*

Chapters:

3.05    In General

3.10    Taxation Generally

3.15    Real Estate Tax Exemption for Elderly and Disabled Persons

3.17    Real Estate Tax Exemption for U.S. Military Veterans and Spouses or Surviving Spouses

3.20    Tax Exemption for Certain Rehabilitated Real Estate

3.25    Recordation Tax

3.30    Tax on Purchasers of Utility Service

3.35    Transient Occupancy Tax

3.37    Registration for Short-Term Rental

3.40    Tax on Meals Served in Restaurants or by Caterers

3.45    Enterprise Zone

3.50    Abatement of Levies

3.55    Refunds of Taxes

3.60    Downtown Service District

3.65    Sales and Use Tax

3.70    Probate Tax

3.75    Cigarette Tax

3.80    Bank Franchise Tax

*Charter references – Finance generally, Ch. V; authority of council to control financial affairs of city, § 11(1); debt commission, § 24.

Cross reference – Financial matters relating to airport commission, SCC 2.95.080 et seq.


Chapter 3.05 IN GENERAL

Sections:

3.05.010    Fiscal year.

3.05.020    Annual budget and levy.

3.05.030    Annual appropriation for bond purposes.

3.05.040    Cancellation and record of redeemed bonds, etc.

3.05.050    Security requirements for city depositories.

3.05.060    Proceedings against defaulting officer whose duties include collection of money due city.

3.05.070    Fee for passing bad check to city.

3.05.080    Assessment of special court costs.

3.05.090    Administrative fees and collection fees on delinquent accounts. 


3.05.010 Fiscal year.

The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1st and end on June 30th. (Code 1964, § 10-1; Code 1985, § 12-1).

State law reference – Uniform fiscal year for cities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2500.


3.05.020 Annual budget and levy.

The council shall cause to be prepared by the city manager, in accordance with the state statutes, each year an annual budget containing the estimated revenues and all proposed expenditures and borrowings for the ensuing fiscal year, and every year the council shall adopt the annual budget and shall make a city levy as provided for by the state law. (Code 1964, § 10-1; Code 1985, § 12-2).

Cross references – Budget and tax levy ordinances not affected by code or ordinance adopting code, SCC 1.05.060; requirements for passage of tax levy ordinances, SCC 2.10.180; duties of city manager as budget commissioner, SCC 2.20.030(2).

State law references – Budgets, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2503 – 15.2-2513; local taxes generally, § 58.1-3000 et seq.


3.05.030 Annual appropriation for bond purposes.

Annually, from the accruing revenues of the city, a sum sufficient to pay all serial bonds maturing during the year and a sum sufficient to pay all other bonds at or before maturity, which sums shall not be less than one percent of the principal amount of the city debt, together with the aggregate annual interest agreed to be paid thereon, shall be, and the same is hereby appropriated to the payment of the principal of the city debt or the purchase of its bonds. (Code 1964, § 10-44; Code 1985, § 12-3).

Cross references – Appropriation ordinances not affected by code or ordinance adopting code, SCC 1.05.060; requirements for passage of appropriation ordinances, SCC 2.10.180.

State law reference – Bond issues for cities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2604 et seq.


3.05.040 Cancellation and record of redeemed bonds, etc.

All certificates of debt or bonds of the city which are redeemed or purchased shall be properly cancelled and shall be filed in the city manager’s office, and a register kept by the treasurer and the city clerk, setting forth the time, price, the person to whom paid, and the circumstances of the redemption or purchase of such certificates or bonds of the city, and they shall report the same in their monthly and annual reports to the council, and the cancelled bonds shall be destroyed each year in the presence of a committee of the council. (Code 1964, § 10-45; Code 1985, § 12-4).


3.05.050 Security requirements for city depositories.

No funds belonging to the city shall be deposited in any bank or other institution that is not in full compliance with the Virginia Security for Public Deposits Act. (Code 1964, § 10-18; Code 1985, § 12-5).

State law reference – Security for Public Deposits Act, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.2-4400 – 2.2-4411.


3.05.060 Proceedings against defaulting officer whose duties include collection of money due city.

In all cases of default on the part of any officer whose duty it is to collect taxes, assessments, water rents or any other sums due the city, proceedings against such officer and his sureties may be either by regular suit at law on his official bond or by motion in the circuit court of the city for judgment and award of execution against him and his sureties upon such bond for the amount of such default, with interest thereon and such penalties as, under the ordinances of the city, may have attached thereto. (Code 1964, § 2-26; Code 1985, § 12-6).

Cross reference – Official bonds, SCC 2.15.010 et seq.


3.05.070 Fee for passing bad check to city.

If any person shall utter, publish or pass any check or draft for payment of any taxes or other sums due the city, which check or draft is subsequently returned for insufficient funds, or because there is no account or the account has been closed, such person shall pay to the city a fee of $20.00 for each such check, in addition to the taxes or other sums due the city. (Ord. 12-9-82, § I{15}; Code 1985, § 12-7).

State law reference – Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-106.


3.05.080 Assessment of special court costs.

(1) There is hereby assessed, as a part of the fees taxed as costs in (a) each civil action filed in the general district court for the city of Staunton, the juvenile domestic relations district court for the city of Staunton, and the circuit court for the city of Staunton and (b) each criminal or traffic case in such courts in which the defendant is charged with a violation of any statute or ordinance, the sum of $2.00. This assessment shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed, and remitted to the treasurer of the city and held by such treasurer subject to disbursements by the city council for the city of Staunton for the construction, renovation or maintenance of courthouse or jail and court-related facilities and to defray increases in the cost of heating, cooling, electricity and ordinary maintenance.

(2) There is hereby assessed the sum of $20.00 as part of the costs in each criminal or traffic case in the district and circuit courts of the city in which the defendant is convicted of a violation of any statute or ordinance. The assessment shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the case is heard, remitted to the treasurer of the city and held by the treasurer subject to appropriation by the city council to the sheriff’s office for the funding of courthouse security personnel and, if requested by the sheriff, equipment and other personal property used in connection with courthouse security.

(3) There is hereby authorized a processing fee in the amount of $25.00 on any individual admitted to the local jail following conviction. The fee shall be ordered as a part of court costs collected by the clerk, deposited into the account of the treasurer of the city and shall be used by the sheriff’s office to defray the costs of processing arrested persons into local jails.

(4) There is hereby assessed the sum of $5.00 as part of the costs in each criminal or traffic case in the general district, juvenile and domestic relations district, and circuit courts for the city of Staunton in which the defendant is charged with a violation of any statute or ordinance. Such assessment shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed, remitted to the treasurer of the city, and held by such treasurer subject to disbursements by the city council, solely to fund software, hardware, and associated equipment costs for the continued implementation and maintenance of an electronic summons system for the city.

(5) These assessments shall be in addition to any other fees prescribed by law. (Ord. 2020-18; Ord. 2016-12; Ord. 2007-13. Code 1985, § 12-8; Ord. 8-12-92; Ord. 7-11-02).

State law reference – Code of Virginia §§ 15.2-1613.1, 17.1-281, 53.1-120(D).


3.05.090 Administrative fees and collection fees on delinquent accounts. 

(1) On each delinquent account now or hereafter owed to the city there is hereby imposed an administrative fee, in addition to all penalties and interest, in the amount of $30.00 for taxes or other charges collected 30 days or more after notice of delinquent taxes or charges pursuant to Section 58.1-3919 of the Code of Virginia but prior to taking judgment for such taxes or charges, and $35.00 for taxes or other charges collected after judgment. If the delinquent charges concern a nuisance abatement, the administrative fee shall be $150.00 or 25 percent of the costs, whichever is less, but in no event shall the administrative fee be less than $25.00. 

(2) There is also imposed on each delinquent account now or hereafter owed to the city collection fees actually contracted for by the city to any attorney or collection agency. Such collection fees shall not exceed 20 percent of the taxes or other charges so collected and shall become due and payable when the city refers a delinquent account to an attorney or collection agency. 

(3) Court costs and/or attorney fees incurred in court proceedings to enforce city ordinances and/or to collect such delinquent accounts shall also be charged and collected as otherwise permitted by the Code of Virginia and the court hearing the matter. 

(4) No tax assessment or tax bill shall be deemed delinquent and subject to the collection procedures prescribed herein during the pendency of any administrative appeal under Section 58.1-3980 of the Code of Virginia, so long as the appeal is filed within 90 days of the date of the assessment, and for 30 days after the date of the final determination of the appeal; provided, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to preclude the assessment or refund, following the final determination of such appeal, of such interest as otherwise may be provided by general law as to that portion of a tax bill that has remained unpaid or was overpaid during the pendency of such appeal and is determined in such appeal to be properly due and owing. (Ord. 2010-03).


Chapter 3.10 TAXATION GENERALLY*

Sections:

3.10.010    Returns and valuation of personal property for taxation.

3.10.015    Personal property tax relief.

3.10.020    Make-up, examination, etc., of property books.

3.10.030    Assessment of property omitted from books – Alteration of books.

3.10.040    When treasurer to receive taxes – Publication of notice – Penalty and interest on delinquencies – Etc.

3.10.050    License tax on owners of motor vehicles not displaying current license plates.

3.10.060    License tax on automobile graveyards.

*Charter references – General authority of council as to taxation, § 11(24-28); collection of taxes, § 20; tax lien on real estate, § 22.

Cross references – Dog license tax, SCC 6.10.090 et seq.; vehicle license tax, SCC 10.10.040 et seq.

State law references – Taxation, Code of Virginia, Title 58.1; local taxes generally, § 58.1-3000 et seq.; general authority of city relative to taxes and assessments, § 15.2-1104.


3.10.010 Returns and valuation of personal property for taxation.

(1) In ascertaining what personal property is to be listed for taxation, who is to list the same and when and how it is to be listed, the provisions of the laws of the state shall be followed.

(2) The commissioner of revenue shall furnish to each person forms for lists of valuations as provided for by state law and such person shall, within the time and in the manner therein mentioned, make out and deliver to the commissioner sworn statements of all personal estate, monies, contracts and credits which such person is required by the laws of the state and this chapter to list.

(3) If the commissioner of revenue is not satisfied with the taxpayer’s valuation of personal property, he may, upon his own view or such information as he may obtain or possess, adopt what he deems a fair and proper valuation thereof; provided, that where it is practicable, he shall give an opportunity to the taxpayer to be heard before his books are returned to the city treasurer.

(4) If any person shall fail, within the prescribed time, to make out and deliver the personal property lists in the prescribed manner, he shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. If any person shall refuse to exhibit to the commissioner of revenue any property listed or required by this chapter to be listed by him, in order that a fair valuation thereof may be assessed, he shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor.

(5) The tax on all tangible personal property, as defined in Section 58.1-3500 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, except for household goods and personal effects listed in Section 58.1-3504 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, and except for (a) horses, mules, and other kindred animals; (b) cattle; (c) sheep and goats; (d) hogs; (e) poultry; (f) grains and other feeds used for the nurture of farm animals; (g) grain, tobacco, wine produced by farm wineries and other agricultural products in the hands of a producer; (h) equipment and machinery used by farm wineries in the production of wine; all of which are hereby expressly exempted from taxation, shall be at the rate per every $100.00 of the assessed value for the tax year concerned, which rate shall be set annually in the budget ordinance for the city of Staunton. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the rate per every $100.00 of the assessed value of the tangible personal property of Habitat for Humanity or its local affiliate or subsidiary shall be zero. The property taxed hereunder, not exempted hereby, shall include all tangible personal property permitted to be taxed locally by Chapter 35 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. The provisions hereof are retroactive to January 1, 1987, and effective for calendar year 1987 and the following years.

(6) Motor vehicle owners are required to file a new personal property tax return on or before May 1st of any tax year for which there is: (a) a change in the name or address of the person or persons owning the vehicle; (b) a change in the situs of the vehicle; (c) any other change affecting the assessment of the personal property tax on the vehicle for which a tax return was previously filed; or (d) purchase or sale of a vehicle. Unless and until such a new personal property tax return is filed, the most recent tax return filed prior to January 1st of each new tax year and/or information retrieved from the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles shall be the basis for the assessment of a motor vehicle. (Ord. 2007-22. Code 1964, §§ 10-25 – 10-28; Code 1985, § 12-76; Ord. 5-13-87; Ord. 5-22-97).

Cross references – Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100; payment of vehicle personal property taxes prerequisite to licensing of vehicle, SCC 10.10.060.

State law reference – Personal property returns, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3517 et seq. Separate classification of Habitat for Humanity § 58.1-3506.


3.10.015 Personal property tax relief.

(1) Purpose – Definitions – Relation to Other Ordinances. 

(a) The purpose of this section is to provide for the implementation of the changes to the Personal Property Tax Relief Act of 1998 (PPTRA) effected by legislation adopted during the 2004 Special Session I and the 2005 Regular Session of the General Assembly of Virginia. 

(b) Terms used in this section that have defined meanings set forth in PPTRA shall have the same meanings as set forth in the Code of Virginia Section 58.1-3523, as amended.

(c) To the extent that the provisions of this section conflict with any prior ordinance or provision of the city code, this section shall control.

(2) Method of Computing and Reflecting Tax Relief. 

(a) For tax years commencing in 2006, the City adopts the provisions of Item 503.E of the 2005 Appropriations Act, providing for the computation of tax relief as a specific dollar amount to be offset against the total taxes that would otherwise be due but for PPTRA and the reporting of such specific dollar relief on the tax bill.

(b) The city council shall, by resolution, set the percentage of tax relief at such level that is anticipated to fully exhaust PPTRA relief funds provided to the city by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 

(c) Personal property tax bills shall set forth on their face the specific dollar amount of relief credited with respect to each qualifying vehicle, together with an explanation of the general manner in which relief is allocated.

(3) Allocation of Relief Among Taxpayers. 

(a) Allocation of PPTRA relief shall be provided in accordance with the general provisions of this section, as implemented by the specific provisions of a resolution adopted annually, after the personal property tax book is certified by the commissioner of revenue and delivered to the treasurer. 

(b) Relief shall be allocated in such a manner as to eliminate personal property taxation of each qualifying vehicle with an assessed value of $1,000 or less.

(c) Relief with respect to qualifying vehicles with assessed values of more than $1,000 shall be provided at a percentage, annually fixed and applied to the first $20,000 in value of each such qualifying vehicle, that is estimated fully to use all available state PPTRA relief.

(d) Beginning with tax year 2016 any relief refunds provided to the city by the Commonwealth of Virginia will be applied to ensure that all of the tax attributable to the first $20,000 of value on each qualifying vehicle leased by an active duty member of the United States military, his spouse, or both, pursuant to a contract requiring him, his spouse, or both to pay the tangible personal property tax on such vehicle. This applies only to a vehicle that would not be taxed in Virginia if the vehicle were owned by such military member, his spouse, or both.

(4) Transitional Provisions. 

(a) Pursuant to authority conferred in Item 503.D of the 2005 Appropriations Act, the city treasurer is authorized to issue a supplemental personal property tax bill, in the amount of 100 percent of tax due without regard to any former entitlement to state PPTRA relief, plus applicable penalties and interest, to any taxpayer whose taxes with respect to a qualifying vehicle for tax year 2005 or any prior tax year remain unpaid on September 1, 2006, or such date as state funds for reimbursement of the state share of such bill have become unavailable, whichever earlier occurs.

(b) Penalty and interest with respect to bills issued pursuant to subsection (4)(a) of this section shall be computed on the entire amount of tax owed. Interest shall be computed at the rate provided in SCC 3.10.040. (Ord. 2018-15; Ord. 2006-05).


3.10.020 Make-up, examination, etc., of property books.

The land and personal property books shall be made up, examined, certified and delivered as provided by the laws of the state. (Code 1964, § 10-29; Code 1985, § 12-77).

State law references – Land books, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3301 et seq.; personal property books, § 58.1-3114 et seq.


3.10.030 Assessment of property omitted from books – Alteration of books.

Should the commissioner of revenue, at any time after the books referred to in SCC 3.10.020 have been delivered to the treasurer, discover that there has been omitted any real or personal property therefrom, he shall forthwith assess the same and send a copy of such assessment to the treasurer, and keep a record thereof on the book in which the omission occurs, and the treasurer shall collect the tax so assessed as other taxes are collected. The commissioner shall make no alteration or amendment to his books after copies are delivered to the treasurer, other than as prescribed in this section. (Code 1964, § 10-30; Code 1985, § 12-78).

State law reference – Alteration of property books after delivery to treasurer, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3119, 58.1-3311.


3.10.040 When treasurer to receive taxes – Publication of notice – Penalty and interest on delinquencies – Etc. 

(1) The city treasurer shall commence to receive the city taxes on February 1st in each year or as soon thereafter as he may receive copies of the books of the commissioner of revenue, and for this purpose shall give notice for at least two weeks prior to June 20th each year that he is prepared to receive at his office the whole or three-fourths of the city taxes on real estate from any person charged therewith on or before June 20th in each year, or in case that day is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, then the following business day, without penalty, and for this purpose shall give notice for at least two weeks prior to December 5th of each year that he is prepared to receive at his office on or before December 5th of each year the remaining one-fourth of the city taxes on real estate and all the city taxes on personal property; except, however, solely for the year 2005, the city treasurer shall give such notice prior to January 27, 2006, that the treasurer is prepared to receive all the city taxes on personal property.

(2) Any person who shall fail to pay the taxes required on or before the dates herein set forth in each year shall incur a penalty thereon of 10 percent, which shall be added to the whole amount of taxes or levies due from such taxpayer, and the city treasurer shall proceed with the collection of such taxes or levies as provided by law.

(3) Should it come to the knowledge of the treasurer that any person owing such taxes or levies is moving or contemplating moving from the corporate limits of the city prior to June 20th or the following December 5th, as the case may be, the treasurer shall have the power to collect such taxes or levies by distress, or otherwise, at any time after such bills shall have come into his hands.

(4) Interest at the rate of 10 percent per annum shall be collected upon the principal and penalties of such taxes and levies from the first day of January following the year for which such unpaid taxes or levies were assessed, which penalties and interest shall be collected and accounted for by the city treasurer, along with the principal thereof, as provided by state law. (Ord. 2005-037; Ord. 2005-34; Ord. 2004-35. Code 1964, § 10-13; Code 1985, § 12-79).

State law reference – Authority of council to prescribe tax due dates and penalty and interest on delinquent taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.


3.10.050 License tax on owners of motor vehicles not displaying current license plates.

(1) The city hereby imposes a license tax in the amount of $10.00 annually, upon the owners of motor vehicles which do not display current license plates and which are not exempted from the requirements of displaying such license plates under the provisions of Sections 46.2-650 through 46.2-750 of the Code of Virginia, are not in a public dump, in an automobile graveyard, as defined in Section 33.2-804 of the Code of Virginia, or in the possession of a licensed junk dealer or licensed motor vehicle dealer.

(2) Nothing in this section shall be applicable to any vehicle being held or stored by or at the direction of any governmental authority, to any vehicle owned by a member of the armed forces on active duty or to any vehicle regularly stored within a structure.

(3) This section shall not apply to any vehicle which is stored on private property, for a period not in excess of 60 days, for the purpose of removing parts for the repair of another vehicle. (Code 1964, § 15-297; Code 1985, § 12-80).

Cross reference – Vehicle licenses generally, SCC 10.10.010 et seq.

State law reference – Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-973.


3.10.060 License tax on automobile graveyards.

(1) For the purpose of this section, an “automobile graveyard” is any lot or place which is exposed to the weather and upon which more than five motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, and which it would not be economically practical to make operative, are placed, located or found.

(2) The city hereby imposes a license tax upon each automobile graveyard in the city, in the amount of $1.00 per annum for each motor vehicle or hulk thereof, 12 years old or older, within the premises of such graveyard on January 1st of each year. (Code 1964, §§ 15-290, 15-298; Code 1985, § 12-81).

State law references – Similar definition of “automobile graveyard,” Code of Virginia, § 33.1-348; authority for above tax, § 15.2-903.


Chapter 3.15 REAL ESTATE TAX EXEMPTION FOR ELDERLY AND DISABLED PERSONS*

Sections:

3.15.010    Definitions.

3.15.020    Authorized.

3.15.030    General eligibility requirements.

3.15.040    Inquiries by commissioner.

3.15.050    Claimant’s affidavit and certificate of disability – Commissioner’s certification.

3.15.060    Amount of exemption.

3.15.070    Changes affecting exemption.

3.15.080    Forfeiture of exemption for failure to pay taxes.

3.15.090    False claims.

3.15.100    Provision for late filing.

*State law reference – Authority of city to provide for the exemption provided for in this chapter, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210.


3.15.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless another meaning shall clearly appear from the context:

“Affidavit” shall mean the real estate tax exemption affidavit provided for in this chapter.

“Dwelling” shall mean real estate which is the sole residence of an eligible person claiming exemption under this chapter, and shall include an improvement to real estate exempt pursuant to this chapter and the land upon which such improvement is situated so long as the improvement is used principally for other than a business purpose and is used to house or cover any motor vehicle classified pursuant to Sections 58.1-3503(A)(3) through (10) of the Code of Virginia; household goods classified pursuant to Section 58.1-3503(A)(14) of the Code of Virginia; or household goods exempted from personal property tax pursuant to Section 58.1-3504 of the Code of Virginia.

“Eligible person” shall mean a person who is at least age 65, or permanently and totally disabled, who owns and occupies as their sole dwelling, real estate or real property (1) held by the eligible person alone or in conjunction with his spouse as tenant or tenants for life or joint lives, (2) held in a revocable inter vivos trust over which an eligible person or the eligible person and his spouse hold the power of revocation, or (3) held in an irrevocable trust under which an eligible person alone or in conjunction with his spouse possesses a life estate or an estate for joint lives or enjoys a continuing right of use or support. The term “eligible person” does not include any interest held under a leasehold or term of years.

“Exemption” shall mean the percentage exemption from the real property tax imposed by the city allowable under the provisions of this chapter.

“Permanently and totally disabled” shall mean unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of the person’s life.

“Taxable year” shall mean the calendar year, from January 1st through December 31st, for which real property tax is imposed or exemption is claimed. (Ord. 2019-35; Ord. 2018-16. Code 1964, § 10-72; Code 1985, § 12-92).


3.15.020 Authorized.

It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide real estate tax exemptions for eligible persons. Pursuant to the authority of Section 58.1-3210 of the Code of Virginia, the city council finds and declares that eligible persons hereunder are bearing an extraordinary real estate tax burden in relation to the circumstances of their income and financial worth. (Ord. 2019-35. Code 1964, § 10-73; Code 1985, § 12-93).


3.15.030 General eligibility requirements.

Exemption pursuant to this chapter shall be granted to eligible persons and as to their dwelling when:

(1) The total combined income received from all sources during the preceding calendar year by (a) owners of the dwelling who use it as their principal residence, (b) owners’ relatives who live in the dwelling, except for those relatives living in the dwelling and providing bona fide caregiving services to the owner whether such relatives are compensated or not, and (c) nonrelatives of the owner who live in the dwelling except for bona fide tenants or bona fide caregivers of the owner, whether compensated or not, does not exceed the sum of $30,000; provided, however, that the first $2,500 of income of each relative, other than the spouse of the owner, who is living in such dwelling shall not be included in such total. If an individual described in subsections (1)(b) and (c) of this section is permanently and totally disabled, any disability income received by such person shall not be included in such total.

(2) The net combined financial worth, including equitable interests, as of December 31st of the immediately preceding calendar year, of the owners and of the spouse of any owner, excluding the value of the dwelling and the land, not exceeding one acre, upon which it is situated, does not exceed $62,500. (Ord. 2019-35; Ord. 2018-16; Ord. 2011-19; Ord. 2010-02; Ord. 2007-12; Ord. 2005-19. Code 1964, § 10-74; Ord. 2-24-83; Code 1985, § 12-94; Ord. 7-28-88; Ord. 4-12-90; Ord. 9-10-98).


3.15.040 Inquiries by commissioner.

The commissioner of revenue shall make such inquiry of persons seeking exemption under this chapter, requiring answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for the exemption and may require the production of certified tax returns to establish the income or financial worth of any applicant. (Code 1964, § 10-75; Code 1985, § 12-95).


3.15.050 Claimant’s affidavit and certificate of disability – Commissioner’s certification.

(1) A person claiming an exemption under this chapter shall file annually with the commissioner of revenue, on forms supplied by the city, an affidavit setting forth the names of the related persons occupying such real estate and that the total combined net worth, including equitable interests, and the combined income from all sources, of the persons specified in SCC 3.15.040 does not exceed the limits prescribed in this chapter.

(2) If the person filing an affidavit under this section is under 65 years of age, the affidavit shall have attached thereto a certification by the social security administration, the veteran’s administration or the railroad retirement board, or if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two medical doctors licensed to practice medicine in the commonwealth, to the effect that such person is permanently and totally disabled, as defined in SCC 3.15.010. The affidavit of at least one of such doctors shall be based upon a physical examination of such person by such doctor. The affidavit of one of such doctors may be based upon medical information contained in the records of the civil service commission which is relevant to the standards for determining permanent and total disability as so defined.

(3) The affidavit required by this section shall be filed after February 1st of each year, but before May 1st.

(4) The commissioner of revenue, after audit and investigation of affidavits submitted under this section, shall certify and submit a list of the persons and property qualifying for exemption and the amount thereof to the city assessor’s office, the chief finance officer and the city treasurer, who shall forthwith deduct the amounts of such exemptions from the real estate tax chargeable for the taxable year to such persons and property. (Code 1964, § 10-75; Code 1985, § 12-96).


3.15.060 Amount of exemption.

The amount of the exemption granted by this chapter is as follows:

SCHEDULE OF RELIEF  

	Single Property Owner or Property Owner and Spouse

	 	Net Combined Financial Worth

	Gross Combined Income	$0 – $25,000	$25,001 – $31,250	$31,251 – $37,500	$37,501 – $43,750	$43,751 – $50,000	$50,001 – $56,250	$56,251 – $62,500

	$0 – $18,000	100%	90%	80%	70%	60%	50%	45%

	$18,001 – $21,000	85%	75%	65%	55%	50%	45%	40%

	$21,001 – $24,000	70%	60%	55%	50%	45%	40%	35%

	$24,001 – $27,000	50%	45%	40%	35%	30%	25%	20%

	$27,001 – $30,000	35%	30%	25%	20%	15%	10%	5%

(Ord. 2007-12; Ord. 2005-19. Code 1964, § 10-76; Ord. 2-24-83; Code 1985, § 12-97; Ord. 2-27-86; Ord. 4-12-90; Ord. 9-10-98).


3.15.070 Changes affecting exemption.

Changes in respect to income, financial worth, ownership of property, or other factors, occurring during the taxable year for which an affidavit is filed under this chapter, and having the effect of violating or exceeding limitations and conditions of this chapter, shall nullify any exemption for the balance of the then current taxable year measured from the date such nullifying change occurred, and for the taxable year immediately following; provided, however, that no change in income or financial worth which does not have the effect of violating the maximum limitations of this chapter shall operate to increase or decrease the percentage of exemption previously determined by the commissioner of revenue pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Code 1964, § 10-77; Code 1985, § 12-98; Ord. 4-12-90).


3.15.080 Forfeiture of exemption for failure to pay taxes.

Failure to pay the difference between the exemption under this chapter and the full amount of taxes levied on the property for which the exemption is granted by the deadline established for payment of real estate taxes shall constitute a forfeiture of the exemption. (Code 1964, § 10-78; Code 1985, § 12-99).


3.15.090 False claims.

Any person falsely claiming an exemption under this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. (Code 1964, § 10-79; Code 1985, § 12-100).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


3.15.100 Provision for late filing.

(1) The commissioner of revenue, notwithstanding the provisions of SCC 3.15.050(3) hereof, may grant an exception to the dates of filing of the affidavit required by SCC 3.15.050(3) to allow a later filing within the calendar year concerned for first-time applicants.

(2) Where a person has previously qualified for the exemption provided in this chapter, but has failed to file the affidavit necessary to qualify for any subsequent year within the time required by SCC 3.15.050 hereof, the commissioner, upon a showing of undue hardship, may or not, in the absolute discretion of the commissioner, grant an exception to the date of filing required by SCC 3.15.050(3). If such late filing is permitted by the commissioner, it shall be limited to the particular year the late filing request is made and for the immediately preceding tax year and no other. If the commissioner grants the exception and allows the late filing, the grant of the exception to late filing is conditioned upon any delinquent taxes plus penalty and interest attributable to said property being paid by the property owner within 10 days of the grant of exception. If the property owner fails to do so, the exception for late filing shall be deemed rescinded without further action. In such case where the delinquent taxes are paid within the time set forth above, the taxes for the year of the application for late filing and for the immediately preceding year, and no other, shall be credited with the exemption for purposes of measuring the taxes due, penalty and interest. (Code 1985, § 12-101; Ord. 7-28-88; Ord. 11-10-94).


Chapter 3.17 REAL ESTATE TAX EXEMPTION FOR U.S. MILITARY VETERANS 

AND SPOUSES OR SURVIVING SPOUSES

Sections:

3.17.010    General eligibility requirements.

3.17.020    Claimant’s application, affidavit and certification of disability.


3.17.010 General eligibility requirements.

Exemption pursuant to this chapter shall be granted to persons and for property complying with the following provisions:

(1) For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2011, any veteran who has been rated by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs or its successor agency pursuant to federal law to have a 100 percent service-connected, permanent, and total disability, and who occupies the real property as the principal place of residence, shall be exempt from taxation of real property, including the joint real property of husband and wife. If the veteran’s disability rating occurs after January 1, 2011, and has a qualified primary residence on the date of the rating, then the exemption under this section begins on the date of such rating. However, the city shall not be liable for any interest on any refund due to the veteran for taxes paid prior to the veteran’s filing of the affidavit or written statement required by Section 58.1-3219.6 of the Code of Virginia and SCC 3.17.020 or successor provisions. If the qualified veteran acquires the property after January 1, 2011, then the exemption shall begin on the date of acquisition, and the previous owner may be entitled to a refund for a pro rata portion of real property taxes paid pursuant to Section 58.1-3360 of the Code of Virginia or successor provisions. The surviving spouse of a veteran eligible for the exemption set forth in this section shall also qualify for the exemption, so long as the death of the veteran occurred on or after January 1, 2011, and the surviving spouse does not remarry. The exemption applies without any restriction on the spouse’s moving to a different principal place of residence.

(a) For purposes of this exemption, real property of any veteran includes real property (i) held by a veteran alone or in conjunction with the veteran’s spouse as tenant or tenants for life or joint lives, (ii) held in a revocable inter vivos trust over which the veteran or the veteran and their spouse hold the power of revocation, or (iii) held in an irrevocable trust under which a veteran alone or in conjunction with their spouse possesses a life estate or an estate for joint lives or enjoys a continuing right of use or support. The term does not include any interest held under a leasehold or term of years.

(b) The exemption for a surviving spouse under this section includes real property (i) held by the veteran’s spouse as tenant for life, (ii) held in a revocable inter vivos trust over which the surviving spouse holds the power of revocation, or (iii) held in an irrevocable trust under which the surviving spouse possesses a life estate or enjoys a continuing right of use or support. The exemption does not apply to any interest held under a leasehold or term of years.

(c) In the event that a person is entitled to an exemption under this section by virtue of holding the property in any of the three ways set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section and one or more other persons have an ownership interest in the property that permits them to occupy the property, then the tax exemption for the property that otherwise would have been provided shall be prorated by multiplying the amount of the exemption by a fraction that has as a numerator the number of people who are qualified for the exemption pursuant to this section and has as a denominator the total number of all people having an ownership interest that permits them to occupy the property.

(d) In the event that the primary residence is jointly owned by two or more individuals, not all of whom qualify for the exemption pursuant to disability or marital status as noted previously in this section, and no person is entitled to the exemption under this section by virtue of holding the property in any of the three ways set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section, then the exemption shall be prorated by multiplying the amount of the exemption by a fraction that has as a numerator the percentage of ownership interest in the dwelling held by all such joint owners who qualify for the exemption pursuant to disability or marital status noted previously in this section, and as a denominator, 100 percent.

(2) For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2015, the surviving spouse (i) of any member of the armed forces of the United States who was killed in action as determined by the U.S. Department of Defense and (ii) who occupies the real property as the principal place of residence shall be exempt from taxation of real property. For purposes of this section, such determination of “killed in action” includes a determination by the U.S. Department of Defense of “died of wounds received in action.” If such member of the armed forces of the United States is killed in action after January 1, 2015, and the surviving spouse has a qualified principal residence on the date that such member of the armed forces is killed in action, then the exemption for the surviving spouse shall begin on the date that such member of the armed forces is killed in action. 

(a) Those dwellings in the locality with assessed values in the most recently ended tax year that are not in excess of the average assessed value for such year of a dwelling situated on property that is zoned as single-family residential shall qualify for a total exemption from real property taxes under this chapter. If the value of a dwelling is in excess of the average assessed value as described in this subsection, then only that portion of the assessed value in excess of the average assessed value shall be subject to real property taxes, and the portion of the assessed value that is not in excess of the average assessed value shall be exempt from real property taxes. Single-family homes, condominiums, town homes, manufactured homes as defined in Section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia or successor provisions whether or not the wheels and other equipment previously used for mobility have been removed, and other types of dwellings of surviving spouses, whether or not the land on which the single-family home, condominium, town home, manufactured home, or other type of dwelling of a surviving spouse is located is owned by someone other than the surviving spouse, that (i) meet this requirement and (ii) are occupied by such persons as their principal place of residence shall qualify for the real property tax exemption. If the land on which the single-family home, condominium, town home, manufactured home, or other type of dwelling is located is not owned by the surviving spouse, then the land is not exempt.

(b) The surviving spouse of a member of the armed forces killed in action shall qualify for the exemption so long as the surviving spouse does not remarry. The exemption applies without any restriction on the spouse’s moving to a different principal place of residence.

(c) The city shall provide for the exemption from real property taxes the qualifying dwelling pursuant to this section and shall provide for the exemption from real property taxes the land, not exceeding one acre, upon which it is situated. If the veteran owns a house that is his/her residence, including a manufactured home as defined in Section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia or successor provisions whether or not the wheels and other equipment previously used for mobility have been removed, such house or manufactured home shall be exempt even if the veteran does not own the land on which the house or manufactured home is located. If such land is not owned by the veteran, then the land is not exempt. A real property improvement other than a dwelling, including the land upon which such improvement is situated, made to such one acre or greater number of acres exempt from taxation pursuant to this subsection shall also be exempt from taxation so long as the principal use of the improvement is (i) to house or cover motor vehicles or household goods and personal effects as classified in Section 58.1-3503(A)(14) of the Code of Virginia and as listed in Section 58.1-3504 of the Code of Virginia or successor provisions, and (ii) for other than a business purpose.

(d) For purposes of this exemption, real property of any surviving spouse of a member of the armed forces killed in action includes real property (i) held by a surviving spouse as a tenant for life, (ii) held in a revocable inter vivos trust over which the surviving spouse holds the power of revocation, or (iii) held in an irrevocable trust under which the surviving spouse possesses a life estate or enjoys a continuing right of use or support. The term does not include any interest held under a leasehold or term of years.

(e) In the event that (i) a surviving spouse is entitled to an exemption under this section by virtue of holding the property in any of the three ways set forth in subsection (2)(c) of this section, and (ii) one or more other persons have an ownership interest in the property that permits them to occupy the property, then the tax exemption for the property that otherwise would have been provided shall be prorated by multiplying the amount of the exemption by a fraction that has one as a numerator and has, as a denominator, the total number of all people having an ownership interest that permits them to occupy the property.

(f) In the event that the principal residence is jointly owned by two or more individuals including the surviving spouse, and no person is entitled to the exemption under this section by virtue of holding the property in any of the three ways set forth in subsection (2)(c) of this section, then the exemption shall be prorated by multiplying the amount of the exemption by a fraction that has as a numerator the percentage of ownership interest in the dwelling held by the surviving spouse and, as a denominator, 100 percent. (Ord. 2019-36; Ord. 2019-02).


3.17.020 Claimant’s application, affidavit and certification of disability.

The veteran or surviving spouse claiming the exemption under SCC 3.17.010 shall file with the Commissioner of the Revenue in which the real property is located, on forms to be supplied by the city, an affidavit or written statement (i) setting forth the name of the disabled veteran and the name of the spouse, if any, also occupying the real property, (ii) indicating whether the real property is jointly owned by a husband and wife, and (iii) certifying that the real property is occupied as the veteran’s principal place of residence. The veteran shall also provide documentation from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs or its successor agency indicating that the veteran has a 100 percent service-connected, permanent, and total disability. The veteran shall be required to refile the information required by this section if the veteran’s principal place of residence changes or if there is a change in the veteran’s disability rating. In the event of a surviving spouse of a veteran claiming the exemption, the surviving spouse shall also provide documentation that the veteran’s death occurred on or after January 1, 2011. (Ord. 2019-02).


Chapter 3.20 TAX EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN REHABILITATED REAL ESTATE*

Sections:

3.20.010    Definitions.

3.20.020    Authorized.

3.20.030    Eligibility requirements.

3.20.040    Amount.

*State law reference – Authority of city to provide for the exemption provided for in this chapter, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3220, 58.1-3221.


3.20.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless another meaning shall clearly appear from the text:

“Substantially rehabilitated commercial or industrial real estate” shall mean any commercial or industrial real estate upon which there is an existing structure which is no less than 25 years of age and which has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 60 percent, without increase of the total square footage of the structure.

“Substantially rehabilitated residential real estate” shall mean any residential real estate upon which there is an existing structure which is no less than 25 years of age and which has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 40 percent, without increasing the total square footage of the structure by more than 15 percent.

“Taxable year” shall mean the calendar year, from January 1st through December 31st, for which real property tax is imposed or an exemption is claimed under this chapter. (Ord. 2-26-81, § 10-80; Code 1985, § 12-111).


3.20.020 Authorized.

It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide real estate tax exemptions for substantially rehabilitated residential real estate and substantially rehabilitated commercial or industrial real estate for a period of seven years, commencing on January 1st of the year following completion of the rehabilitation; provided, however, that no property owner may apply for exemption on the basis of a building permit issued prior to January 1, 1978; and further provided, that property owners who completed their improvements prior to January 1, 1981, shall not be eligible to claim the exemption herein set out for a period exceeding seven years from January 1st of the year following completion of the rehabilitation and shall not be eligible for refund or adjustment of taxes payable prior to January 1, 1981. (Ord. 2-26-81, § 10-81; Code 1985, § 12-112).


3.20.030 Eligibility requirements.

Exemptions pursuant to this chapter are hereby granted to persons and for property complying with the following provisions:

(1) The person claiming the exemption shall file his application on a form approved by the city assessor, requesting the exemption provided by this chapter prior to January 1st of the taxable year for which the exemption is claimed. Such application shall not be deemed to be filed until the applicant has paid to the city a fee in the amount of $20.00 for processing such application.

(2) No property shall be eligible for the exemption unless the appropriate building permits have been acquired and the city assessor has verified that the rehabilitation indicated on the application has been completed. (Ord. 2-26-81, § 10-82; Code 1985, § 12-113).


3.20.040 Amount.

The amount of exemption granted under this chapter shall be an amount equal to the increase in assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation of the structure, as determined by the assessing officer, and this amount only shall be applicable to subsequent assessments commencing on January 1st of the year following the rehabilitation. (Ord. 2-26-81, § 10-80; Code 1985, § 12-114).


Chapter 3.25 RECORDATION TAX

Sections:

3.25.010    Imposed.

3.25.020    Collection and disposition.


3.25.010 Imposed.

There is hereby imposed a city recordation tax, in an amount equal to one-third of the amount of the state recordation tax collectible for the state under Sections 58.1-800 through 58.1-813 of the Code of Virginia, on the first recordation of each taxable instrument in the city; provided, however, that, except in a case in which the state recordation tax is $0.50 specifically, where a deed or other instrument conveys, covers or relates to property located in the city and also to property located in another county or city, or in other counties or cities, the tax imposed under this section shall be computed only with respect to the property located in the city. (Code 1964, § 10-60; Code 1985, § 12-125).

State law reference – Authority for above tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-814.


3.25.020 Collection and disposition.

The clerk of the circuit court of the city shall collect the tax imposed by SCC 3.25.010 and pay the same into the treasury of the city. (Code 1964, § 10-61; Code 1985, § 12-126).


Chapter 3.30 TAX ON PURCHASERS OF UTILITY SERVICE

Sections:

3.30.010    Definitions.

3.30.020    Electric utility consumer tax.

3.30.030    Local natural gas utility consumer tax.

3.30.040    Penalties.

3.30.050    Repealed.

3.30.060    Repealed.

3.30.070    Remittance of tax collections.

3.30.080    Refunds.

3.30.090    Interest and penalties.

3.30.100    Tax on purchases of local telephone service to pay for an E911 emergency system.

3.30.110    Water utility tax.

3.30.111    Exemptions.


3.30.010 Definitions.

“Consumer” means every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representatives or permittees, makes a taxable purchase of electricity or natural gas services in this jurisdiction.

“Gas utility” means a public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service in Virginia.

“CCF” means the volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of 100 cubic feet.

“Kilowatt hours (kWh) delivered” means 1,000 watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called cogenerators) as defined in Section 56-594 of the Code of Virginia, it means kWh supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kWh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators.

“Person” means any individual, corporation, company or other entity.

“Pipeline distribution company” means a person, other than a pipeline transmission company which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas, manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or byproducts thereof to a purchaser for purposes of furnishing heat or light.

“Residential consumer” means the owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes, including, but not limited to, apartment houses and other multiple-family dwellings.

“Service provider” means a person who delivers electricity to a consumer or a gas utility or pipeline distribution company which delivers natural gas to a consumer.

“Used primarily” relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric or natural gas utility service is furnished. (Code 1985, § 12-137).


3.30.020 Electric utility consumer tax.

(1) In accordance with Section 58.1-3814 of the Code of Virginia, effective January 1, 2001, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider, classified as determined by such provider, as follows:

(a) Residential consumers: Such tax shall be $1.40 plus the rate of $0.015 on each kWh delivered monthly to residential consumers by a service provider not to exceed $2.00 monthly.

(b) Nonresidential consumers: Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month for the classes of nonresidential consumers as set forth below:

(i) Commercial consumers – such tax shall be $2.29 plus the rate of $0.014489 on each kWh delivered monthly to commercial consumers, not to exceed $20.00 monthly.

(ii) Industrial consumers – such tax shall be $2.29 plus the rate of 0.014489 on each kWh delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed $20.00 monthly.

(c) The conversion of tax pursuant to this chapter to monthly kWh delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect.

(2) Repealed by Ord. 2018-17.

(3) Billing, Collection and Remittance of Tax. The service provider shall bill the electricity consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers electricity and shall remit the same to the commissioner of the revenue for the city on a monthly basis on forms provided by the commissioner. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Section 58.1-3814, paragraphs F. and G., and Section 58.1-2901 of the Code of Virginia. If any consumer receives and pays for electricity but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify the commissioner of revenue of this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. Such remittance shall be due and payable to this jurisdiction on or before the last day of the calendar month following the month the tax was received by the service provider.

(4) Computation of Bills Not on Monthly Basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this chapter if submitted 12 times per year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bimonthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows:

(a) The kWh will be divided by two;

(b) A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth in this section;

(c) The tax determined by subsection (4)(b) of this section shall be multiplied by two;

(d) The tax in subsection (4)(c) of this section may not exceed twice the monthly “maximum tax.” (Ord. 2018-17. Code 1985, § 12-138).


3.30.030 Local natural gas utility consumer tax. 

(1) In accordance with Section 58.1-3814 of the Code of Virginia, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of natural gas delivered to consumers by pipeline distribution companies and gas utilities classified by “class of consumers” as such term is defined in Section 58.1-3814 J. of the Code of Virginia, as follows:

(a) Residential consumers: Such tax on residential consumers of natural gas shall be $2.00 plus the rate of $0.00 on each CCF, delivered monthly to residential consumers, not to exceed $2.00 per month.

(b) Nonresidential consumers: Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month shown for each CCF delivered by a pipeline distribution company or a gas utility for the classes as set forth below:

(i) Commercial consumers – such tax shall be $4.65 plus the rate of $0.182269 on each CCF delivered monthly to commercial consumers, not to exceed $20.00 monthly.

(ii) Industrial consumers – such tax shall be $4.65 plus the rate of $0.182269 on each CCF delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed $20.00 monthly.

(c) The conversion of tax pursuant to this chapter to monthly CCF delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect.

(2) Repealed by Ord. 2018-17.

(3) Billing, Collection and Remittance of Tax. The service provider shall bill the natural gas consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers natural gas and shall remit the same to the commissioner of the revenue for the city on a monthly basis on forms provided by the commissioner. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Section 58.1-3814, paragraphs F. and G., and Section 58.1-2901 of the Code of Virginia. If any consumer receives and pays for natural gas but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify the commissioner of the revenue of this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for natural gas and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. Such remittance shall be due and payable to this jurisdiction on or before the last day of the calendar month following the month the tax was received by the service provider.

(4) Computation of Bills Not on Monthly Basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this chapter if submitted 12 times per year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bimonthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows:

(a) The CCF will be divided by two;

(b) A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth in this section;

(c) The tax determined by subsection (4)(b) of this section shall be multiplied by two;

(d) The tax in subsection (4)(c) of this section may not exceed twice the monthly “maximum tax.” (Ord. 2018-17. Code 1985, § 12-139).


3.30.040 Penalties.

Any consumer of electricity or natural gas failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed and levied under this chapter, and any officer, agent or employee of any service provider violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,500, or by imprisonment in jail for not more than 360 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such failure, refusal, neglect or violation shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this chapter. (Code 1985, § 12-140).


3.30.050 Consumer use tax upon telephone service.

Repealed by Ord. 2018-17. (Ord. 2004-16. Code 1985, § 12-141).


3.30.060 Collection of tax.

Repealed by Ord. 2018-17. (Code 1985, § 12-142).


3.30.070 Remittance of tax collections.

Each service provider shall remit monthly to the commissioner of the revenue the amount of tax billed during the preceding month to consumers with a service address in the city of Staunton. All such remittances shall be paid over to the commissioner of the revenue not later than the twenty-seventh day of the month following the month in which they are collected, or the first business day thereafter. (Code 1985, § 12-143).


3.30.080 Refunds.

Any consumer is entitled to a refund from the city equal to the amount of the tax the consumer paid to a jurisdiction outside of the commonwealth if such tax was legally imposed in such other jurisdiction. The amount of any such credit or refund shall not exceed the tax paid to the city of Staunton. (Code 1985, § 12-144).


3.30.090 Interest and penalties.

Any consumer who fails to pay the tax imposed in this chapter when due to the service provider and any service provider who fails to remit said taxes to the commissioner of the revenue in accordance with SCC 3.30.080 shall be liable for interest and penalties. The interest and penalties for a consumer or service provider shall be computed in the same manner as interest and penalties are computed for failure to pay or remit the city’s utility tax.

All other provisions of SCC 3.30.100 et seq., are hereby unchanged and are ratified and confirmed hereby. (Code 1985, § 12-145; Ord. 10-12-00; Ord. 4-12-01).


3.30.100 Tax on purchases of local telephone service to pay for an E911 emergency system.

(1) When used in this section the following words shall have the following meanings except where the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended.

(a) E911 System. An “E911 system” means a telephone service which utilizes a computerized system to automatically route emergency telephone calls placed by dialing the digits 911 to the proper public safety answering point serving the jurisdiction from which the emergency telephone call was placed. An E911 system includes selective routing of telephone calls, automatic telephone number identification, and automatic location identification performed by computers and other auxiliary control center communications equipment.

(b) Public Safety Answering Point. The term “public safety answering point” means a communications facility operated on a 24-hour basis which first receives E911 calls from persons in an E911 service area and which may, as appropriate, directly dispatch public safety services or extend, transfer, or relay E911 calls to appropriate public safety agencies.

(c) Public Safety Agency. The term “public safety agency” means a functional division of a public agency which provides firefighting, police, medical, or other emergency services or a private entity which provides such services on a voluntary basis. 

(d) Local Telephone Service. The term “local telephone service” shall mean local exchange service.

(2) There is hereby imposed and levied by the city of Staunton, upon every purchaser of local telephone service, a tax in the amount of $2.90 per month. This tax shall be paid by the purchaser to the seller of local telephone service (hereinafter referred to as “seller”) for the use of the city of Staunton to pay for the initial capital, installation, communications facility renovations and/or remodeling, and maintenance costs of its E911 system. When the total initial capital and installation costs have been fully recovered, the tax shall be reduced to the level necessary to offset recurring maintenance, repair, and system upgrade costs, salaries or portions of salaries of dispatchers or call takers. The treasurer of the city shall notify the seller of the date on which the tax is to be reduced under this section. This notification will be sent by certified mail to the registered agent of the seller 60 days in advance of the date of which the tax is to be reduced.

(3) It shall be the duty of every seller in acting as the tax-collecting medium or agency for the city to add the amount of the tax imposed under subsection (2) of this section to all periodic bills it renders to nonexempt purchasers of local telephone service. The seller shall accept remittances of tax from purchasers at the time it collects the charges for local telephone service and shall report and pay over all tax collected in any calendar month to the treasurer of the city on or before the last day of the first calendar month thereafter. At this time, the seller shall notify the treasurer of the city of the name and address of all purchasers who refuse to pay the tax imposed by this section. The tax levied or imposed under this section shall become effective with the later of (a) bills dated 60 days after a copy of the section is sent to the registered agent of the seller by certified mail, or (b) bills dated on or after September 1, 2000.

(4) Each and every seller shall keep records showing all purchases of local telephone service in the city of Staunton. These records must show the date of bills for local telephone service and the amount of tax appearing on each bill. These records shall be kept at the seller’s offices for a period of three years for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times during normal business hours. The duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make copies thereof.

(5) The United States of America, the state of Virginia and the political subdivisions, agencies, boards, commissions and authorities of the United States and the state of Virginia are hereby exempted from payment of the tax imposed and levied by this section.

(6) This tax shall not apply to any local telephone service where a periodic bill is not rendered.

(7) Any purchaser who willfully fails, refuses, or neglects to pay the tax hereby imposed any seller, or any officer, agent or employee thereof, who with full knowledge, willfully refuses to perform the duties imposed on it by subsections (3) and (4) of this section with the intent of preventing the collection of the tax imposed by this section, shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of not more than $25.00. Each failure, refusal or neglect and each day’s continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense.

(8) Whenever the tax levied by this section is collected by the seller acting as tax-collecting medium or agency for the city of Staunton in accordance with SCC 3.30.100(3), such seller shall be allowed as compensation for the collection and remittance of this tax, three percent of the amount of tax due and accounted for. The seller shall deduct this compensation from the payment made to the treasurer of the city of Staunton in accordance with SCC 3.30.100(3). (Code 1985, § 12-146; Ord. 10-26-89; Ord. 7-13-94; Ord. 5-22-97; Ord. 4-27-00).


3.30.110 Water utility tax.

(1) There is hereby imposed and levied by the city, upon each purchaser of city water, a tax in the amount of 20 percent of the charge, exclusive of any federal tax thereon, made by the seller against the purchaser; provided, however, that such tax shall not exceed $2.00 for residential users or $20.00 for commercial or industrial users multiplied, in each case, by the number of months, or portions thereof, covered by the bill for such water purchase.

(2) The tax imposed and levied by this section shall not apply to the United States of America, the state and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and authorities thereof with respect to water purchased for the use of such governmental agencies.

(3) The tax imposed and levied by this section shall not apply to the purchase of bottled water. (Code 1985, § 12-147; Ord. 3-14-02).


3.30.111 Exemptions.

The taxes authorized by this chapter shall not apply to:

(1) The United States of America, the Commonwealth and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and authorities thereof are hereby exempted from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this chapter with respect to the purchase of utility services used by such governmental agencies;

(2) Utility sales of products used as motor vehicle fuels; and

(3) Natural gas used to generate electricity by a public utility as defined in Section 56-265.1 of the Code of Virginia, or an electric cooperative as defined in Section 56-231.15 of the Code of Virginia. (Ord. 2018-17).


Chapter 3.35 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX

Sections:

3.35.010    Definitions.

3.35.020    Levy and rate.

3.35.030    Exceptions.

3.35.040    Collection.

3.35.050    Reports and remittances.

3.35.060    Interest and penalties.

3.35.070    Determination of tax due by the commissioner of the revenue.

3.35.080    Cessation of business – Report and tax due immediately.

3.35.090    Commissioner of the revenue – Other powers and duties.

3.35.100    Penalty.


3.35.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Commissioner of the revenue” shall mean the commissioner of the revenue of the city of Staunton, Virginia, or any of his duly authorized deputies or agents.

“Hotel” shall mean any public or private hotel, inn, hotel, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, rooming house, or other lodging place within the city of Staunton offering lodging for four or more persons at any one time, and the owner and operator thereof, who for compensation, furnishes lodging to any transients as hereinafter defined.

“Person” shall mean and include individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, corporations, persons acting in representative capacity, and combinations of individuals of whatever form and character.

“Room rental” shall mean the total charge made by any such hotel for lodging or space furnished any such transient. If the charge made by such hotel to such transient includes any charge for services or accommodations in addition to that of lodging, or the use of space, then such portion of the total charge as represents only room or space rental shall be distinctly set out and billed to such transient by such hotel as a separate item.

“Transient” shall mean any person who, for any period of not more than 30 consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging or the use of any space in any hotel as hereinabove defined, for which lodging or use of space a charge is made.

“Treasurer” shall mean the treasurer of the city of Staunton, Virginia, or any of his authorized deputies or agents. (Code 1985, § 12-151; Ord. 7-25-85).


3.35.020 Levy and rate.

In addition to all other taxes of every kind now or hereafter imposed by law, there is hereby imposed and levied, for the purpose of funding the general operation of the city government, on each and every transient a tax equivalent to six and seven-tenths percent of the total amount paid for room rental by or for any such transient to any hotel. (Ord. 2016-07; Ord. 2007-02. Code 1985, § 12-152; Ord. 7-25-85; Ord. 7-13-94).


3.35.030 Exceptions.

No tax shall be payable hereunder on room rental paid to any hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home or home for the aged. Also, no tax shall be payable hereunder on space rental paid to any travel campground. (Code 1985, § 12-153; Ord. 7-25-85).


3.35.040 Collection.

Every person receiving any payment for room rental with respect to which a tax is levied under this chapter shall collect the amount of tax hereby imposed from the transient on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such room rental, at the time payment for such room rental is made. (Code 1985, § 12-154; Ord. 7-25-85).


3.35.050 Reports and remittances.

(1) The person collecting any such tax shall make out a report upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of the revenue may prescribe and require, showing the amount of room rental charges collected, and the tax required to be collected, and shall sign and deliver the same to the commissioner of the revenue.

(2) The commissioner of the revenue shall determine whether the report is in proper form and upon such determination shall cause a copy to be delivered to the treasurer.

(3) The person collecting any such tax shall remit the tax to the treasurer.

(4) Said reports and remittances shall be made on or before the twentieth day of the month following each month and covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. The first report must be filed not later than August 20, 1985. (Code 1985, § 12-155; Ord. 7-25-85).


3.35.060 Interest and penalties.

If any person shall fail or refuse to remit to the treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid under this chapter within the time and in the amount specified in this chapter, there shall be added to such tax by the treasurer interest at the rate of 10 percent per annum from the first day following the day such tax is due upon the amount of the tax for each year or portion thereof from the date upon which the tax is due as provided in this chapter. (Code 1985, § 12-156; Ord. 7-25-85).


3.35.070 Determination of tax due by the commissioner of the revenue.

If any person required to collect and remit the tax imposed by this chapter fails to file a report, or if the commissioner of the revenue has reasonable cause to believe that an erroneous report has been filed, the commissioner of the revenue may proceed to determine the amount due to the city and in connection therewith shall make such investigations and take such testimony and other evidence as may be necessary and he shall report his determination to the treasurer; provided, however, that notice and opportunity to be heard be given any person who may become liable for the amount owing prior to any determination by the commissioner of the revenue. (Code 1985, § 12-157; Ord. 7-25-85).


3.35.080 Cessation of business – Report and tax due immediately.

Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under SCC 3.35.020 shall quit or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax under the provisions of this chapter shall become immediately due, and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. (Code 1985, § 12-158; Ord. 7-25-85).


3.35.090 Commissioner of the revenue – Other powers and duties.

It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to ascertain the name of every person operating a hotel in the city, liable for the collection of the tax levied by SCC 3.35.020. The commissioner of the revenue shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of determining the amount due to the city under this chapter; and a copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file and available for public examination in the commissioner of the revenue’s office. Failure or refusal to comply with any rules and regulations promulgated under this section shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. (Code 1985, § 12-159; Ord. 7-25-85).


3.35.100 Penalty.

Any person intentionally failing to file a report required by this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, punishment shall not exceed that prescribed for a Class 3 misdemeanor as provided in Section 18.2-11 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. Each such failure shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection or remittance of such tax, penalties and interest, as provided in this chapter. (Code 1985, § 12-160; Ord. 7-25-85).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


Chapter 3.37 REGISTRATION FOR SHORT-TERM RENTAL

Sections:

3.37.010    Purpose.

3.37.020    Definitions.

3.37.030    Registration.

3.37.040    Fee.

3.37.050    Penalty.

3.37.060    Prohibitions and restrictions – Miscellaneous.


3.37.010 Purpose.

This chapter prescribes the conditions for the registration for short-term rental. (Ord. 2017-19).


3.37.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

“Operator” means the proprietor of any dwelling, lodging, or sleeping accommodations offered as a short-term rental, whether in the capacity of the owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other possessory capacity.

“Short-term rental” means the provision of a room or space that is suitable or intended for occupancy for dwelling, sleeping, or lodging purposes, for a period of fewer than 30 consecutive days, in exchange for charge for the occupancy. (Ord. 2017-19).


3.37.030 Registration.

(1) A short-term rental operator shall, within 30 days of holding or continuing to hold itself out as offering lodging, register with the commissioner of the revenue to allow for the assessment and remittance of business license as required under SCC 5.05.100 and transient occupancy taxes as provided in Chapter 3.35 SCC. 

(2) After initial registration under the provisions of this chapter, a short-term rental operator shall register by not later than March 1st each year with the commissioner of revenue, providing the complete name of the operator and the legal and street address (and parcel identification number) of each property in the city of Staunton offered for short-term rental by the operator. (Ord. 2018-04; Ord. 2017-19).


3.37.040 Fee.

The annual registration fee shall be $50.00 for each property for which the operator is engaged in short-term rental and shall be paid to the city of Staunton. (Ord. 2017-19).


3.37.050 Penalty.

There is imposed a penalty of $500.00 for each violation for any failure to register as required under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-19).


3.37.060 Prohibitions and restrictions – Miscellaneous.

(1) Until an operator pays the penalty and registers such property as required under the provisions of this chapter, the operator shall not offer or rent such property for short-term rental.

(2) For any repeated violations of the provisions of this chapter as it relates to a specific property, the operator is prohibited from registering and offering that property for short-term rental.

(3) An operator required to register under the provisions of this chapter is prohibited from offering a specific property for short-term rental in the city of Staunton upon multiple violations on more than three occasions of applicable state and local laws, ordinances, and regulations, as they relate to the short-term rental of such property.

(4) Notwithstanding compliance with the provisions of this chapter, an operator shall comply with all other provisions of the Staunton City Code and other applicable law, including but not limited to those related to land use under Chapter 18.152 SCC. (Ord. 2017-19).


Chapter 3.40 TAX ON MEALS SERVED IN RESTAURANTS OR BY CATERERS

Sections:

3.40.010    Definitions.

3.40.020    Levy.

3.40.030    Collection of tax by seller.

3.40.040    Exemptions – Limits on application.

3.40.050    Gratuities and service charges.

3.40.060    Report of taxes collected – Remittance – Preservation of records.

3.40.070    Penalty for violation of ordinance.

3.40.080    Interpretation of ordinance.


3.40.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have, for the purposes of this chapter, the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

“Cater” means the furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for compensation.

“Caterer” means a person who furnishes meals to be consumed on the premises of another for compensation.

“Collector” means the commissioner of revenue or designee.

“Commissioner” means the commissioner of revenue and any duly designated deputies, assistants, inspectors or other employees.

“Food” means all food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service.

“Food establishment” means any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the city of Staunton, including, but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, café, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, caterer, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption.

“Meal” shall mean any prepared food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein, shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller’s premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service.

“Seller” means any food establishment or caterer selling meals, or the person operating such business. (Code 1985, § 12-170; Ord. 12-13-90, § 1).


3.40.020 Levy.

There is hereby imposed and levied by the city of Staunton on each person a tax at the rate of seven percent on the amount paid for meals purchased from any food establishment, whether consumed on the premises or not. There shall be no tax if the total amount paid is less than $0.25; on larger amounts a fractional cent of tax due shall be rounded to the next higher cent. (Ord. 2017-08; Ord. 2007-08. Code 1985, § 12-171; Ord. 12-13-90, § 1).


3.40.030 Collection of tax by seller.

Every seller receiving any payment for food with respect to which a tax is levied hereunder shall collect and remit the amount of the tax imposed by this chapter from the person on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such food at the time payment for such food is made; provided, however, that no blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the Department for the Visually Handicapped and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes.

All tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city of Staunton. (Code 1985, § 12-172; Ord. 12-13-90, § 1).


3.40.040 Exemptions – Limits on application.

(1) The tax imposed under this chapter shall not be levied on factory-prepackaged candy, gum, nuts and other items of essentially the same nature served for on- or off-premises consumption.

(2) The tax imposed under this chapter shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption (items sold through a “drive-in” window of a food establishment, if they fit the definition of “meal,” are, nevertheless, taxable):

(a) Donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and factory-prepackaged items of essentially the same nature.

(b) Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this provision, a bulk sale shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on-premises consumption (e.g., a whole cake, a gallon of ice cream); a bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption.

(c) Alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages sold in factory-sealed containers.

(d) Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the Food Stamp Program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children.

(e) Any food or food product purchased for home consumption as defined in the federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 U.S.C. Section 2012, as amended, except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items, whether or not purchased for immediate consumption, are excluded from the said definition of food in the federal Food Stamp Act: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, and nonfactory-sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subsections (4)(c), (d) and (e) of this section.

(3) A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages.

(4) The tax imposed hereunder shall not be levied on the following purchases of food and beverages:

(a) Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee.

(b) Food and beverages sold by day-care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or employees.

(c) Food and beverages for use or consumption and which are paid for directly by the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth or the United States.

(d) Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof and the spouses and children of such persons.

(e) Food and beverages furnished by a public or private nonprofit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations.

(f) Food and beverages sold on an occasional basis, not exceeding four times per calendar year, by a nonprofit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church, or religious body as a fund-raising activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for nonprofit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes.

(g) Food and beverages sold through vending machines.

(h) Food and beverages sold in movie theaters.

(i) Food and beverages sold at the Staunton Farmer’s Market. (Ord. 2006-15. Code 1985, § 12-173; Ord. 12-13-90, § 1).


3.40.050 Gratuities and service charges.

The tax imposed by this chapter shall be imposed and levied on any gratuity for an employee of a seller; except, however, no such tax shall be imposed and levied on that portion of the amount paid by the purchaser as a discretionary gratuity in addition to the sales price of the meal or that portion of the amount paid by the purchaser as a mandatory gratuity or service charge added by the food establishment in addition to the sales price of the meal, but only to the extent that such mandatory gratuity or service charges do not exceed 20 percent of the sales price. (Ord. 2008-19. Code 1985, § 12-174; Ord. 12-13-90, § 1).


3.40.060 Report of taxes collected – Remittance – Preservation of records.

It shall be the duty of every person required by this chapter to pay to the city of Staunton the taxes imposed by this chapter to make a report thereof setting forth such information as the commissioner may prescribe and require, including all purchases taxable under this chapter, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this chapter. Such records shall be kept and preserved for a period of five years. The commissioner or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. (Code 1985, § 12-175; Ord. 12-13-90, § 1).


3.40.070 Penalty for violation of ordinance.

(1) Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is $1,000 or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.

(2) Except as provided in subsection (1) of this section, any corporate or partnership officer, as defined in Section 58.1-3906 of the Code of Virginia, or any other person required to collect, account for, or pay over the meals tax imposed under this chapter, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, or who willfully evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.

(3) Each violation of or failure to comply with this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this chapter. (Code 1985, § 12-176; Ord. 12-13-90, § 1).


3.40.080 Interpretation of ordinance.

The commissioner of revenue for the city of Staunton is empowered to interpret the provisions of this chapter. Any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved by such interpretation may file an appeal therefrom to the circuit court for the city of Staunton, Virginia. (Code 1985, § 12-177; Ord. 6-12-86; Ord. 12-13-90, § 1; Ord. 6-27-00).


Chapter 3.45 ENTERPRISE ZONE

Sections:

3.45.010    Statement of purpose.

3.45.020    Boundaries and date established – Transition.

3.45.030    Definitions.

3.45.040    Deferral of increased assessed property value.

3.45.050    Certain grant incentives.

3.45.060    Repealed.

3.45.070    Other incentives established by regulation.

3.45.080    Designation of enterprise zone administrator.

3.45.090    Application for incentive created herein.

3.45.100    Validity.

3.45.110    Termination date.


3.45.010 Statement of purpose.

In accordance with Title 59.1, Chapter 22, of the Virginia Code, it is the purpose of this chapter to promote business and industrial growth within the area designated as the Staunton enterprise zone by means of tax incentives, deferrals, grants, and other incentives and initiatives to stimulate real property improvements and new job creation that will serve the best interests of the city of Staunton. (Ord. 2007-06; Ord. 2006-23. Code 1985, § 12-191; Ord. 5-24-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § A).


3.45.020 Boundaries and date established – Transition.

(1) The boundaries of the Staunton enterprise zone are as set forth on the map entitled “Staunton Enterprise Zone 2010 – 2020 (with 2010 Expansion),” dated January 1, 2010, as maintained in the office of the Staunton enterprise zone administrator, the provisions of which map are incorporated fully herein by reference. The Staunton enterprise zone as shown on the map dated January 1, 2010, is established and designated effective January 1, 2010, solely for purposes of eligibility for benefits that may be provided by the Commonwealth of Virginia under the applicable provisions of Title 59.1 of the Virginia Code and implementing regulations of the Commonwealth of Virginia.

(2) With respect to the enterprise zone set forth on the map entitled “Staunton Enterprise Zone 2010 – 2020 (with 2010 Expansion),” dated January 1, 2010, the benefits provided in SCC 3.45.040 and 3.45.050, and the regulations promulgated under SCC 3.45.070, shall be measured from January 1, 2010.

(3) Any application made on or after January 1, 2010, for incentives shall be regarded as an application as to the zone established and the corresponding benefits allowed by the city under the provisions of this chapter in effect for such purposes as of January 1, 2010. Any application made before January 1, 2010, shall be regarded as an application made as to the zone established and the corresponding benefits allowed by the city under the provisions of this chapter in effect for such purposes immediately prior to January 1, 2010. No business firm which received any benefits allowed by the city under the provisions of this chapter in effect for such purposes immediately prior to January 1, 2010, shall be eligible for benefits allowed by the city under the provisions of this chapter in effect as of January 1, 2010, unless and until the business firm satisfies all of the requirements as to the zone established and benefits allowed by the city as of January 1, 2010. (Ord. 2010-17; Ord. 2008-28; Ord. 2007-06; Ord. 2006-23. Code 1985, § 12-192; Ord. 5-24-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § A; Ord. 2-25-93).


3.45.030 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

(1) “Average number of full-time employees” means the number of full-time employees during each payroll period of a business firm’s taxable year divided by the number of payroll periods.

(a) In calculating the average number of full-time employees, a business firm may count only those full-time employees who worked at least one-half of the normal work days during the payroll period. Paid leave time may be counted as work time.

(b) For a business firm which uses different payroll periods for different classes of employees, the average number of full-time employees of the firm shall be defined as the sum of the average number of full-time employees for each class of employees.

(2) “Business firm” means any for-profit business entity, incorporated or unincorporated, which is authorized to do business in the commonwealth of Virginia.

(a) The term “business firm” includes partnerships and small business corporations electing to be taxed under Subchapter S of the federal Internal Revenue Code, and which are not subject to state income tax as partnerships or corporations, but the taxable income of which is passed through to and taxed as income of individual partners and shareholders.

(b) The term “business firm” does not include homeowners associations as defined by the Internal Revenue Code, Section 528.

(3) “Employee of a zone establishment” means a person employed by a new business firm who is on the payroll of the firm’s establishment(s) within the zone. In the case of an employee who is on the payroll of two or more establishments of the firm, both inside and outside of the zone, the term “employee of a zone establishment” refers only to such an employee assigned to the firm’s zone establishment(s) for at least one-half of the normally scheduled workdays for such employee.

(4) “Full-time employee” means an employee of a zone establishment who works at least 35 hours per week during the business firm’s weekly payroll period, or two or more individuals who together share the same job position and together work 35 hours per week during the business firm’s weekly payroll period for that one position, provided the time worked totals at least 1,750 hours during the business firm’s taxable year. The term “full-time employee” does not include a partner member or shareholder in the new business firm or an unpaid volunteer worker.

(5) “In good standing” means that the business firm or new business firm has satisfied all of the requirements of the commissioner of revenue and of the treasurer of the city, including the payment in full of all license taxes, real estate taxes, and other taxes, levies, fees, charges, interest, and penalties, and has paid in full all other fees, charges, and claims of any nature whatsoever imposed by or owed to the city or related entities of the city. The determination of whether a business firm is “in good standing” shall be made by the enterprise zone administrator upon consideration of a certification provided by the commissioner of revenue, the treasurer of the city, and by any other authorized official of the city or related entities of the city and upon consideration of other information as the zone administrator deems appropriate.

(6) “Marketing expenses” means out-of-pocket costs paid by a business firm for advertising, public relations, graphic design work and printing related to advertisement, promotion, or brand development, or other out-of-pocket costs paid for general business promotion.

(7) “New or expanding business” means an enterprise which has increased its number of employees, expanded its facilities, or invested additional new capital in facilities, plant or equipment as part of a written plan and effort to grow its revenues and profits.

(8) “Property owner” includes any person or entity, regardless of form, having legal title to real property. (Ord. 2010-17; Ord. 2007-06; Ord. 2006-23. Code 1985, § 12-193; Ord. 5-24-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § A; Ord. 7-25-91).


3.45.040 Deferral of increased assessed property value.

(1) Any business firm or property owner who makes repairs, renovations or other structural or interior improvements to their industrial or commercial property in the enterprise zone, increasing the assessed value of the property by at least 40 percent, shall receive a five-year deferral of increased assessment of property value for real estate tax purposes with respect to such improvements.

(2) The business firm or property owner claiming the deferral shall file in the Staunton enterprise zone administrator’s office an application on the form approved by the city assessor, requesting the deferral provided hereunder by not later than January 1st of the real estate tax year for which the exemption is claimed. 

(3) No business firm or property owner shall be eligible for the deferral provided hereunder unless:

(a) The required building permits have been obtained;

(b) The business firm or property owner is in good standing;

(c) The city assessor has verified in writing to the Staunton enterprise zone administrator that the requirement to increase the assessed value by at least 40 percent has been satisfied; and 

(d) A final certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city.

(4) Any business firm or property owner qualifying for the deferral of increased assessment of property value and who, as part of a new development or redevelopment, has not less than 50 percent pervious surface area of the commercial or industrial property, may receive one additional year of deferral. (Ord. 2010-17; Ord. 2007-06; Ord. 2006-23. Code 1985, § 12-194; Ord. 5-24-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § A).


3.45.050 Certain grant incentives.

(1) A business firm in good standing shall be eligible to apply for one or more of the following specific grants through an annual application process administered by the enterprise zone administrator on behalf of the economic development authority (EDA) of the city of Staunton, to the extent not inconsistent with the terms of a contribution agreement to be entered into between the EDA and the city, in amount(s) equal to:

(a) One thousand dollars per full-time employee of a zone establishment when such business firm creates a minimum of 15 new full-time jobs, provided:

(i) Each such employee earns at least 300 percent of the federal minimum wage;

(ii) The new business firm has been in full operation in the transaction of business in the enterprise zone for at least one year immediately prior to applying; and

(iii) The total grant available to any one business is limited to $25,000;

(b) Fifty percent of the machinery and tools or personal property tax collected by the city for a period of three years when such business firm has acquired and is assessed each such year on a basis that reflects an increase of at least $1,000,000 in additional machinery and tools or an increase of at least $500,000 in additional personal property, respectively, when compared to the year immediately prior to the three-year period.  The amount of the grant shall be calculated based on the increase in machinery and tools tax or personal property tax paid by the business and not the total amount.

(2) A business firm in good standing shall be eligible to apply for one or more of the following specific grants available on a first-come, first-served basis beginning July 1st of each year from the EDA of the city of Staunton, to the extent not inconsistent with the terms of a contribution agreement to be entered into between the EDA and the city, in amounts(s) equal to:

(a) Three thousand dollars as a reimbursement of or grant towards the business firm’s interest rate buy-down on start-up or expansion loan; refund of broadband connection fees; $2,000 cultural amenity package, providing tickets and entrance opportunities for Staunton’s local arts and cultural destinations; or $500.00 cash grant for each full-time job created for up to five employees when such employee(s) earn at least 300 percent of the federal minimum wage, as long as the business firm is a new or expanding business firm that meets the definition of a “creative class” target section within the professional, scientific, and technical services sector (NAICS 54), including: 5413 architectural, engineering, and related services; 5414 specialized design services; 5415 computer systems design and related services; 5416 management, scientific, and technical consulting services; 5417 scientific research and development services; 5418 advertising, public relations, and related services; and 5419 other professional, scientific, and technical services.

(b) Fifty percent of marketing expenses in the first six months after opening for new target sector destination retailers in the central business district and Newtown portion of the enterprise zone and a two-year membership to the Staunton Downtown Development Association (SDDA) at no cost, provided:

(i) The grant available to any one business is $5,000 plus the value of the two-year membership to the SDDA.

(ii) If the marketing is conducted with or through a Staunton-based business, reimbursement shall be made at a 100 percent rate rather than a 50 percent match, but the $5,000 incentive cap remains applicable.

(iii) It shall be available only to target section destination retailers including furniture stores, supermarkets or other nonconvenience grocery stores, quality apparel stores, musical instrument retailers, high-end auto dealerships, and book and music retailers.

(c) Two-hundred-dollar scholarship to the Staunton Creative Community Fund, Inc.’s business plan development course available only to minority entrepreneurs when $50.00 is paid as a deposit for course attendance. 

(3) If the total amount of grants for which eligible business firms and new business firms have applied exceeds the annual appropriation for such grants, then the amount of grant that each business firm and new business firm is eligible for shall be prorated in a proportional amount.

(4) Such grants shall immediately terminate upon such business firm’s relocation outside the enterprise zone. (Ord. 2010-20; Ord. 2010-17; Ord. 2008-22; Ord. 2007-06; Ord. 2006-23. Code 1985, § 12-195; Ord. 5-24-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § A; Ord. 6-28-95).


3.45.060 Other certain incentives.

Repealed by Ord. 2010-17. (Ord. 2006-23. Code 1985, § 12-196; Ord. 5-24-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § A).


3.45.070 Other incentives established by regulation.

Regulations and rules prescribing procedures effectuating the purpose of this chapter shall be promulgated by the city manager and approved by the city council. Such regulations and rules shall include, but not be limited to, the incentives enumerated in this chapter. (Ord. 2006-23. Code 1985, § 12-197; Ord. 5-24-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § A).


3.45.080 Designation of enterprise zone administrator.

The Staunton department of economic development is hereby designated to administer the enterprise zone with the director of economic development or designee serving as enterprise zone administrator. (Ord. 2006-23. Code 1985, § 12-198; Ord. 5-24-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § A; Ord. 6-28-95).24


3.45.090 Application for incentive created herein.

Business firms may make application for the various incentives set forth herein to the enterprise zone administrator on forms provided by the city of Staunton and available at the office of economic development. (Ord. 2010-17; Ord. 2006-23. Code 1985, § 12-199; Ord. 5-24-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § A).


3.45.100 Validity.

If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, or provision of this chapter be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall not operate to affect the validity of any other part hereof. (Ord. 2006-23. Code 1985, § 12-200; Ord. 5-24-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § A).


3.45.110 Termination date.

This chapter shall terminate, unless continued pursuant to application made to the Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Housing and Community Development, on December 31, 2020. (Ord. 2010-17; Ord. 2006-23. Code 1985, § 12-201; Ord. 5-24-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § A).


Chapter 3.50 ABATEMENT OF LEVIES

Sections:

3.50.010    Abatement of levies on building razed, destroyed or damaged by fortuitous happenings.

3.50.020    Method and amount of abatement.

3.50.030    Notification of city treasurer.


3.50.010 Abatement of levies on building razed, destroyed or damaged by fortuitous happenings.

Whenever a building is (1) razed, or (2) destroyed or damaged by a fortuitous happening beyond the control of the owner, the owner may apply for an abatement of the real estate tax due thereon. Application for such abatement shall be made on a form provided by the city assessor and made to the city assessor within six months of the date such building was razed, damaged or destroyed. (Code 1985, § 12-206; Ord. 8-23-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § B).


3.50.020 Method and amount of abatement.

Upon receipt of an application for abatement under this chapter, the city assessor shall ascertain the extent of the diminution of the value by reason of such fortuitous happening. If the damage or destruction decreases the tax-assessed valuation of the building by less than $500.00, no abatement shall be allowed. Also, no abatement shall be allowed unless the destruction or damage renders the building unfit for use and occupancy for 30 days or more during the calendar year. The tax on such razed, destroyed or damaged building shall be computed according to the ratio which the portion of the year the building was fit for use, occupancy and enjoyment bears to the entire year. (Code 1985, § 12-207; Ord. 8-23-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § B; Ord. 6-13-00).


3.50.030 Notification of city treasurer.

Whenever the city assessor determines that real estate taxes should be abated hereunder, said assessor shall notify the city treasurer accordingly. (Code 1985, § 12-208; Ord. 8-23-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § B).


Chapter 3.55 REFUNDS OF TAXES

Sections:

3.55.010    Refunds of local taxes erroneously paid.

3.55.020    Interest on erroneous assessments.


3.55.010 Refunds of local taxes erroneously paid.

(1) If the commissioner of revenue is satisfied that he or she has erroneously assessed any applicant with any local taxes, the commissioner shall certify to the treasurer the amount erroneously assessed. If the taxes have not been paid, the applicant shall be exonerated from so much thereof as is erroneous, and if such taxes have been paid, the treasurer or his successor in office shall refund to the applicant the amount erroneously paid, together with any penalty and interest paid thereon.

(2) When the commissioner of revenue who made the erroneous assessment has been succeeded by another person, such person shall have the same authority as the commissioner making the original erroneous assessment, provided he or she makes diligent investigation to determine that the original assessment was erroneously made and certifies thereto to the local treasurer and the Staunton city council.

(3) Any person who believes an erroneous assessment has been made to his or her taxes may apply to the commissioner of revenue in writing stating sufficient detail to enable the commissioner to evaluate such claim.

(4) Local taxes subject to relief hereunder shall include all local taxes imposed by the city of Staunton under the provisions of the Staunton City Code and the ordinance amending and restating the ordinance imposing taxes on persons and property and imposing license taxes enacted as of January 1, 1976, as amended.

(5) Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, no refund shall be made hereunder in any case when application therefor was made more than three years after the last day of the tax year for which such taxes were assessed. In the event, however, that any tax is declared to be unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the city council for the city of Staunton may grant a refund of such tax to all taxpayers, for those years to which the court proceeding was applicable.

(6) This section shall not apply to any tax collected by the city of Staunton which is paid over by the city to state or federal authority. (Code 1985, § 12-213; Ord. 10-25-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § C).


3.55.020 Interest on erroneous assessments.

Any refund made pursuant to this chapter shall be repaid with interest on the amount determined to have been erroneously paid. Such interest shall be at the same rate that the city of Staunton charges for interest upon delinquent taxes and shall run from the date such taxes were required to be paid or were paid, whichever is later. “Interest” as used herein does not include any penalty for late payment. (Code 1985, § 12-214; Ord. 10-25-90; Ord. 3-14-91, § C).


Chapter 3.60 DOWNTOWN SERVICE DISTRICT

Sections:

3.60.010    Downtown service district created.

3.60.020    Additional tax imposed.

3.60.030    Downtown service district defined.

3.60.040    Purposes of tax and facilities and services proposed.

3.60.050    Proposed plan for providing facilities and services.

3.60.060    Benefits which can be expected.

3.60.070    Other powers and duties.


3.60.010 Downtown service district created. 

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 15.2-2400 et seq. of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, a downtown service district is hereby designated and created for the purposes set forth in SCC 3.60.040, to be named the downtown service district. (Ord. 2005-05. Code 1985, § 12-217; Ord. 2-24-00).


3.60.020  Additional tax imposed. 

To provide for additional governmental services not being offered uniformly throughout the city, there shall be annually set a tax rate and annually levied and collected such additional tax for and upon every $100.00 of assessed value of real property and improvements located in the downtown service district, with boundaries as defined by SCC 3.60.030. Valuation and assessment of real property, timing with respect to valuation, assessment and payment, penalties and interest on delinquencies, assessment of new construction, and all other procedures for and details of administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be the same as provided for by the Staunton City Code for real estate taxes generally. (Ord. 2005-05. Code 1985, § 12-218).


3.60.030 Downtown service district defined. 

(1) The boundaries of the downtown service district shall be defined to include all properties fronting upon and the area included within the following boundaries: 

BEGINNING AT THE SOUTHEASTERN CORNER OF THE INTERSECTION OF Churchville Avenue and North Lewis Street, proceeding along the eastern side of North Lewis Street to the northeast corner of the intersection of North Lewis Street and Frederick Street, then crossing North Lewis street to the northwest corner of the said intersection, then proceeding across Frederick Street to the southwest corner of the said intersection, then proceeding south along the western side of Lewis Street to the northwest corner of the intersection of South Lewis Street and Middlebrook Avenue, then proceeding directly across Middlebrook Avenue to the south side of Middlebrook Avenue, then proceeding along the south side of Middlebrook Avenue to the southeast corner of the intersection of Middlebrook Avenue and South Augusta Street, then proceeding south to the northern side of the railroad concourse, then proceeding east along the northern side of the concourse to the southeastern corner of the southern termination point of South New Street, then proceeding north along the eastern side of South New Street to the southeastern corner of the intersection of South New Street and Mill Street, then proceeding along the south side of Mill Street to the southeastern corner of the intersection of Mill Street and Greenville Avenue, then proceeding along the south side of Greenville Avenue to the point where Greenville Avenue merges with South Coalter Street, then proceeding north across Greenville Avenue and continuing north along the west side of South Coalter Street to the northwestern corner of the intersection of South Coalter Street and State Street, then proceeding along the north side of State Street to the northwestern corner of the intersection of South Coalter Street and State Street, thence proceeding along the north side of State Street to the northwestern corner of the intersection of State Street and Greenville Avenue, then proceeding along the northern side of Greenville Avenue to the southeastern corner of the intersection of Greenville Avenue and Kalorama Street, then proceeding east along the south side of Kalorama Street to the southeastern corner of the intersection of Kalorama Street and Market Street, then proceeding north along the eastern side of Market Street to the southeastern corner of the intersection of Market Street and Frederick Street, then proceeding west along the south side of Frederick Street to the southwestern corner of the intersection of Frederick Street and North New Street, then crossing Frederick Street to the northwestern corner of the intersection of North New Street and Frederick Street, then proceeding west along the north side of Frederick Street to the northeastern corner of the intersection of Frederick Street and North Augusta Street, then proceeding north along the eastern side of North Augusta Street to the southeastern corner of the intersection of North Augusta Street and North New Street, then crossing North Augusta Street to the southwestern corner of the intersection of North Augusta Street and Churchville Avenue, then proceeding along the south side of Churchville Avenue to the point of beginning.

(2) References to street names set out in subsection (1) of this section are based upon and fully shown on a map, dated October 17, 1994, entitled “Downtown Service District, Staunton, Virginia,” a copy of which is on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Clerk of Council, City Hall, 116 West Beverley Street, Staunton, Virginia.

(3) Public utility facilities in or above the public right-of-way, such as poles, lights, wires, cable, conduit, and piping, shall not be included within the downtown service district or subject to the tax imposed by this chapter. 

(4) All parcels of land that are bisected by the downtown service district boundaries, as set out in subsection (1) of this section, are to be considered wholly included within the boundaries of said district.

(5) All real property located within the downtown service district as set out in subsection (1) of this section, used exclusively as a single-family detached residence, and such other real property otherwise exempt from the payment of real estate taxes, shall not be subject to the tax imposed by this chapter. (Code 1985, § 12-219).


3.60.040 Purposes of tax and facilities and services proposed. 

(1) Taxes collected pursuant to this chapter shall be levied for and used to provide additional governmental services not being offered uniformly throughout the entire city, including, but not limited to, economic and business development and promotional activities intended to foster business retention; business recruitment and developer recruitment; physical improvements to public facilities which are unique to the downtown; planning for the development and acquisition of public spaces needed for downtown; and those public improvements enumerated in Section 15.2-2403 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended.

(2) Taxes collected pursuant to this chapter shall be segregated so as to enable the same to be expended only in the downtown service district in which raised. (Code 1985, § 12-220).


3.60.050 Proposed plan for providing facilities and services. 

Provision of the specific facilities and services proposed by this chapter shall, upon the city manager’s approval and execution of a contract on behalf of the city, as appropriate, be by action of the Staunton Downtown Development Association, Inc., working in four primary areas: design, promotion, economic development, and organization, with respect to physical improvements, promotion and advertising, recruitment, support services, compilation of market data, and similar initiatives for the benefit of the downtown service district and its businesses and to continue and sustain revitalization of the downtown service district. Such contract shall include, among other requirements as determined by the city manager, a description of the specific services and products, as well as of the construction, establishment, maintenance and operation of any specific necessary and desirable facilities and equipment to be provided by the Staunton Development Association, Inc., which is hereby granted the power and responsibilities with respect to the downtown service district according to law. In addition, the contract shall include specific standards or measures for accountability in order for the city manager and council to quantitatively evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the work of the Staunton Downtown Development Association, Inc. As a contractual condition of funding, the board of directors and governance otherwise of the Staunton Downtown Development Association, Inc., shall reflect a significant representation of and orientation to owners of properties and to owners and operators of businesses in the downtown service district. (Ord. 2005-05. Code 1985, § 12-221).


3.60.060 Benefits which can be expected. 

Increased market traffic downtown, the recruitment of new businesses and the expansion of existing businesses, increased profitability of district businesses, increased market awareness, increased property values, and increased community allegiance to the downtown district can be expected by the provision of the facilities and services proposed by this chapter. (Code 1985, § 12-222).


3.60.070 Other powers and duties.

The city shall have all those powers and duties with respect to a downtown service district as set forth in Section 15.2-2403 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, including the power to contract with any person, firm, or corporation to provide additional governmental services in such district.

(1) The tax program authorized by this chapter on downtown revitalization and development shall expire on June 30, 2010, with the exception that all delinquent taxes owed to the city as a result of said tax program shall continue to be due to, and collectable by, the city and that all applicable penalties and interest shall apply.

(2) The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be in full force and effect on and after July 1, 2005. 

(3) One hundred eighty days prior to the expiration of the tax program authorized by this chapter, with said date being January 1, 2010, city council shall initiate a review of the downtown service district created by this chapter, and based upon the findings of said review, decide whether to continue this tax program. If council elects to continue the program, then council shall establish the appropriate rate of taxation as herein provided. (Ord. 2005-05. Code 1985, § 12-223; Ord. 12-8-94; Ord. 2-24-00).


Chapter 3.65 SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:

3.65.010    Sales and use tax imposed.


3.65.010 Sales and use tax imposed.

Pursuant to the authority granted under Section 58.1-605 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, there is hereby imposed a general retail sales tax at the rate of one percent to provide revenue for the general fund of the city. Such tax shall be added to the rate of state sales tax imposed by Sections 58.1-603 and 58.1-604 of the Code of Virginia and shall be subject to all provisions of Chapter 6 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia and the rules and regulations published with respect thereto. (Code 1985, § 12-260; Ord. 11-13-97).


Chapter 3.70 PROBATE TAX

Sections:

3.70.010    Local probate tax.


3.70.010 Local probate tax.

(1) There is hereby imposed a city probate tax on the grant of administration in or by the circuit court for an amount equal to one-third of the state tax provided and imposed by Section 58.1-1712 of the Code of Virginia as amended.

(2) The clerk of the circuit court for the city of Staunton, Virginia, shall collect the tax imposed hereunder and pay the revenues therefrom into the treasury of the city. Such clerk shall be entitled to compensation for such collection in an amount equal to five percent of the amount collected and remitted hereunder, all as provided for and authorized by Sections 58.1-3805 and 58.1-3806 of the Code of Virginia (1950) as amended. (Code 1985, § 12-270; Ord. 12-12-02).


Chapter 3.75 CIGARETTE TAX

Sections:

3.75.010    Cigarette tax imposed.

3.75.020    Definitions.

3.75.030    Levied – Amount – Tax additional to other taxes.

3.75.040    Methods of payment.

3.75.050    Preparation and sale of stamps generally – Discounts.

3.75.060    Duties of dealers and sellers.

3.75.070    Monthly reports and recordkeeping.

3.75.080    Assessment of unpaid taxes.

3.75.090    Display of stamps – Seizure.

3.75.100    Refund for unused or damaged stamps.

3.75.110    Rules and regulations.

3.75.120    Violations of chapter generally.

3.75.130    Violations of chapter prohibited – Acts enumerated.


3.75.010 Cigarette tax imposed. 

Pursuant to the authority set forth in the Charter for the city of Staunton in Section 11, Paragraph 24, and Sections 58.1-3830 and 58.1-3840 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, there is hereby imposed a tax on the sale and use of cigarettes to provide revenue for the general fund of the city as set forth hereafter in this chapter. (Ord. 2004-21; Ord. 2004-15. Code 1985, § 12-271).


3.75.020 Definitions.

Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words and phrases shall, for purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 

“Cigarette” means any roll of any size or shape for smoking, whether filtered or unfiltered, with or without a mouthpiece, made wholly or partly of cut, shredded or crimped tobacco or other plant or substitute for tobacco, whether the same is flavored, adulterated or mixed with another ingredient, if the wrapper or cover is made of any material other than leaf tobacco or homogenized leaf tobacco, regardless of whether the roll is labeled or sold as a cigarette or by any other name. 

“City” means the city of Staunton, Virginia.

“Dealer” means every manufacturer, manufacturer’s representative, self-wholesaler, wholesaler, public warehouser or other person who supplies a seller within the city with cigarettes. 

“Director” means the director of finance for the city of Staunton, or his or her designee. 

“Package” means any container, regardless of the material used in its construction in which separate cigarettes are placed without such cigarettes being placed into any container within the package. Packages are those containers of cigarettes from which individual cigarettes are ordinarily taken when they are consumed by their ultimate user. 

“Person” means any individual, firm, unincorporated association, company, corporation, L.L.C., joint stock company, group, agency, syndicate, trust or trustee, receiver, fiduciary, partnership and conservator. The word “person” as applied to a partnership, unincorporated association or other joint venture means the partners or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation shall include all the officers and directors thereof. 

“Sale” means every act or transaction, regardless of the method or means employed, including the use of vending machines and other mechanical devices, whereby title to any cigarettes shall be transferred from the seller to any other person within the corporate limits of the city. 

“Seller” means every person who transfers title to any cigarettes, or in whose place of business title to any cigarettes is transferred, within the corporate limits of the city, for any purpose other than resale. 

“Stamp” means a small gummed piece of paper or decalcomania to be sold by the city director of finance and to be affixed, manually or by machine, to every package of cigarettes sold at retail in the city, under the authorization of the director of finance. 

“Treasurer” means the treasurer for the city of Staunton, or his or her designee. (Ord. 2004-21; Ord. 2004-15. Code 1985, § 12-272).


3.75.030 Levied – Amount – Tax additional to other taxes.

In addition to all other taxes of every kind now or hereafter imposed by law, there is hereby levied and imposed by the city an excise tax on the sale of cigarettes equivalent to $0.30 on each package containing 25 or fewer cigarettes. The tax shall be paid by the seller, if not previously paid, and collected in the manner and at the time provided for in this chapter; provided, that the tax payable for each package of cigarettes sold within the city shall be paid but once. The tax hereby levied shall not apply to free distribution of sample cigarettes in packages containing five or fewer cigarettes. (Ord. 2014-10; Ord. 2004-21; Ord. 2004-15. Code 1985, § 12-273).


3.75.040 Methods of payment. 

The tax imposed by this chapter shall be evidenced by the use of a stamp, purchased from the city director of finance and affixed by the dealer or seller to every package of cigarettes to be sold within the city. The tax shall be paid at the time the stamps are purchased from the director of finance. Every dealer and every seller shall have the right to buy such stamps from the director of finance and to affix the same to packages of cigarettes as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2004-21; Ord. 2004-15. Code 1985, § 12-274).


3.75.050 Preparation and sale of stamps generally – Discounts.

For the purpose of making stamps available for use, the director of finance shall sell stamps of such denomination and in such quantities as may be necessary for the payment of the taxes imposed by this chapter. In the sale of such stamps, the director of finance shall allow a discount of five percent of the denominational or face value of the stamps to cover the costs incurred in affixing the stamps to packages of cigarettes. (Ord. 2004-21; Ord. 2004-15. Code 1985, § 12-275).


3.75.060 Duties of dealers and sellers.

(1) Every dealer in cigarettes is hereby required and it shall be his duty to purchase such stamps at the office of the director of finance as shall be necessary to pay the tax levied and imposed by this chapter, and to affix or cause to be affixed, a stamp or stamps of the prescribed monetary value to each package of cigarettes prior to delivering or furnishing such cigarettes to any seller. 

(2) Every seller is hereby required to examine each package of cigarettes, prior to exposing the same for sale, for the purpose of ascertaining whether such package has the proper stamps affixed thereto or imprinted thereon as required by this chapter. If upon such examination unstamped or improperly stamped packages of cigarettes are discovered, the seller shall either: 

(a) Purchase and affix to such packages of cigarettes the proper stamps covering the tax imposed by this chapter; or

(b) Immediately notify the dealer who provided the cigarettes, and upon such notification such dealer shall forthwith either affix to the unstamped or improperly stamped packages the proper amount of stamps, or shall replace such packages with others to which stamps have been properly fixed thereon.

(3) In the event any seller elects to purchase and affix stamps before offering cigarettes for sale, the dealer delivering and furnishing such cigarettes shall not be required to purchase and affix stamps to such cigarettes so sold or furnished; provided, that any such dealer shall, on the day following the day of such delivery, file with the director a copy of the delivery memorandum showing the name and address of such seller and the quantity and type of cigarettes so delivered and furnished. (Ord. 2004-21; Ord. 2004-15. Code 1985, § 12-276).


3.75.070 Monthly reports and recordkeeping.

(1) It shall be the duty of each dealer to report monthly to the director separately the following information: 

(a) The quantity of stamped cigarettes sold or delivered during the period requested by the director to: 

(i) Each dealer;

(ii) Each seller; and

(iii) Each separate person or place of business within the city;

(b) The quantity of stamps on hand, both affixed and unaffixed on the first day of the period of request and the quantity of stamps or stamped cigarettes received during the period; and

(c) Such further information as the director may require for the proper administration and enforcement of this chapter for the determination of the exact number of cigarettes in the possession of each dealer or user. 

(2) Upon request by the director, any seller shall provide the director, in writing, with the name and address of the dealer who provides the seller with cigarettes. 

(3) It shall be the duty of every dealer and seller in the city to maintain and keep, for a period of two years, complete records of the number of packages of cigarettes delivered or sold by such dealer or seller and to make all such records available for examination by the director, upon demand, at any and all reasonable times. (Ord. 2004-21; Ord. 2004-15. Code 1985, § 12-277).


3.75.080 Assessment of unpaid taxes. 

(1) When, upon examination and audit of any invoices, records, books, canceled checks or other memoranda touching on the purchase, sale, receipt, storage or possession of tobacco products taxed herein, any dealer or other person liable for the tax is unable to furnish evidence to the director of sufficient tax payments and stamp purchases to cover cigarettes which were sold, used, stored, received, purchased or possessed by him, the prima facie presumption shall arise that such cigarettes were received, sold, used, stored, purchased or possessed by him without the proper tax having been paid. The director shall, from the results of such examination and audit based upon such direct or indirect information available, assess the tax due and unpaid. 

(2) The dealer or other person liable for the tax shall be notified by certified mail or hand delivery of such deficiency and such tax, penalty and interest assessed shall be due and payable within 10 days after notice of such deficiency has been issued. (Ord. 2004-21; Ord. 2004-15. Code 1985, § 12-278).


3.75.090 Display of stamps – Seizure.

(1) Stamps shall be placed upon each package of cigarettes in such manner as to be readily visible to the purchaser, and shall be affixed to each package of cigarettes in such a manner that their removal will require continued application of water or steam. 

(2) Any seller found to possess, prior to being offered for sale, more than 60 packages of cigarettes without the tax paid stamp affixed who is not in the process of affixing such stamps thereto, shall be presumed to be in possession of untaxed cigarettes in violation of this chapter. If such person has received the cigarettes within the preceding 48 hours, and has not offered them for sale, such presumption shall not apply.

(3) Any vending machine located within the city containing cigarettes upon which the stamp has not been affixed or containing cigarettes placed so as to not allow visual inspection of the stamp through the viewing area as provided for by the vending machine manufacturer shall be presumed to contain untaxed cigarettes in violation of this chapter. If a vending machine does not allow for visual inspection of the stamp, the director is hereby authorized to direct the owner to open the machine in order to determine whether the cigarettes contained therein are stamped. 

(4) Any cigarettes, coin operated vending machines, counterfeit stamps, or other property found in violation of this chapter shall be declared contraband goods and may be seized by the director. In addition to any tax due, the dealer or other person liable for the tax possessing such untaxed cigarettes shall be subject to civil and criminal penalties herein provided.

(5) In lieu of seizure, the director may seal such vending machines to prevent continued illegal sale or removal of such cigarettes. The removal of such seal from a vending machine by any unauthorized person shall be a violation of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the seizure of any vending machine at any time after it is sealed. 

(6) All cigarette vending machines shall be plainly marked with the name, address and telephone number of the owner of said machine.

(7) Any seized and confiscated cigarettes, vending machines or other property used in the furtherance of any illegal evasion of the tax may be disposed of by sale or other method deemed appropriate by the director 30 days after notice to the person from whom the items were seized, and any other known holder of a property interest in the property. The notice shall state that the owner or holder of a property interest may challenge the proposed sale and forfeiture by written appeal to the Staunton city manager at least five days prior to the date of the proposed sale. The appellant shall have the right to personally appear before the city manager, or his or her designee, and to present any relevant evidence or witnesses, to question any witness for the city, and to assert any available affirmative defense. The city manager shall render a written decision on the appeal within 10 working days. If a timely appeal is filed, no sale and forfeiture shall occur unless and until the city manager renders a decision rejecting the appeal.

(8) No credit from any sale of cigarettes, vending machines or other property seized shall be allowed toward any tax, penalties or interest assessed.

(9) An inventory of the property seized pursuant to a violation of this section shall be prepared and a copy shall be provided to the owner of the seized property as soon as practicable.

(10) When any property is seized for the purposes of forfeiture and an information naming that property has not been filed, neither the agency seizing the property nor any other law enforcement agency may request, require, or in any manner induce any person who asserts ownership, lawful possession, or any lawful right to the property to waive his interest in or rights to the property until an information has been filed. (Ord. 2018-18; Ord. 2004-21; Ord. 2004-15. Code 1985, § 12-279).


3.75.100 Refund for unused or damaged stamps.

(1) Should any person, after acquiring from the director of finance any stamps provided for in this chapter, cease to be engaged in a business necessitating the use of the stamps, or should the stamps be damaged to the extent that they are unusable, such person shall be entitled to a refund of the denominational or face amount of any such stamps, less any discount, upon presenting the stamps to the director of finance and furnishing the director of finance with an affidavit showing, to his satisfaction, that the stamps were acquired by such person but not used, and the reason for requesting the refund. 

(2) Any and all refunds for unused or damaged stamps provided for under this section may be made on vouchers approved by the director of finance. Such refunds shall be charged against the sums collected for the sale of said stamps. Payment to the person requesting the refund shall be made within 30 days of the request. (Ord. 2004-21; Ord. 2004-15. Code 1985, § 12-280).


3.75.110 Rules and regulations.

The director is hereby authorized and empowered to jointly prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the methods and means of cancellation of the stamps provided for in this chapter and to any and all other matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The director is further authorized and empowered to examine the books, records, invoices, papers and any and all cigarettes in and upon any premises where the same are placed, stored, sold, offered for sale, or displayed for sale by a seller. The director is authorized to delegate any of the powers and duties set out in this chapter to one or more deputies or assistants, except as may be prohibited by law. (Ord. 2004-21; Ord. 2004-15. Code 1985, § 12-281).


3.75.120 Violations of chapter generally. 

(1) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Conviction and punishment for such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment of any tax, interest or penalty imposed by this chapter.

(2) Any person who fails to pay any cigarette tax at the time it is due shall pay a late payment penalty in the amount of 10 percent of the unpaid tax per month. 

(3) Any person who fails to pay any cigarette tax at the time it is due shall pay interest on the tax found to be overdue and unpaid at the rate of three quarters of one percent per month. 

(4) In addition, any person who shall perform any fraudulent act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this chapter shall be required to pay a penalty in the amount of 50 percent of any tax found to be overdue and unpaid. 

(5) Each day’s violation of, or noncompliance with, any of the provisions of this chapter shall be and constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2004-21; Ord. 2004-15. Code 1985, § 12-282).


3.75.130 Violations of chapter prohibited – Acts enumerated.

It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person: 

(1) To perform any act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this chapter or of any part thereof, or for any dealer or seller, with intent to violate any provision of this chapter, to fail or refuse to perform any of the duties imposed upon him under the provisions of this chapter, or to fail or refuse to obey any lawful order which the director may issue under this chapter;

(2) To falsely or fraudulently make, forge, alter or counterfeit any stamp, invoice or reports, to procure or cause to be made, forged, altered or counterfeited any such stamp, or knowingly and willfully to alter, publish, pass or tender as true any false, altered, forged or counterfeited stamp or stamps;

(3) To sell any cigarettes upon which the tax imposed by this chapter has not been paid and upon which evidence of payment thereof is not shown on each package of cigarettes;

(4) To reuse or refill with cigarettes any package from which the cigarettes have been removed, for which the tax has been paid;

(5) To remove from any package any stamp with intent to use or cause the same to be used after the same have already been used, or to buy, sell or offer for sale or give away any used, removed, altered or restored stamps, to any person, or to reuse any stamp which has theretofore been used for evidence of the payment of any tax prescribed in this chapter, or, except as to the director of finance, to sell or offer to sell any stamp provided for herein;

(6) To possess, store, use, authorize or approve the possession, storage or use for sale or resale of any cigarettes in quantities of more than 60 packages upon which the stamp has not been affixed; or 

(7) To transport, authorize or approve the transportation of any cigarettes, in quantities of more than 60 packages into or within the city upon which the stamp has not been affixed, if they are: 

(a) Not accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating the true name and address of the consignor or seller and the consignee or purchaser and the brands and quantity of cigarettes transported; or 

(b) Accompanied by a bill of lading or other document which is false or fraudulent in whole or part; or 

(c) Accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating:

(i) A consignee or purchaser in another state or the District of Columbia who is not authorized by the law of such other jurisdiction to receive or possess such cigarettes on which the taxes imposed by such other jurisdiction have not been paid, unless the tax of the state or district of destination has been paid and the said cigarettes bear the tax stamps of that state or district; or 

(ii) A consignee or purchaser in the Commonwealth of Virginia but outside the city who does not possess a Virginia Sales and Use Tax Certificate, a Virginia Retail Tobacco License and, where applicable, both a business license and a retail tobacco license issued by the local jurisdiction of destination. (Ord. 2004-21; Ord. 2004-15. Code 1985, § 12-283).


Chapter 3.80 BANK FRANCHISE TAX

Sections:

3.80.010    Definitions.

3.80.020    Imposition of city bank franchise tax.

3.80.030    Filing of return and payment of tax.

3.80.040    Effective date.

3.80.050    Penalty upon bank for failure to comply with chapter.


3.80.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section:

(1) “Bank” shall be as defined in Section 58.1-1201 of the Code of Virginia.

(2) “Net capital” shall mean a bank’s net capital computed pursuant to Section 58.1-1205 of the Code of Virginia. (Ord. eff. 1-1-80 § I).


3.80.020 Imposition of city bank franchise tax.

(1) Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 12 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, there is hereby imposed upon each bank located within the boundaries of this city a tax on net capital equaling 80 percent of the state rate of franchise tax set forth in Section 58.1-1204 of the Code of Virginia.

(2) In the event that any bank located within the boundaries of this city is not the principal office but is a branch extension or affiliate of the principal office, the tax upon such branch shall be apportioned as provided by Section 58.1-1211 of the Code of Virginia. (Ord. eff. 1-1-80 § II).


3.80.030 Filing of return and payment of tax.

(1) On or after the first day of January of each year, but not later than March 1st, of any such year, all banks whose principal offices are located within this city shall prepare and file with the commissioner of the revenue (or comparable local assessing officer) a return as provided by Section 58.1-1207 of the Code of Virginia in duplicate which shall set forth the tax on net capital computed pursuant to Chapter 12 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. The commissioner of the revenue (or comparable assessing officer) shall certify a copy of such filing of the bank’s return and schedule and shall forthwith transmit such certified copy to the State Department of Taxation.

(2) In the event that the principal office of a bank is located outside the boundaries of this city and such bank has branch offices located within this city, in addition to the filing requirements set forth in subsection (1) of this section, any bank conducting such branch business shall file with the commissioner of the revenue or appropriate assessing officer of this city a copy of the real estate deduction schedule, apportionment and other items which are required by Sections 58.1-1207, 58.1-1211 and 58.1-1212 of the Code of Virginia.

(3) Each bank, on or before the first day of June of each year, shall pay into the treasurer’s office (or other appropriate official) of this city all taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. eff. 1-1-80 § III).


3.80.040 Effective date.

The provisions of this chapter shall be effective for the year beginning January 1, 1980. (Ord. eff. 1-1-80 § IV).


3.80.050 Penalty upon bank for failure to comply with chapter.

Any bank which shall fail or neglect to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, which fine shall be recovered upon motion, after five days’ notice in the circuit court of this city. The motion shall be in the name of the commonwealth and shall be presented by the attorney for the commonwealth of this locality. (Ord. eff. 1-1-80 § V).

 


Title 4 

(Reserved)

 


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.05    Business, Professional, Occupation and Other License Taxes

5.10    Amusements

5.15    Repealed

5.20    Precious Metals and Gems and Pawnbrokers

5.25    Solicitors and Solicitations

5.30    Taxicabs

5.40    Adult Businesses


Chapter 5.05 BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL, OCCUPATION AND OTHER LICENSE TAXES*

Sections:

5.05.010    Overriding conflicting ordinances.

Article I. General

5.05.020    License required – Penalty.

5.05.030    Omitted taxes or levies.

5.05.040    Half and quarter licenses.

5.05.050    Transfer of licenses – Display of license.

5.05.060    Zoning.

5.05.070    Subjects not mentioned in chapter.

5.05.080    Proration of license taxes.

5.05.090    Definitions.

5.05.100    License requirement.

5.05.110    Situs of gross receipts.

5.05.120    Limitations and extensions.

5.05.130    Appeals and rulings.

5.05.140    Recordkeeping and audits.

5.05.150    Exclusions and deductions from “gross receipts.”

5.05.160    Exemption from license taxes.

Article II. Business, Professional and Occupational Taxes

5.05.170    License fee and tax.

Article III. Other License Taxes

5.05.180    Alcoholic beverages.

5.05.190    State license required.

5.05.200    Delivery.

5.05.210    License in addition to other license requirements.

5.05.220    Public utilities and public service companies.

5.05.230    Short-term rental property tax.

5.05.240    Going out of business permits.

*State law references – § 58.1-3700 – § 58-1-3735; § 4.1-205; § 4.1-233 of the Code of Virginia.


5.05.010 Overriding conflicting ordinances.

Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the commonwealth of Virginia, and notwithstanding any other current ordinances or resolutions enacted by this governing body, whether or not compiled in the code of this jurisdiction, to the extent of any conflict, the following provisions shall be applicable to the levy, assessment, and collection of licenses required and taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and upon the persons, firms and corporations engaged therein within this locality. (Code 1985, Ch. 12, Art. XVII).

Article I. General


5.05.020 License required – Penalty.

(1) Whenever a license is required herein, it shall be unlawful to engage in such business, employment, or profession without first obtaining the required license. A violation of this requirement shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor.

(2) No business license under this chapter shall be issued until the applicant has produced satisfactory evidence that all delinquent business license, personal property, meals, transient occupancy, severance, and admissions taxes owed by the applicant (or the business) to the city of Staunton, Virginia, have been paid which have been properly assessed against the applicant (or the business) by the city.

(3) Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or business who engages in business without obtaining a license required hereunder, or after being refused a license, shall not be relieved of the tax imposed by this chapter. (Code 1985, § 12-230).


5.05.030 Omitted taxes or levies.

If the commissioner of revenue for the city ascertains that any local tax has not been assessed for any tax year of the three preceding tax years, or that the same has been assessed at less than the law required for any one or more of such years, or that the taxes for any cause have not been realized, the commissioner of the revenue shall list and assess the same with taxes at the rate or rates prescribed for that year, adding thereto penalty and interest at the rate provided for under Sections 58.1-3916 and 58.1-3918 of the Code of Virginia. Interest may be computed upon the taxes and penalty from the first day following the due date in the year in which such taxes should have been paid and shall accrue thereon from such date until payment; provided, if such assessment was necessitated through no fault of the taxpayer, such penalty and interest shall accrue after 30 days from the date of assessment until payment. (Code 1985, § 12-231).


5.05.040 Half and quarter licenses.

(1) A license (other than a license for which the certificate of a court is required by law before it can be granted, and other than a license which the law imposing the same provides shall not be prorated), the tax on which would be $150.00, or $300.00 in the case of wholesale merchants, or more were it issued for the period of one year, may be issued for a period of less than one year, and shall expire on June 30th or December 31st, whichever shall happen first after it is issued, and the tax on such license shall be one-half of the tax required were the license issued for a year; provided, if the time between the date of issue of the license to the end of the half-year is less than six months, the tax thereon shall be abated proportionately to the amount chargeable for six months, unless the license is of such character that no proration thereof is allowable.

(2) If the tax for one year would be $300.00, or $600.00 in the case of wholesale merchants, or more, the license may be issued for a period of less than one year and shall expire on March 31st, June 30th, September 30th, or December 31st, whichever shall happen first after it is issued, and the tax on such license shall be one-quarter of the tax required were the license issued for a year; provided, if the time between the date of issue of the license to the end of the quarter year is less than three months, the tax thereon shall be abated proportionately to the amount chargeable for three months, unless the license is of such character that no proration thereof is allowable. (Code 1985, § 12-232).


5.05.050 Transfer of licenses – Display of license.

(1) Licenses issued under this chapter, which have been paid in full, except where otherwise provided, shall be transferable to the assignees or successors in interest of any licensee, but in no event are such license taxes refundable. In no case shall any transfer of the license be legal, or valid, unless and until notice in writing of such transfer shall have been given to the commissioner and he shall have approved said transfer in writing on said license; the said notice shall state the time of the transfer and the place of business and the name of the person to whom transferred. A fee of $5.00 shall be paid for each transfer.

(2) The license receipt or other certificates showing the payment of license taxes whenever imposed by this chapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous place at the regular place of business or profession of the licensee, in order that any officer of the city may inspect the same at all reasonable times. All licensees who have or maintain no regular place of business shall either carry with them on their person or have affixed or attached to their truck, automobile or other vehicle the license receipt or certificate and promptly display the same when called upon by any officer of the city to do so. (Code 1985, § 12-233).


5.05.060 Zoning.

The commissioner of the revenue shall not issue a license for conducting any business at a location where the conducting of such business is prohibited by the zoning ordinance of the city. The granting of any license under this chapter in no way relieves the licensee from complying with any and all present and future zoning restrictions. (Code 1985, § 12-234).


5.05.070 Subjects not mentioned in article.

Nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed to repeal any tax imposed by ordinance upon motor vehicles and other vehicles, persons, property, admissions, charges for utility services, or any subject not herein in this chapter mentioned. (Code 1985, § 12-235).


5.05.080 Proration of license taxes.

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, general or special, and regardless of the basis or method of measurement or computation, the city shall not impose a license tax based on gross receipts on a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling, or upon a person, firm, or corporation for any fraction of a year during which such person, firm, or corporation has permanently ceased to engage in such business, trade, profession, occupation, or calling within the city. In the event a person, firm, or corporation ceases to engage in a business, trade, profession, or calling within the city during a year for which a license tax based on gross receipts has already been paid, the taxpayer shall be entitled upon application to a refund for that portion of the license tax already paid, prorated on a monthly basis so as to ensure that the licensed privilege is taxed only for that fraction of the year during which it is exercised within the city. The city may elect to remit any refunds in the ensuing fiscal year and may offset against such refund any amount of past-due taxes owed by the same taxpayer. In no event shall the city be required to refund any part of a flat fee or minimum flat tax. (Code 1985, § 12-236).


5.05.090 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise required by the context:

“Affiliated group” means:

(1) One or more chains of includable corporations connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is an includable corporation if:

(a) Stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the includable corporations, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other includable corporations; and

(b) The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other includable corporations. As used in this section, the term “stock” does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends. The term “includable corporation” means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term “receipts” includes gross receipts and gross income.

(2) Two or more corporations if five or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing:

(a) At least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least 80 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation; and

(b) More than 50 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than 50 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation.

(3) When one or more of the includable corporations, including the common parent corporation, is a nonstock corporation, the term “stock” as used in this section shall refer to the nonstock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context.

“Assessment” means a determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by an assessing official when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the assessing official or an employee of the assessing official, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be.

“Assessor” or “assessing official” means the commissioner of revenue of this jurisdiction.

“Base year” means the calendar year preceding the license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of Section 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia.

“Business” means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: (1) advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or (2) filing tax returns, schedules, and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 

“Contractor” shall have the meaning prescribed in Section 58.1-3714.B of the Code of Virginia, as amended, whether such work is done or offered to be done by day labor, general contract, or subcontract. 

“Definite place of business” means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for 30 consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis; and real property leased to another. A person’s residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant.

“Financial services” means the buying, selling, handling, managing, investing, and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities, and other investments and shall include the service for compensation by a credit agency, an investment company, a broker or dealer in securities and commodities or a security or commodity exchange, unless such service is otherwise provided for in this chapter.

“Broker” shall mean an agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks, bonds, commodities, or services, usually on a commission basis.

“Commodity” shall mean staples such as wool, cotton, etc., which are traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in futures.

“Dealer,” for purposes of this chapter, shall mean any person engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for his own account, but does not include a bank, or any person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular business.

“Security,” for purposes of this chapter, shall have the same meaning as in the Securities Act (Section 13.1-501 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, or in similar laws of the United States regulating the sale of securities.

Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but without limitation, the following:

Buying installment receivables

Chattel mortgage financing

Consumer financing

Credit card services

Credit unions

Factors

Financing accounts receivable

Industrial loan companies

Installment financing

Inventory financing

Loan or mortgage brokers

Loan or mortgage companies

Safety deposit box companies

Security and commodity brokers and services

Stockbrokers

Working capital financing

“Gross receipts” means the whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the licensed privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of Chapter 37 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia.

“License year” means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business.

“Personal services” shall mean rendering for compensation any repair, personal, business or other services not specifically classified as “financial, real estate or professional service” under this chapter, or rendered in any other business or occupation not specifically classified in this chapter unless exempted from local license tax by Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia.

“Professional services” means services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians, and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and not others, as the Virginia Department of Taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to Section 58.1-3701 of the Code of Virginia. The Department shall identify and list each occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instruction and study, is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding, or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The word “profession” implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 

“Purchases” shall mean all goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term shall also include the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesaler or wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. Such merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine, or chooses not to disclose, the cost of manufacture.

“Real estate services” shall mean rendering a service for compensation as lessor, buyer, seller, agent or broker and providing a real estate service, unless the service is otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, and such services include, but are not limited to, the following:

Appraisers of real estate

Escrow agents, real estate

Fiduciaries, real estate

Lessors of real property

Real estate agents, brokers, and managers

Real estate selling agents

Rental agents for real estate

“Retailer” or “Retail merchant” shall mean any person or merchant who sells goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser, but does not include sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users.

“Services” shall mean things purchased by a customer which do not have physical characteristics, or which are not goods, wares, or merchandise.

“Wholesaler” or “Wholesale merchant” shall mean any person or merchant who sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial, government and industrial users which, because of the quantity, price, or other terms, indicate that they are consistent with sales at wholesale. (Code 1985, § 12-237).


5.05.100 License requirement.

(1) Every person engaging in the city of Staunton in any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling (collectively hereinafter “a business”) as defined in this chapter, unless otherwise exempted by law, shall apply for a license for each such business if (a) such person maintains a definite place of business in the city of Staunton; (b) such person does not maintain a definite office anywhere but does maintain an abode in the city of Staunton, which abode for the purposes of this chapter shall be deemed a definite place of business; or (c) there is no definite place of business but such person operates amusement machines, is engaged as a peddler or itinerant merchant, carnival or circus, as specified in Sections 58.1-3717, 3718, or 3728, respectively, of the Code of Virginia, or is a contractor subject to Section 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia, or is a public service corporation subject to Section 58.1-3731 of the Code of Virginia. A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business. A person engaged in two or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: (a) each business or profession is licensable at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of this jurisdiction; (b) all of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and (c) the taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the assessor may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts.

(2) Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to beginning business if he was not subject to licensing in the city of Staunton on or before January 1st of the license year, or no later than March 1st of the current license year if he had been issued a license for the preceding license year. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the assessing official.

(3) The tax shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not based on gross receipts. If the tax is measured by the gross receipts of the business, the tax shall be paid on or before March 1st of the year concerned.

(4) The assessing official may grant an extension of time, not to exceed 90 days, in which to file an application for a license, for cause. The extension shall be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax, subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension, together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, a penalty of 10 percent of the portion paid after the due date.

(5) A penalty of 10 percent of the tax may be imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the assessing official if both the application and payment are late; however, both penalties may be assessed if the assessing official determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax made by the assessing official, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the assessing official is not paid within 30 days, the treasurer may impose a 10 percent late payment penalty. The penalties shall not be imposed, or if imposed, shall be abated by the official who assessed them, if the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control. 

“Acted responsibly” means that: (a) the taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business, and (b) the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered.

“Events beyond the taxpayer’s control” include, but are not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer’s reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the assessing official, who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer’s business when he provided the erroneous information. 

(6) Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the assessing official is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalties charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any tax paid under this chapter from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged under Section 58.1-3916 of the Code of Virginia. 

No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, in event of such adjustment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than 30 days from (a) the date of the payment that created the refund, or (b) the due date of the tax, whichever is later.

In the case of an applicant whose license is based on gross receipts and who was not subject to licensing in the city on or before January 1st of the license year, the applicant shall pay the tax with the application based on estimated gross receipts for the balance of the calendar year of the license. (Code 1985, § 12-238).


5.05.110 Situs of gross receipts.

(1) General rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this chapter is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a licensable privilege at a definite place of business within the city of Staunton. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed, or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices, as follows:

(a) The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which his services are performed, or if his services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of Section 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia.

(b) The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the Department of Taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality. 

(c) The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed.

(d) The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled.

(2) Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule (and the affected jurisdictions are unable to reach an apportionment agreement), except as to circumstances set forth in Section 58.1-3709 of the Code of Virginia, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of businesses on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to the city of Staunton solely because the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction.

(3) Agreements. The assessor may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of Virginia concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes on more than 100 percent of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the assessor shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. (Code 1985, § 12-239).


5.05.120 Limitations and extensions.

(1) Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of any license tax imposed pursuant to this chapter, both the assessing official and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon.

(2) Notwithstanding Section 58.1-3903 of the Code of Virginia and SCC 5.05.030, the assessing official shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six preceding years.

(3) The period for collecting any local license tax shall not expire prior to the period specified in Section 58.1-3940 of the Code of Virginia, two years after the date of assessment if the period for assessment has been extended pursuant to this section, two years after the final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed pursuant to SCC 5.05.130(2) or (4), or two years after the final decision in a court application pursuant to Section 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia or similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later. (Code 1985, § 12-240).


5.05.130 Appeals and rulings.

(1) Any person assessed with a licensing tax under this chapter as the result of an audit may apply within 90 days from the date of the assessment to the assessing official for a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer’s contention. The assessor may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the applications. The assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct. The assessor shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer’s claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth its position. Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer’s right to seek correction and the specific procedure to be followed in the jurisdiction (e.g., the name and address to which an application should be directed).

(2) Provided an application is made within 90 days of an assessment, collection activity shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the assessor, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of SCC 5.05.100(6), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term “jeopardized by delay” includes a finding that the application is frivolous, or that a taxpayer desires (a) to depart quickly from the locality, (b) to remove his property therefrom, (c) to conceal himself or his property therein, or (d) to do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question.

(3) Any person assessed with a license tax under this chapter as a result of an audit may apply within 90 days of the determination by the assessing official on an application pursuant to subsection (1) of this section to the Tax Commissioner for correction of such assessment. The Tax Commissioner shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within 90 days of receipt of the taxpayer’s application, unless the taxpayer and the assessing official are notified that a longer period will be required. The application shall be treated as an application pursuant to Section 58.1-1821 of the Code of Virginia, and the Tax Commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to Section 58.1-1822 of the Code of Virginia. Following such an order, either the taxpayer or the assessing official may apply to the appropriate circuit court pursuant to Section 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia. However, the burden shall be on the party making the application to show that the ruling of the Tax Commissioner is erroneous. Neither the Tax Commissioner nor the Department of Taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the Tax Commissioner has ruled on it.

(4) On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the Tax Commissioner under subsection (3) of this section, the assessing official shall further suspend collection activity until a final determination is issued by the Tax Commissioner, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of SCC 5.05.100(6), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term “jeopardized by delay” shall have the same meaning as set forth in subsection (2) of this section.

(5) Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of the tax to a specific situation from the assessor. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if (a) there is a change in the law, a court decision, or (b) the assessor notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. (Code 1985, § 12-241).


5.05.140 Recordkeeping and audits.

Every person who is assessable with a license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the assessor to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the assessor to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the assessor in order to allow the assessor to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within this jurisdiction. The assessor shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer’s local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside this jurisdiction, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the assessor’s office upon demand. (Code 1985, § 12-242).


5.05.150 Exclusions and deductions from “gross receipts.” 

(1) General Rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of the business or profession.

(2) The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts:

(a) Amounts received and paid to the United States, the commonwealth or any county, city or town for the Virginia retail sales or use tax, or for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes, for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels.

(b) Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable receipts even though the creation of such debt and factoring are a regular part of its business).

(c) Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the business to its customer.

(d) Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor.

(e) Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset.

(f) Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, and which the recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee’s gross receipts together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive. 

(g) Withdrawals from inventory for purposes other than sale or distribution and for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory, whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes.

(h) Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a licensable business not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of its own funds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees, and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business.

(i) Gross receipts of real estate brokers shall not include amounts received by a broker which arise from real estate sales transactions to the extent that such amounts are paid to a real estate agent as a commission on any real estate sales transaction and the real estate agent is subject to the business license tax on such receipts. The broker claiming the exemption shall identify on its license application each agent to whom the excluded receipts have been paid and the jurisdiction of the commonwealth of Virginia to which the agent is subject to business license taxes.

(j) Gross receipts for license tax purposes under this chapter shall not include the license and admission taxes established under Sections 59.1-392 and 59.1-393 of the Code of Virginia, respectively, nor shall it include pari-mutuel wagering pools as established under Section 59.1-392 of the Code of Virginia.

(k) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 58.1-605 of the Code of Virginia with respect to a license tax applicable to motor vehicle dealers measured by the gross receipts of such dealer, the dealer may separately state the amount of tax applicable to each sale of a motor vehicle and add such tax to the sales price of the motor vehicle. The failure of such merchant to recover the tax from the purchaser shall not relieve such merchant from the obligation to pay the tax to the city.

(l) (i) No omitted taxes may be assessed against any motor vehicle dealer which calculated its gross receipts for license tax purposes by excluding the value of any vehicle accepted as a trade-in for periods of time prior to January 1, 1991.

(ii) Whenever a motor vehicle dealer accepts a trade-in as part of a sale of a motor vehicle, the dealer’s gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include the amount of the trade-in.

(3) The following shall be deducted from gross receipts or gross purchases that would otherwise be taxable:

(a) Any amount paid for computer hardware and software that are sold to a United States federal or state government entity; provided, that such property was purchased within two years of the sale to said entity by the original purchaser who shall have been contractually obligated at the time of purchase to resell such property to a state or federal government entity. This deduction shall not occur until the time of resale and shall apply to only the original cost of the property and not to its resale price, and the deduction shall not apply to any of the tangible personal property which was the subject of the original resale contract if it is not resold to a state or federal government entity in accordance with the original contract obligation.

(b) Any receipts attributable to business conducted in another state or foreign country in which the taxpayer is liable for an income or other tax based upon income. (Code 1985, § 12-243).


5.05.160 Exemption from license taxes.

(1) All nonprofit businesses which are exempt from the payment of federal taxes by the Internal Revenue Service are hereby exempt from business license taxes and fees imposed by this chapter. This exemption does not apply to a business endeavor conducted by such nonprofit business, the proceeds of which are taxable by the Internal Revenue Service.

(2) Those activities and business enterprises set forth in Section 58.1-3703(C) of the Code of Virginia, as amended from time to time, are exempt from the license taxes or fees imposed by this chapter.

(3) The license tax imposed on peddlers or itinerant merchants or on peddlers at wholesale shall not apply to those activities or businesses set forth in Section 58.1-3719 of the Code of Virginia, as amended from time to time.

(4) No license tax shall be imposed upon itinerant merchants or to peddlers or to those who sell or offer for sale in person or by their employees ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature or farm products grown or produced by them and not purchased for them for sale.

(5) No license tax shall be imposed upon the sale of goods, wares and merchandise by an assignee, trustee, executor, fiduciary, officer in bankruptcy or other officer appointed by any court of the commonwealth or of the United States. (Code 1985, § 12-244; Ord. 3-26-98).

Article II. Business, Professional and Occupational Taxes


5.05.170 License fee and tax.

Every person or business subject to licensure under this chapter shall be assessed and required to pay annually:

(1) Except as may be otherwise provided in Sections 58.1-3712, 58.1-3712.1 and 58.1-3713 of the Code of Virginia, every such person or business shall be assessed and required to pay annually a license tax on all the gross receipts of such persons includable as provided in this chapter at a rate set forth below for the class of enterprise listed:

(a) For contractors and persons constructing for their own account for sale, $0.16 per $100.00 of gross receipts;

(b) For retailers, $0.20 per $100.00 of gross receipts;

(c) For financial, real estate and professional services, $0.40 per $100.00 of gross receipts;

(d) For repair, personal and business services and all other businesses and occupations not specifically listed or exempted in this chapter or otherwise by law, $0.36 per $100.00 of gross receipts;

(e) For wholesalers (based on purchases at cost):

(i) Zero dollars to $10,000 – $100.00 tax;

(ii) Ten thousand one dollars to $50,000 – $100.00 tax plus $0.50 per $100.00 of purchases at cost exceeding $10,000;

(iii) Fifty thousand one dollars and up – $300.00 tax plus $0.12 per $100.00 of purchases at cost exceeding $50,000.

(f) For carnivals, circuses and speedways, $200.00 for each performance held in this jurisdiction;

(g) For fortune tellers, clairvoyants and practitioners of palmistry, $1,000 per year; 

(h) For massage parlors, $1,000 per year;

(i) For itinerant merchants or peddlers as defined in Section 58.1-3717 of the Code of Virginia:

(i) For each show or sale sponsored by a nonprofit organization, at which goods are sold by vendors not otherwise exempted from a license tax herein, the sponsoring organization shall obtain a promoter’s license from the commissioner of revenue for the dates said show or sale is to be held. Upon completion of said show or sale, the sponsoring organization shall remit to the commissioner of revenue a fee of $5.00 for each separate itinerant vendor taking part therein. A separate promoter’s license shall be obtained for each event held or conducted by such organization. As used herein and in subsequent sections, “event” shall mean a show or sale lasting no more than 72 continuous hours. The fee of $5.00 to be remitted shall apply to an itinerant merchant taking part in said event, either for a part of the event or for all of the event, without proration. The remittance of such fees shall be made to the commissioner of revenue within seven days of the conclusion of the event.

(ii) Itinerant merchant (balloons, souvenirs, trinkets, pennants and similar articles during parades, festivals, merchant promotions and similar events) $50.00 license fee, for each separate event.

(iii) Itinerant merchant (furniture, appliances, rugs, jewelry, audio/video sets, clothing, auto supplies, crafts, scenic art and similar goods, ware and merchandise) $200.00 license fee for each separate event.

(iv) Itinerant merchant (fruits, vegetables, seafood, meats, eggs, ice cream, popcorn, sandwiches, beverages, flowers, plants, Christmas trees or family supplies of perishable nature not produced by them) $50.00 license fee;

(j) For photographers, as defined in Section 58.1-3727 of the Code of Virginia, $30.00 per year;

(k) For permanent coliseums, arenas or auditoriums having a maximum capacity in excess of 

10,000 persons, open to the public, $1,000 per year;

(l) For savings and loan associations and credit unions, $50.00 per year;

(m) For direct sellers as defined in Section 58.1-3719.1 of the Code of Virginia with total annual sales in excess of $4,000, $0.20 per $100.00 of total annual retail sales or $0.05 per $100.00 of total annual wholesale sales, whichever is applicable. 

(n) For commission merchants as defined in Section 58.1-3733 of the Code of Virginia, $0.36 per $100.00 of commission income.

(o) For amusement machines and amusement operators as follows:

(i) A license tax on the operator of 10 or more coin-operated amusement machines in the amount of $200.00.

(ii) A license tax on the operation of less than 10 coin-operated amusement machines in the amount of $150.00.

(iii) In addition, a gross receipts tax on the share of receipts actually received by the operator at the rate of $0.36 per $100.00 of such receipts. 

(iv) The term “amusement operator” as used herein is defined by Section 58.1-3720(A) of the Code of Virginia.

(v) The exemptions provided in Section 58.1-3721 of the Code of Virginia are adopted herein.

(vi) The commissioner of revenue for the city shall prepare and issue a license, which, when signed by the commissioner, shall evidence the payment of the license tax. Every operator shall furnish to the commissioner of revenue for the city a complete list of all machines on location and the address of each location on or before January 31st of each year. Each machine shall have conspicuously located thereon a decal, sticker, or other adhesive label, no less than one by two inches in size, clearly denoting the operator’s name and address.

(vii) Any person, firm, or corporation providing any such coin machines or other devices and failing to procure a license therefor, as provided herein, shall be in violation of law, and, if convicted, shall be subject to the penalties imposed for a Class 4 misdemeanor for each offense, and the machine or other device shall become forfeited to the city of Staunton, Virginia. (Code 1985, § 12-250; Ord. 3-26-98; Ord. 7-23-98).

Article III. Other License Taxes


5.05.180 Alcoholic beverages.

(1) Every person engaged in the manufacture, bottling or selling of alcoholic beverages within the city shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax as follows:

(a) Alcoholic Beverages. For each:

(i) Distiller’s license: if more than 5,000 gallons but not more than 36,000 gallons manufactured during such year, $750.00; if more than 36,000 gallons manufactured during such year, $1,000; and no local license shall be required for any person who manufactures not more than 5,000 gallons of alcohol or spirits, or both, during such license year;

(ii) Fruit distiller’s license: $1,500;

(iii) Bed and breakfast establishment license: $40.00;

(iv) Museum license: $10.00;

(v) Tasting license: $5.00 per license granted;

(vi) Equine sporting event license: $10.00;

(vii) Day spa license: $20.00; and

(viii) Meal-assembly kitchen license: $20.00.

(b) Beer. For each:

(i) Brewery license: if not more than 500 barrels of beer manufactured during the year in which the license is granted, $250.00, and if more than 500 barrels of beer manufactured during the year in which the license is granted, $1,000;

(ii) Bottler’s license: $500.00;

(iii) Wholesale beer license: $250.00;

(iv) Retail on-premises beer license for a hotel, restaurant, club or other person and for each retail off-premises beer license: $100.00; and

(v) Beer shipper’s license: $10.00.

(c) Wine. For each:

(i) Winery license: $50.00;

(ii) Wholesale wine license: $50.00;

(iii) Farm winery license: $50.00; and

(iv) Wine shipper’s license: $10.00.

(d) Wine and Beer. For each:

(i) Retail on-premises wine and beer license for a hotel, restaurant or club; and for each retail off-premises wine and beer license, including each gift shop, gourmet shop and convenience grocery store license: $150.00;

(ii) Hospital license: $10.00;

(iii) Banquet license: $5.00 for each license granted, except for banquet licenses granted by the board pursuant to Section 4.1-215(A) of the Code of Virginia, for events occurring on more than one day, which shall be $20.00 per license;

(iv) Gourmet brewing shop license: $150.00;

(v) Wine and beer shipper’s license: $10.00;

(vi) Annual banquet license: $15.00; and

(vii) Historic cinema house license: $20.00.

(e) Mixed Beverages. For each:

(i) Mixed beverage restaurant license, including restaurants located on the premises of and operated by hotels or motels, or other persons:

(A) With a seating capacity at tables for up to 100 persons: $200.00;

(B) With a seating capacity at tables for more than 100 but not more than 150 persons: $350.00; and

(C) With a seating capacity at tables for more than 150 persons: $500.00;

(ii) Private, nonprofit club operating a restaurant located on the premises of such club: $350.00;

(iii) Mixed beverage caterer’s license: $500.00;

(iv) Mixed beverage limited caterer’s license: $100.00;

(v) Mixed beverage special events licenses: $10.00 for each day of each event;

(vi) Mixed beverage club events licenses: $10.00 for each day of each event;

(vii) Annual mixed beverage amphitheater license: $300.00;

(viii) Annual mixed beverage motor sports race track license: $300.00;

(ix) Annual mixed beverage banquet license: $75.00; and

(x) Limited mixed beverage restaurant license:

(A) With a seating capacity at tables for up to 100 persons: $100.00;

(B) With a seating capacity at tables for more than 100 but not more than 150 persons: $250.00; and

(C) With a seating capacity at tables for more than 150 persons: $400.00.

(f) Annual mixed beverage performing arts facility license: $300.00.

(2) In ascertaining the liability of a beer wholesaler to local merchants’ license taxation, and in computing the local wholesale merchants’ license tax on such beer wholesaler, purchases of beer up to a stated amount shall be disregarded, which stated amount shall be the amount of beer purchases which would be necessary to produce a local wholesale merchants’ license tax equal to the local wholesale beer license tax paid by such wholesaler under SCC 5.05.170 and a wholesale wine licensee to local merchants’ license taxation, and in computing the local wholesale merchants’ license tax on such wholesale wine licensee, purchases of wine up to a stated amount shall be disregarded, which stated amount shall be the amount of wine purchases which would be necessary to produce a local wholesale merchants’ license tax equal to the local wholesale wine licensee license tax paid by such wholesale wine licensee under SCC 5.05.170.

(3) As relevant, the definitions found in Section 4.1-100 of the Virginia Code or successor provisions shall apply mutatis mutandis to the same terms used in this section. (Ord. 2018-19; Ord. 2013-15; Ord. 2011-20; Ord. 2005-02. Code 1985, § 12-251).


5.05.190 State license required.

No such license shall be issued to any person, unless the applicant shall have shown to the satisfaction of the commissioner of the revenue that the applicants hold or shall secure simultaneously therewith the proper state license provided for in Chapter 1, Title 4.1 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. (Code 1985, § 12-252).


5.05.200 Delivery.

Nothing herein shall be construed so as to require any person to obtain a city license where such person is a wholesaler or distributor who maintains no place of business within the city, but merely delivers alcoholic beverages in the city. (Code 1985, § 12-253).


5.05.210 License in addition to other license requirements.

No alcoholic beverage license authorized by this chapter shall be construed as exempting any licensee from any merchant’s or restaurant’s license, and no such license shall be transferable. (Code 1985, § 12-254).


5.05.220 Public utilities and public service companies. 

(1) Telephone Companies. All persons engaged in the business of providing telephone communication in the city shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax equal to one-half of one percent of the gross receipts for such company accruing from sales to the ultimate consumer in the city.

(2) As used in this section, the term “gross receipts,” in the case of telephone companies, shall not include charges for long-distance calls, and for all entities shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed business in the ordinary course of business and as limited by Section 58.1-3732 of the Code of Virginia, et seq.

(3) Telegraph Companies. On every telegraph company, agent or officer thereof, the tax shall be $100.00 for the privilege of carrying on telegraph business between this and other points in the state of Virginia, except, where the gross receipts amount to $3,000 or less, the tax shall be $60.00.

(4) Heat, Light, and Power and Gas Companies. All persons engaged in the business of furnishing electricity or gas, or furnishing heat, light or power by means of electric current or gas in the city shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts derived during the preceding calendar year; excluding, however, such services furnished to federal, state and local authorities and sales for resale to other electric or gas companies.

(5) Any public utility company engaged in retail sales shall pay the same license as required by retailers under SCC 5.05.170. (Code 1985, § 12-255).


5.05.230 Short-term rental property tax.

(1) Levied Amount. Pursuant to Section 58.1-3510.6 of the Code of Virginia, there is hereby assessed and imposed on every person engaged in the short-term rental business a tax as follows:

(a) A tax of one percent on the gross proceeds of such business as defined in subsection (3)(a) of this section; and

(b) A tax of one-and-one-half percent on the gross proceeds of such business as defined in subsection (3)(b) of this section.

Such tax shall be in addition to the tax levied pursuant to Section 58.1-605 of the Code of Virginia. For purposes of this section, “gross proceeds” means the total amount charged to each person for the rental of daily rental property, excluding any state and local sales tax paid pursuant to the Virginia Retail Sales and Use Tax Act.

(2) Short-Term Rental Property – Defined. For purposes of this section, “short-term rental property” means all tangible personal property held for rental and owned by a person certified to engage in the short-term rental business, except as to trailers, as defined in Section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, and other tangible personal property required to be licensed or registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles, Department of Game and Inland Fisheries, or the Department of Aviation.

(3) Short-Term Rental Business, Defined. A person is engaged in the short-term rental business if:

(a) Not less than 80 percent of the gross rental receipts of such business in the preceding year arose from transactions involving the rental of short-term rental property, other than heavy equipment property as defined below, for periods of 92 consecutive days or less, including all extensions and renewals to the same person or a person affiliated with the lessee; or

(b) Not less than 60 percent of the gross rental receipts of such business during the preceding year arose from transactions involving the rental of heavy equipment property for periods of 270 consecutive days or less, including all extensions and renewals to the same person or a person affiliated with the lessee. For the purposes of this subsection, “heavy equipment property” means rental property of an industry that is described under Section 532412 or 532490 of the 2002 North American Industry Classification System as published by the United States Census Bureau, excluding office furniture, office equipment, and programmable computer equipment and peripherals as defined in Section 58.1-3503(A)(16) of the Code of Virginia.

(c) For purposes of determining whether a person is engaged in the short-term rental business as defined in subsections (3)(a) and (b) of this section:

(i) A person is “affiliated” with the lessee of rental property if such person is an officer, director, partner, member, shareholder, parent or subsidiary of the lessee, or if such person and the lessee have any common ownership interest in excess of five percent;

(ii) Any rental to a person affiliated with the lessee shall be treated as rental receipts but shall not qualify for purposes of the 80 percent requirement of subsection (3)(a) of this section or the 60 percent requirement of subsection (3)(b) of this section; and

(iii) Any rental of personal property which also involves the provision of personal services for the operation of the personal property rented shall not be treated as gross receipts from rental; provided, however, that the delivery and installation of tangible personal property shall not mean operation for the purposes of this subsection.

(d) A person who has not previously been engaged in the short-term rental business who applies for a certificate of registration pursuant to Section 58.1-3510.5 of the Virginia Code shall be eligible for registration upon the person’s certification that the person anticipates meeting the requirements of subsection (3)(a) or (b) of this section, designated by the applicant at the time of application, during the year for which registration is sought.

(e) In the event that the commissioner of the revenue makes a written determination that a rental business previously certified as short-term rental business pursuant to Section 58.1-3510.5 of the Virginia Code has failed to meet either of the tests set forth in subsection (3)(a) or (b) of this section during a preceding tax year, such business shall lose its certification as a short-term rental business and shall be subject to the business personal property tax with respect to all rental property for the tax year in which such certification is lost and any subsequent tax years until such time as the rental business obtains recertification pursuant to Section 58.1-3510.5 of the Virginia Code. In the event that a rental business loses its certification as a short-term rental business pursuant to this subsection, such business shall not be required to refund to customers short-term rental property taxes previously collected in good faith and shall not be subject to assessment for business personal property taxes with respect to rental property for tax years preceding the year in which the certification is lost unless the commissioner makes a written determination that the business obtained its certification by knowingly making materially false statements in its application, in which case the commissioner may assess the taxpayer the amount of the difference between short-term rental property taxes remitted by such business during the period in which the taxpayer wrongfully held certification and the business personal property taxes that would have been due during such period but for the certification obtained by the making of the materially false statements. Any such assessment, and any determination not to certify or to decertify a rental business as a short-term rental business as defined in this subsection, may be appealed pursuant to the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 58.1-3983.1 of the Virginia Code for appeals of local business taxes, which shall apply mutatis mutandis to such assessments and certification decisions.

(f) A rental business that has been decertified pursuant to the provisions of subsection (3)(e) of this section shall be eligible for recertification for a subsequent tax year upon a showing that it has met one of the tests provided in subsection (3)(a) or (b) of this section for at least 10 months of operations during the present tax year.

(4) Taxation of Rental Property That Is Not Short-Term Rental Property. Except for short-term rental passenger cars, rental property that is not short-term rental property shall be classified for taxation pursuant to Section 58.1-3503 of the Code of Virginia.

(5) Collection, Return, and Remittance of Tax. Every person engaged in the short-term rental business shall collect the rental tax from the lessee of the short-term rental property at the time of the rental. The lessor of the short-term rental property shall transmit a quarterly return to the commissioner of revenue, indicating the gross proceeds derived from the short-term rental business, and shall remit therewith the payment of such tax as is due for the quarter. The quarterly returns and payment of tax shall be filed with the commissioner of revenue on or before the twentieth day of each of the months of April, July, October, and January, representing, respectively, the gross proceeds and taxes collected during the preceding quarters ending March 31st, June 30th, September 30th and December 31st. The return shall be upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of revenue may require, showing the amount of gross receipts and the tax required to be collected. The taxes required to be collected under this chapter shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect such taxes until remitted as required in this section.

(6) Procedure upon Failure to Collect, Report, or Remit Taxes. If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this section and to make, within the time provided in this section, the returns and remittances required in this section, the commissioner of revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of revenue shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such return and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax, penalty, and interest provided for by this section and shall notify such person, by registered mail, sent to his last known place of address, of the total amount of such tax, penalty, and interest, and the total amount thereof shall be payable within 10 days from the date of such notice. In the event such tax is not paid within 10 days from the date of the notice, the treasurer shall proceed to collect same in accordance with Chapter 9 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia.

(7) Penalty and Interest. If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to remit to the commissioner of revenue the tax required to be collected and paid under this section within the time specified in the section, there shall be added to such tax a penalty in the amount of 10 percent of the tax past due or the sum of $10.00, whichever is the greater. The assessment of such penalty shall not be deemed a defense to any criminal prosecution for failing to make any return or remittance, as required in this section. Additionally, interest on late payments of all taxes due shall be added at the rate of 10 percent per year. Penalty and interest for failure to pay the tax assessed pursuant to this section shall be assessed on the first day following the day such quarterly installment payment is due.

(8) Exclusions and Exemptions. No tax shall be collected or assessed on (a) rentals by the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth, or the United States; or (b) any rental of durable medical equipment, as defined in subdivision 10 of Section 58-1-609.10 of the Code of Virginia. Additionally, all exemptions applicable in Chapter 6 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia (Section 58.1600 et seq.) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the short-term rental property tax.

(9) Renter’s Certificate of Registration. Every person engaging in the business of short-term rental of tangible personal property shall file an application for a certificate of registration with the commissioner of revenue. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the commissioner of revenue and shall set forth the name under which the applicant intends to operate the rental business, the location, and such other information as the commissioner may require.

Each applicant shall sign the application as owner of the rental business. If the rental business is owned by an association, partnership, or corporation, the application shall be signed by a member, partner, executive officer, or other personnel specifically authorized by the association, partnership, or corporation to sign.

Upon approval of the application by the commissioner of revenue, a certificate of registration shall be issued. The certificate shall be conspicuously displayed at all times at the place of business for which it is issued.

The certificate is not assignable and shall be valid only for the person in whose name it has been issued and the place of business designated.

(10) Criminal Penalties for Violation of Section. Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Provided, however, if the amount of tax due and unpaid for any quarterly installment exceeds $1,000, any person failing to remit payment when due shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.

(11) License Tax Provisions. Every person engaged in the short-term rental business as defined herein shall be classified in the category of retail sales and shall pay a license tax equal to that imposed on retail merchants at the rate of $0.20 per $100.00 of gross receipts, as defined herein. (Ord. 2011-21. Code 1985, § 12-256).


5.05.240 Going out of business permits.

(1) Any person, firm, or corporation, prior to advertising or conducting a sale for the purpose of discontinuing a retail business, or to modify the word “sale” in any advertisement with the words “going out of business” or any other words which tend to insinuate that the retail business is to be discontinued and the merchandise liquidated, shall obtain a permit to conduct such sale from the commissioner of revenue for the city of Staunton, Virginia, if said sale or any portion thereof is to be conducted within the city of Staunton, Virginia.

(2) All applications for special sale permits required hereunder shall be accompanied by an inventory, including the kind and quantity of all goods which are to be offered for sale during the sale, and only the goods specified in the inventory list may be advertised at a reduced price or sold at a reduced price during the sale period. Goods not included on the inventory of special sale goods shall not be commingled with or added to the special sale goods.

Each special sale permit issued hereunder shall be valid for a period no longer than 60 days, and any extension of that time shall constitute a new special sale and shall require an additional permit and inventory. A maximum of two additional permits beyond the initial 60-day permit shall be granted upon application by the seller, solely for the purpose of liquidating only those goods contained in the initial inventory list and which remain unsold.

Any person, firm, or corporation who advertises such sale shall conspicuously include in the advertisement the permit number assigned for the sale by the commissioner of revenue for the city of Staunton and the effective dates of the sale, as authorized in the permit.

(3) Upon the issuance of such permit, the commissioner of revenue for the city of Staunton shall collect a fee to be paid by the applicant in the amount of $65.00 for each permit issued hereunder. Such permit fee is an addition to, and not in lieu of, any other applicable taxes or fees set forth in Article I of this chapter. (Code 1985, § 12-257; Ord. 11-14-96).


Chapter 5.10 AMUSEMENTS*

Sections:

Article I. In General

5.10.010    Violations of chapter.

5.10.020    Approval of location for circuses, amusement rides, etc.

Article II. Public Dance Hall

5.10.030    Defined.

5.10.040    License and registration permit – Required – Registration fee.

5.10.050    Same – Consent of council prerequisite to issuance.

5.10.060    Same – Revocation.

5.10.070    Council rules and regulations.

Article III. Poolrooms and Bowling Alleys

5.10.080    Permit – Required – Application.

5.10.090    Same – Issuance or refusal.

5.10.100    Same – Revocation.

5.10.110    Orderly operation – To be closed during certain hours.

*Cross reference – Parks and recreation, Ch. 2.80 SCC.

Article I. In General


5.10.010 Violations of chapter.

Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. (Code 1985, § 5-1).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


5.10.020 Approval of location for circuses, amusement rides, etc.

It shall be unlawful for any person to make exhibition of a circus or menagerie or conduct a merry-go-round or hobbyhorse or show of any kind, other than shows held in a permanent building, at any place within the city, unless the location thereof shall have been first approved by the city manager. (Code 1964, § 5-1; Code 1985, § 5-2).

Article II. Public Dance Hall*

*State law reference – Authority of city to regulate public dance halls, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-433.


5.10.030 Defined.

A “public dance hall,” within the meaning of this article, is any place open to the general public where dancing is permitted; provided, however, that a restaurant located in the city and licensed under Sections 4-98.1 and 4-98.2 of the Code of Virginia to serve food and beverages, having a dance floor with an area not exceeding 10 percent of the total floor area of the establishment, shall not be considered a public dance hall. (Code 1985, § 5-13).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-433.


5.10.040 License and registration permit – Required – Registration fee.

No person shall conduct a public dance hall in the city, where an admission fee is charged or a charge is made for participating in dancing, without first obtaining a license and paying the applicable license tax under the city’s license tax ordinance. Where there is no admission fee or there is no charge made for participating in dancing, a person conducting the public dance hall in the city shall register such dance hall with the city official designated by the council and shall obtain a registration permit. He shall also pay a registration fee of $50.00. (Code 1964, § 5-2; Code 1985, § 5-14).

State law reference – Dance hall ordinance to provide for license tax and permit, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-433.


5.10.050 Same – Consent of council prerequisite to issuance.

No license for a public dance hall, as required in the license tax ordinance of the city, or registration permit, as required by SCC 5.10.040, shall be granted until the applicant has secured the consent of the city council, conditioned upon the fact that the applicant is a proper person to conduct such dance hall and that the location is suitable for such purpose. (Code 1964, § 5-2; Code 1985, § 5-15).


5.10.060 Same – Revocation.

The license and registration permit referred to in SCC 5.10.040 shall be revocable at the pleasure of the council. (Code 1964, § 5-2; Code 1985, § 5-16).


5.10.070 Council rules and regulations.

All public dance halls in the city shall be subject to such rules and regulations as are now or may hereafter be prescribed by the city council. (Code 1964, § 5-2; Code 1985, § 5-17).

Article III. Poolrooms and Bowling Alleys


5.10.080 Permit – Required – Application.

No person shall operate any bowling alley or poolroom within the city without first securing a permit for the construction and operation thereof from the city council. An application for such permit shall set forth the name of the proprietor proposing to construct and operate the bowling alley or poolroom, the location where the same is to be operated and such other matters as the council may, from time to time, prescribe. (Code 1964, §§ 5-7, 5-8; Code 1985, § 5-28).


5.10.090 Same – Issuance or refusal.

Upon favorable action by the council on an application for a permit required by SCC 5.10.080, the permit shall be issued. The council shall have the right to determine whether or not the proposed location is a proper one for the operation of a bowling alley or poolroom and if, in its judgment, it deems it an improper place or the person operating the same an improper person to operate such alley or poolroom, it may decline to grant such permit. (Code 1964, § 5-3; Code 1985, § 5-29).


5.10.100 Same – Revocation.

The city council shall have the right, at any time, to revoke any permit for the operation of bowling alley or poolroom, if in the opinion of the council, the operation of the bowling alley or poolroom in question is harmful to the public interests. In case of the revocation of the permit by the council, any license tax paid by the operator under the provisions of the license tax ordinance shall not be prorated or refunded. (Code 1964, § 5-9; Code 1985, § 5-30).


5.10.110 Orderly operation – To be closed during certain hours.

Poolrooms and bowling alleys located in the city shall be operated in an orderly manner and shall be closed every night during the week not later than 12:00 p.m. and shall remain closed until 7:00 a.m. the following morning. (Code 1964, § 5-5; Code 1985, § 5-31).


Chapter 5.15 HEALTH CLUBS AND MASSAGE THERAPY – TATTOO PARLORS

(Repealed by Ord. 2020-09)


Chapter 5.20 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS AND PAWNBROKERS*

Sections:

Article I. Dealers

5.20.010    Definitions.

5.20.020    Article not applicable to purchase or sale of coins.

5.20.030    Waiver of article provisions for certain exhibitions and shows.

5.20.040    Violations of article.

5.20.050    Inspection of records required by article and of articles listed in such records.

5.20.060    Bond or letter of credit.

5.20.070    Notice of closing and reopening of business – Location of business.

5.20.080    Identification of persons from whom purchases made.

5.20.090    Record of purchases.

5.20.100    Prohibited purchases.

5.20.110    Retention of purchases.

5.20.120    Record of sales.

5.20.130    Permit required.

5.20.140    Application – Fee.

5.20.150    Applicant’s weighing devices to be inspected and approved.

5.20.160    Issuance or denial.

5.20.170    Not transferable.

5.20.180    Term – Renewal.

5.20.190    Revocation.

Article II. Pawnbrokers

5.20.200    Definition.

5.20.210    License required.

5.20.220    Issuance of license.

5.20.230    Private action upon bond.

5.20.240    Strict observance of state code.

*Editor’s note – Title of chapter changed by ordinance of 1-26-95.

Article I. Dealers*

*State law reference – Authority of city to adopt ordinance from which this article is derived, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.26.


5.20.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:

“Coin” means any piece of gold, silver or other metal fashioned into a prescribed shape, weight and degree of fineness, stamped by authority of a government with certain marks and devices, and having a certain fixed value as money.

“Dealer” means any person engaged in the business of purchasing secondhand precious metals or gems, removing in any manner precious metals or gems from manufactured articles not then owned by such person or buying, acquiring or selling precious metals or gems removed from such manufactured articles. “Dealer” shall mean any employer or principal on whose behalf a purchase is made and any employee or agent who makes any such purchase for or on behalf of his employer or principal. This definition shall not be construed so as to include persons engaged in the following:

(1) Purchases of precious metals or gems directly from other dealers, manufacturers or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories, provided the selling dealer has complied with the provisions of this article.

(2) Purchases of precious metals or gems from a duly qualified fiduciary who is disposing of the assets of the estate being administered by such fiduciary in the administration of an estate.

(3) Acceptance by a retail merchant of trade-in merchandise previously sold by such retail merchant to the person presenting that merchandise for trade-in.

(4) Repairing, restoring or designing jewelry by a retail merchant, if such activities are within his normal course of business.

(5) Purchases of precious metals or gems by industrial refiners and manufacturers, insofar as such purchases are made directly from retail merchants, wholesalers, dealers or by mail originating outside the commonwealth.

(6) Persons regularly engaged in the business of purchasing and processing nonprecious scrap metals which incidentally may contain traces of precious metals recoverable as a byproduct.

“Gems” means any item containing precious or semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry.

“Precious metals” means any item, except coins, composed in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum or platinum alloys. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-1; Code 1985, § 21-11).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.15.


5.20.020 Article not applicable to purchase or sale of coins.

The provisions of this article shall not apply to the sale or purchase of coins. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-12; Code 1985, § 21-12).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.27.


5.20.030 Waiver of article provisions for certain exhibitions and shows.

The chief of police or his designee may waive, by written notice, any provisions of this article, except SCC 5.20.100, for particular numismatic, gem or antique exhibitions or craft shows sponsored by nonprofit organizations; provided, that the purpose of the exhibitions or shows is nonprofit in nature, notwithstanding the fact that there may be casual purchases and trades made at such exhibitions or shows. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-10; Code 1985, § 21-13).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.24.


5.20.040 Violations of article.

Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-11; Code 1985, § 21-14).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


5.20.050 Inspection of records required by article and of articles listed in such records.

Every dealer shall admit to his premises, during regular business hours, the chief of police or his sworn designee or any law enforcement official of the state or federal government, and shall permit such officer to examine all records required by this article and to examine any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer or official to be missing or stolen. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-2; Code 1985, § 21-15).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.16.


5.20.060 Bond or letter of credit.

(1) Every dealer, at the time of obtaining a permit under SCC 5.20.130 et seq. of this article, shall enter into a recognizance to the city, secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in the commonwealth, in the penal sum of $25,000, conditioned upon due observance of the terms of this article. In lieu of a bond, a dealer may cause to be issued, by a bank authorized to do business in the commonwealth, a letter of credit in favor of the city in the sum of $25,000.

(2) A single bond upon an employer or principal may be written or a single letter of credit issued under this section to cover all employees and all transactions occurring at a single location.

(3) If any person shall be aggrieved by the misconduct of any dealer who has violated the provisions of this article, he may maintain an action for recovery in any court of proper jurisdiction against such dealer and his surety; provided, that recovery against the surety shall be only for that amount of the judgment, if any, which is unsatisfied by the dealer. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-7, 3-8; Code 1985, § 21-16).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 54-859.21, 54-859.22. 


5.20.070 Notice of closing and reopening of business – Location of business.

If the business of a dealer is not operated without interruption, Saturdays, Sundays and recognized holidays excepted, the dealer shall notify the chief of police of all closings and reopenings of such business. The business of a dealer shall be conducted only from the fixed and permanent location specified in his application for a permit under SCC 5.20.130 et seq. of this article. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-9; Code 1985, § 21-17).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.23E.


5.20.080 Identification of persons from whom purchases made.

No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems without first ascertaining the identity of the seller by requiring an identification issued by a governmental agency, with a photograph of the seller thereon, and at least one other corroborating means of identification. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-3; Code 1985, § 21-18).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.17.


5.20.090 Record of purchases.

(1) Every dealer shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of each purchase of precious metals or gems. The record of each such purchase shall be retained for not less than 24 months. These records shall set forth the following:

(a) A complete description of all precious metals or gems purchased from each seller. The description shall include all names, initials, serial numbers or other identifying marks or monograms on each item purchased, the true weight or carat of any gem and the price paid for each item.

(b) The date and time of receiving the items purchased.

(c) The name, address, age, sex, race, driver’s license number or social security number and signature of the seller.

(2) The information required by subsection (1) of this section shall appear on each bill of sale for all precious metals and gems purchased by a dealer, and a copy shall be mailed or delivered, within 24 hours of the time of purchase, to the chief of police. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-2; Code 1985, § 21-19).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.16.


5.20.100 Prohibited purchases.

(1) No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who is under the age of 18 years.

(2) No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who the dealer believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of such items, unless the seller has written and duly authenticated authorization from the owner permitting and directing such sale. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-4; Code 1985, § 21-20).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.18.


5.20.110 Retention of purchases.

(1) A dealer shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a minimum of 10 calendar days from the date on which a copy of the bill of sale is received by the chief of police pursuant to SCC 5.20.090. Until the expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter or dispose of a purchased item, in whole or in part, or remove it from the city.

(2) If a dealer performs the service of removing precious metals or gems, he shall retain the metals or gems removed and the article from which the removal was made for a period of 10 calendar days after receiving such article and precious metals or gems. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-5; Code 1985, § 21-21).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 54-859.19. 


5.20.120 Record of sales.

Each dealer shall keep and maintain, for at least 24 months, an accurate and legible record of the name and address of each person to whom he sells any precious metal or gem in its original form after the waiting period required by SCC 5.20.110. This record shall also show the name and address of the seller from whom the dealer purchased such item. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-6; Code 1985, § 21-22).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.20.


5.20.130 Permit required.

No person shall engage in the activities of a dealer within the city, unless he has a current permit so to do issued pursuant to this article. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-9; Code 1985, § 21-28).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.23A.


5.20.140 Application – Fee.

To obtain a permit required by this article, the dealer shall file with the chief of police an application form which shall include the dealer’s full name and any aliases and his address, age, sex and fingerprints, the name, address and telephone number of the applicant’s employer, if any, and the location of the dealer’s place of business. Such application shall be accompanied by an application fee of $200.00. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-9; Code 1985, § 21-29).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.23B.


5.20.150 Applicant’s weighing devices to be inspected and approved.

Before a permit may be issued under this article, the applicant must have all weighing devices used in his business inspected and approved by local or state weights and measures officials and shall present written evidence of such approval to the chief of police. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-9; Code 1985, § 21-30).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108C.


5.20.160 Issuance or denial.

Upon the filing of a proper application under this article and compliance with the provisions of this article, the applicant shall be issued a permit by the chief of police or his designee; provided, that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within seven years prior to the date of the application. The permit shall be denied if the applicant has previously been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked under this article or under state law or any ordinance of another jurisdiction similar in substance to the provisions of this article. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-9; Code 1985, § 21-31).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108B.


5.20.170 Not transferable.

No permit issued under this article shall be transferable. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-9; Code 1985, § 21-32).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108D.


5.20.180 Term – Renewal.

A permit issued under this article shall be valid for one year from the date issued and may be renewed in the same manner as such permit was initially obtained, with an annual permit fee of $200.00. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-9; Code 1985, § 21-33).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108D.


5.20.190 Revocation.

Upon the first conviction, by any court, of a dealer for a violation of any provision of this article, the chief of police may revoke his permit to engage in business as a dealer under this article for a period of one full year from the date the conviction becomes final. Such revocation shall be mandatory upon a second conviction. (Ord. 12-9-82, § III, 3-11; Code 1985, § 21-34).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4110.

Article II. Pawnbrokers 


5.20.200 Definition. 

“Pawnbroker” means any person who lends or advances money or other things for profit on the pledge and possession of personal property, or other valuable things, other than securities or printed evidences of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable things on condition of selling the same back to the seller at a stipulated price. (Code 1985, § 21-35).


5.20.210 License required. 

No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of a pawnbroker without obtaining a license therefore pursuant to Chapter 40 of Subtitle V of Title 54.1 (Sections 54.1-4000 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, as amended. Applicants shall apply to the circuit court for the city of Staunton, Virginia, for authorization permitting the city of Staunton to issue such license pursuant to Section 54.1-4001 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. (Code 1985, § 21-36).


5.20.220 Issuance of license. 

The license authorized by the circuit court for the city of Staunton may be issued by the commissioner of revenue for the city of Staunton, Virginia, upon the following conditions:

(1) The applicant shall furnish the date of birth of the applicant.

(2) The applicant shall designate the location of the building wherein the business shall be conducted.

(3) The applicant, at the time of obtaining such license, shall enter a recognizance to the city of Staunton secured by corporate surety authorized to do business in the commonwealth of Virginia, in the penal sum of $2,500 conditioned upon the due observance of the terms of Section 54.1-4000 through and including Section 54.1-4014 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. In lieu of a bond, the applicant may cause to be issued by a bank authorized to do business in the commonwealth of Virginia a letter of credit in favor of the city of Staunton, conditioned as aforesaid, in the same penal amount. The bond, or letter of credit, set forth herein shall be kept in force and effect during all times that said business is conducted, and evidence of this shall be furnished to the commissioner of revenue upon request. Any person who has previously obtained a license to operate a pawnbroker business who has not posted the bond or letter of credit required hereunder shall be required to post such bond or letter of credit prior to the continuation of such business under the license previously issued. (Code 1985, § 21-37).


5.20.230 Private action upon bond. 

Any person who recovers a judgment against a licensed pawnbroker for the pawnbroker’s misconduct may maintain an action in his own name upon the bond (or letter of credit, as the case may be) if the execution issued upon such judgment is wholly or partially unsatisfied. (Code 1985, § 21-38).


5.20.240 Strict observance of state code. 

Every pawnbroker must comply with the provisions of Section 54.1-4000 through and including Section 54.1-4014 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, and is subject to the penalties set forth therein for violation thereof. (Code 1985, § 21-39; Ord. 1-26-95).


Chapter 5.25 SOLICITORS AND SOLICITATIONS

Sections:

Article I. In General

5.25.010    Repealed.

5.25.020    Soliciting for sale of magazine subscriptions.

Article II. Solicitations by Charitable or Civic Organizations

5.25.030    Definitions.

5.25.040    Exemptions from article generally.

5.25.050    Exemptions from certain provisions of article.

5.25.060    Reciprocal agreements with other municipalities.

5.25.070    Article does not authorize unlawful acts or omissions or decrease liability imposed by law.

5.25.080    Appeals from orders under article.

5.25.090    Investigations to enforce article.

5.25.100    Violations of article generally.

5.25.110    Actions to enjoin violations of article.

5.25.120    Registration of organizations.

5.25.130    Reports by organizations with no local office and which solicit solely by telephone, mail, etc.

5.25.140    Publication of warning as to unregistered organizations.

5.25.150    Records to be kept by organizations.

5.25.160    Contracts between organizations and fund-raising counsel and professional solicitors.

5.25.170    Disclosure to be made by professional solicitors.

5.25.180    Statements, reports, contracts, etc., filed under article constitute public records – Charge for copies thereof.

5.25.190    False or misleading information in statements or reports required by article.

5.25.200    Receipts required for certain contributions.

5.25.210    Soliciting without authority from organization.

5.25.220    Soliciting by certain persons prohibited.

5.25.230    Soliciting for benefit of nonresident who fails to supply information to commissioner.

5.25.240    Misleading solicitations generally.

5.25.250    Misrepresentations as to sponsors, endorsers, etc.

5.25.260    Misrepresentations as to income tax deductions.

Article I. In General


5.25.010 Begging or soliciting alms on streets, etc.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-15. (Code 1964, § 16-7; Code 1985, § 24-1).


5.25.020 Soliciting for sale of magazine subscriptions.

(1) Solicitation for the purpose of selling magazine subscriptions is permitted as an activity in interstate commerce, subject to the following requirements:

(a) A company desiring to send representatives or agents throughout the city to solicit subscriptions must first provide to the chief of police satisfactory proof that the publisher or jobber is engaged in interstate commerce. A notarized statement signed by an officer of the company will normally suffice.

(b) Each company referred to in subsection (1)(a) of this section shall provide the chief of police with a list of all representatives or agents to be employed in the city; such list to include the full name, social security number, home address and temporary address in the city of each such representative or agent and such other identifying information as may be required by the chief of police.

(c) Each representative or agent shall carry, and display on request, a photo identification card to be provided by the company, which card identifies the representative or agent as an authorized company solicitor.

(2) A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. (Code 1985, § 24-2).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.

Article II. Solicitations by Charitable or Civic Organizations*

*State law references – Solicitations of contributions, Code of Virginia, § 57-48 et seq.; ordinances regulating charitable or civic organizations soliciting within city, § 57-63.


5.25.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Charitable organization” means any organization which is or holds itself out to be organized or operated for any charitable purpose or which soli-cits contributions from the public or obtains contributions solicited from the public. This definition shall not be deemed to include any church or convention or association of churches primarily operated for nonsecular purposes, and no part of the net income of which inures to the direct benefit of any individual; nor shall it include any political party, as defined in Sections 24.2-101 and 24.2-682 of the Code of Virginia (see also Section 57-63 of the Code of Virginia), or any political campaign committee required by state or federal law to file a report or statement of contributions and expenditures; nor shall it include any labor union registered under Section 40.1-76 of the Code of Virginia, or any trade association; nor shall it include any authorized individual who solicits, by authority of such organization, solely on behalf of a registered or exempt charitable organization or on behalf of an organization excluded from the definition of charitable organization.

“Charitable purpose” means any charitable, benevolent, humane, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary purpose and the purpose of influencing legislation or influencing the actions of any public official or instigating, prosecuting or intervening in litigation.

“Civic organization” means any local service club, veterans’ post, fraternal society or association, volunteer fire or rescue group or civic league or association of 10 or more persons not organized for profit, but operated exclusively for educational or charitable purposes, including the promotion of community welfare, and the net earnings of which are devoted exclusively to charitable, educational, recreational or social welfare purposes.

“Commissioner of revenue” or “commissioner” means the commissioner of revenue of the city or a member of his staff to whom he may delegate his duties under this article.

“Contribution” means any gift, bequest, devise or other grant of any money, credit, financial assistance or property of any kind of value, including the promise to contribute, except payments by the membership of an organization for membership fees, dues, fines or assessments, or for services rendered to individual members, and except money, credit, financial assistance or property received from any governmental authority. The term “contribution” shall not include any donation of blood or any gift made pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 8 of Title 32.1 (Section 32.1-289 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia.

“Federated fund-raising organization” means any federation of independent charitable organizations which have voluntarily joined together, including, but not limited to, a United Fund or Community Chest, for purposes of raising and distributing money for and among themselves and where membership does not confer operating authority and control of the individual agencies upon the federated group organization.

“Fund-raising expenses” mean the expenses of all activities that constitute or are an integral and inseparable part of a solicitation.

“Membership” means those persons to whom, for payment of fees, dues, assessments and the like, an organization provides services and confers a bona fide right, privilege, professional standing, honor or other direct benefit, in addition to the right to vote, elect officers or hold offices. The term “membership” shall not include those persons who are granted a membership upon making a contribution as the result of solicitation.

“Parent organization” means that part of a charitable organization which coordinates, supervises or exercises control over policy, fund-raising and expenditures, or assists or advises one or more chapters, branches or affiliates.

“Person” means any individual, organization, trust, foundation, association, partnership, corporation, society or other group or combination acting as a unit.

“Professional fund-raising counsel” means any person who, for a flat fixed fee under a written agreement, plans, conducts, manages, carries on, advises or acts as a consultant, whether directly or indirectly, in connection with soliciting contributions for, or on behalf of, any charitable or civic organization, but who actually solicits no contributions as part of such services. A bona fide salaried officer or employee of a registered or exempt charitable organization or of a registered parent organization shall not be deemed to be a professional fund-raising counsel.

“Professional solicitor” means any person who, for a financial or other consideration, solicits contributions for, or on behalf of, a charitable or civic organization, whether such solicitation is performed personally or through his agents, servants or employees or through agents, servants or employees specially employed by or for a charitable or civic organization, who are engaged in the solicitation of contributions under the direction of such person; or any person who, for a financial or other consideration, plans, conducts, manages, carries on, advises or acts as a consultant to a charitable or civic organization in connection with the solicitation of contributions, but does not qualify as a professional fund-raising counsel. A bona fide salaried officer or employee of a registered or exempt charitable organization or of a registered parent organization shall not be deemed a professional solicitor.

“Sale,” “sell,” or “sold” mean the transfer of any property or the rendition of any service to any person in exchange for consideration, including any purported contribution without which such property would not have been transferred or such services would not have been rendered.

“Solicit” or “solicitation” mean the request or appeal, directly or indirectly, for any contribution on the plea or representation that such contribution will be used for a charitable purpose, including without limitation, the following methods of requesting such contribution:

(1) Any oral or written request.

(2) Any announcement to the press, over the radio or television, or by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal or campaign to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable purpose connected therewith.

(3) The distribution, circulation, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement or other publication which, directly or by implication, seeks to obtain public support.

(4) The sale of, or any offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising space, subscription, ticket or any service or tangible item in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable purpose or where the name of any charitable organization is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such sale, or when or where, in connection with any such sale, any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale will be donated to any charitable purpose. “Solicitation,” as defined herein, shall be deemed to occur when the request is made, at the place the request is received, whether or not the person making the same actually receives any contribution. (Code 1985, § 24-13).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-48.


5.25.040 Exemptions from article generally.

(1) Nothing in this article shall be construed as being applicable to the American Red Cross or any of its local chapters.

(2) No charitable organization shall be required to comply with the provisions of this article, if such organization has registered with the state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services or if such organization is a chapter, branch or affiliate included in the consolidated report of an organization or federated organization which is so registered, and if such organization registers, with the commissioner of revenue, its name, the names of its solicitors and the dates and times that they will be soliciting in the city. (Code 1985, § 24-14).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 57-60(d), 57-63(d).


5.25.050 Exemptions from certain provisions of article.

(1) The following shall be exempt from the registration requirements of SCC 5.25.120 and the requirements of SCC 5.25.150, but shall otherwise be subject to the provisions of this article:

(a) Educational institutions that are accredited by the state board of education or by a regional accrediting association or by an organization affiliated with the National Commission on Accrediting, the Association Montessori Internationale or the American Montessori Society, any foundation having an established identity with any of the aforementioned educational institutions, and any other educational institution confining its solicitation of contributions to its student body, alumni, faculty and trustees, and their families.

(b) Persons requesting contributions for the relief of any individual specified by name at the time of the solicitation, when all of the contributions collected, without any deductions whatsoever, are turned over to the named beneficiary for his use.

(c) Charitable organizations which do not intend to solicit and receive, during a calendar year, and have not actually raised or received, during any of the three next preceding calendar years, contributions from the public in excess of $5,000, if all of their functions, including fund-raising activities, are carried on by persons who are unpaid for their services and if not part of their assets or income inures to the benefit of, or is paid to, any officer or member. Nevertheless, if the contributions raised from the public, whether all of such is or is not received by any charitable organization during any calendar year, shall be in excess of $5,000, it shall, within 30 days after the date it shall have received total contributions in excess of $5,000, register with and report to the commissioner of revenue as required by this article.

(d) Organizations which solicit only within the membership of the organization by the members thereof.

(e) Organizations which have no office within the city and which solicit in the city from without the commonwealth solely by means of telephone or telegraph, direct mail or advertising in national media.

(f) Health care institutions which have been granted tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and any supporting organization which exists solely to support any such institution.

(g) Civic organizations.

(2) No charitable or civic organization shall be exempt under this section unless it shall submit, before any solicitation, to the commissioner of revenue, on a form to be prescribed by him, the name, address and purpose of the organization and a statement setting forth the reason for the claim for exemption. Parent organizations may file consolidated applications for exemptions for any chapters, branches or affiliates which they believe to be exempt from the registration provisions of this article. If exempted, the commissioner shall issue a letter of exemption which may be exhibited to the public. No registration fee shall be required of any exempt organization. The letter of exemption shall remain in effect as long as the organization continues to solicit in accordance with its claim for exemption. (Code 1985, § 24-15).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-60.


5.25.060 Reciprocal agreements with other municipalities.

The commissioner of revenue may enter into a reciprocal agreement with the appropriate authority of any other municipality within the commonwealth for the purpose of exchanging information with respect to charitable organizations, professional fund-raising counsel and professional solicitors. Pursuant to such agreements, the commissioner may accept information filed by charitable organizations, professional fund-raising counsel and professional solicitors with the appropriate authority of another locality within this commonwealth, in lieu of the information required to be filed by this article. (Code 1985, § 24-16).


5.25.070 Article does not authorize unlawful acts or omissions or decrease liability imposed by law.

Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as making lawful any act or omission which is now unlawful, or as decreasing the liability, civil or criminal, of any person imposed by existing laws. (Code 1985, § 24-17).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-62.


5.25.080 Appeals from orders under article.

Any person aggrieved by any final order of the commissioner of revenue under this article, denying such person any right to which he is entitled under law, may, within 15 days from the date of such order, apply for relief to the circuit court of the city. Either party may appeal any final order of such court in the same manner as provided by law in cases other than cases of appeals of right. (Code 1985, § 24-18).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-67.


5.25.090 Investigations to enforce article.

The commissioner of revenue, upon his own motion or upon the complaint of any person, may investigate any charitable or civic organization, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor to determine whether such organization, counsel or solicitor has violated any of the provisions of this article. (Code 1985, § 24-19).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-59(b).


5.25.100 Violations of article generally.

A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. (Code 1985, § 24-20).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


5.25.110 Actions to enjoin violations of article.

Whenever the city attorney shall have reason to believe that any charitable or civic organization, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor is operating in violation of the provisions of this article, or has knowingly and willfully made any false statement in any registration application or statement, report or other information required by this article, or that a charitable or civic organization, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor has failed to file a registration statement required by this article, or that there is employed or is about to be employed, in any solicitation or collection of contributions for a charitable or civic organization, any device, scheme or artifice to defraud or to obtain money or property by means of any false pretense, representation or promise, or that the officers or representatives of any charitable or civic organization, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor have refused or failed, after notice, to produce any records of such organization, or that the funds raised by solicitation activities are not devoted or will not be devoted to the charitable purposes of the charitable or civic organization, the city attorney may, in addition to all other actions authorized by law, bring an action against such charitable or civic organization and its officers and such professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor to enjoin such charitable or civic organization or professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor from continuing such violation, solicitation or collection, or engaging therein, or doing any acts in furtherance thereof, and for such other relief as the court deems appropriate. (Code 1985, § 24-21).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-59(c).


5.25.120 Registration of organizations.

(1) Every charitable organization, except as otherwise provided herein, which intends to solicit contributions within the city, or have funds solicited on its behalf, shall, prior to any solicitation, file an initial registration statement with the commissioner of revenue upon forms acceptable to him. Each registration statement shall thereafter be refiled on or before the first day of the fourth calendar month of the next and each following fiscal year in which such charitable organization is engaged in solicitation activities within the city. It shall be the duty of the president, chairman or principal officer of such charitable organization to file the statements required herein. Such statements shall contain the following information:

(a) The name of the organization and the purpose for which it was organized.

(b) The principal address of the organization, the address of any offices in the city and its designated agent for process within the commonwealth. If no such agent is designated, the organization shall be deemed to have designated the secretary of the commonwealth. If the organization does not maintain an office, the statement shall include the name and address of the person having custody of its financial records.

(c) The names and addresses of any chapters, branches or affiliates in the city.

(d) The place where and the date when the organization was legally established, the form of the organization, and a reference to any determination of its tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code.

(e) The names and addresses of the officers, directors, trustees and the principal salaried executive staff officer.

(f) A copy of a balance sheet and income statement, with the opinion of an independent public accountant, for the organization’s immediate preceding fiscal year, or a copy of a financial statement certified by an independent public accountant covering, in a consolidated report, complete information as to all the preceding year’s fund-raising activities of the charitable organization, showing the kind and amount of funds raised, fund-raising expenses and allocation or disbursement of funds raised; provided, that no charitable organization which has registered with the commissioner of revenue for the current and next preceding three years, or is exempt from registration for such years under SCC 5.25.050, shall be required to file any financial information. The report required by this subsection shall comply with the accounting standards prescribed in SCC 5.25.150.

(g) A statement showing the computation of the percentages provided for in subsection (2) of this section and SCC 5.25.170.

(h) A statement indicating whether the organization intends to solicit contributions from the public directly or have such done on its behalf by others.

(i) A statement indicating whether the organization is authorized by any other governmental agency within the commonwealth to solicit contributions and whether it, or any officer, professional fund-raiser or professional solicitor thereof, is or has ever been enjoined by any court or otherwise prohibited from soliciting contributions in any jurisdiction.

(j) The general purpose or purposes for which the contributions to be solicited shall be used.

(k) The name or names under which it intends to solicit contributions.

(l) The names of the individuals or officers of the organization who will have the final responsibility for the custody of the contributions.

(m) The names of the individuals or officers of the organization responsible for the final distribution of the contributions.

(n) A statement indicating whether the organization, or any officer, professional solicitor or professional fund-raiser thereof, has ever been convicted of a felony and, if so, a description of the pertinent facts.

(2) Each charitable organization shall, as a part of its registration statement, compute the percentage which its fund-raising expenses for its preceding fiscal year bore to its support received directly from the public during such year.

(3) Each chapter, branch or affiliate located in the city, except an independent member agency of a federated fund-raising organization, shall separately report the information required by this section or report the information to its parent organization, which shall then furnish such information as to itself and all local affiliates, chapters and branches in a consolidated form. All affiliated organizations included in a consolidated registration statement shall be considered as one charitable organization for all purposes of this article. If a consolidated registration statement is filed, all statements thereafter filed shall be upon the same basis, unless permission to change is granted by the commissioner of revenue.

(4) Each federated fund-raising organization located in the city shall report the information required by this section in a consolidated form. Any federated fund-raising organization may elect to exclude from its consolidated report information relating to the separate fund-raising activities of all of its independent member agencies. No member agency of a federated fund-raising organization shall be required to report separately any information contained in such a consolidated report; provided, however, that any separate solicitation campaign conducted by, or on behalf of, any such member agency in the city shall nevertheless be subject to all other provisions of this article.

(5) The registration forms shall be verified under oath or affirmation by an authorized officer of the charitable organization.

(6) Every charitable organization which submits an independent registration to the commissioner of revenue shall pay an annual registration fee of $10.00. A parent organization filing on behalf of one or more chapters, branches or affiliates or a federated fund-raising organization filing on behalf of its member agencies shall pay a single annual registration fee for itself and such chapters, branches, affiliates or member agencies included in the registration statement. All fees paid hereunder shall be credited to the office of the commissioner of revenue for reimbursement of administrative expenses. (Code 1985, § 24-22).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 57-49, 57-58, 57-63(a)(3).


5.25.130 Reports by organizations with no local office and which solicit solely by telephone, mail, etc.

Any charitable organization having no office or place of business within the city and soliciting in the city from without the city solely by telephone or telegraph, direct mail or advertising in local or national media, and any professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor engaged by such an organization, shall file with the commissioner of revenue any report which would otherwise be required of it; provided, such charitable organization maintains an office or place of business within the commonwealth. (Code 1985, § 24-23).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-51(b).


5.25.140 Publication of warning as to unregistered organizations.

If the commissioner of revenue shall determine that any charitable or civic organization, not registered with his office and not exempt from registration, irrespective of whether such organization is subject to the jurisdiction of the city, is soliciting in the city, directly or indirectly, by any means, including, without limitation, by telephone or telegraph, by direct mail or by advertising in national media, he may, after 10 days’ written notice mailed to the charitable or civic organization, cause to be printed, in one or more newspapers published or distributed in the city, a notice in substantially the following form:

WARNING – UNREGISTERED CHARITABLE SOLICITATION

The organization named below has solicited contributions from area residents for allegedly charitable purposes. It has not registered with, or been granted the appropriate exempt status by, the Commissioner of Revenue of the City of Staunton, as required by law. Contributors are cautioned that their contributions to such organization may be used for noncharitable purposes.

A copy of such warning shall immediately thereupon be forwarded to the administrator of consumer affairs for the commonwealth. (Code 1985, § 24-24).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-52.


5.25.150 Records to be kept by organizations.

Every charitable organization shall keep true fiscal records for all fiscal years in accordance with the standards set out in Section 57-53 of the Code of Virginia. Such records shall be retained for a period of at least three years after the end of the period to which they relate. (Code 1985, § 24-25).


5.25.160 Contracts between organizations and fund-raising counsel and professional solicitors.

(1) Every contract or agreement between a professional fund-raising counsel and a charitable or civic organization must be in writing and shall be filed with the commissioner of revenue within 10 days after such contract or written agreement is entered into.

(2) Every contract, or a written statement of the nature of the arrangement to prevail in the absence of a contract, between a professional solicitor and a charitable or civic organization shall be filed with the commissioner of revenue within 10 days after such contract is entered into or such arrangement is agreed to.

(3) All agreements and arrangements between a professional fund-raising counsel and a charitable or civic organization must be reduced to writing before being executed or acted upon. (Code 1985, § 24-26).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-54.


5.25.170 Disclosure to be made by professional solicitors.

It shall be unlawful for a professional solicitor to solicit contributions from a prospective donor, without fully disclosing to the prospective donor, at the time of solicitation, the minimum percentage of any amount contributed which will be received by the charitable or civic organization for its own use; provided, that if such percentage is at least 70 percent, no such disclosure need be made. (Code 1985, § 24-27).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-55.1.


5.25.180 Statements, reports, contracts, etc., filed under article constitute public records – Charge for copies thereof.

Registration statements, reports, professional fund-raising counsel contracts or professional solicitor contracts and all other documents and information required to be filed under this article shall become public records in the office of the commissioner of revenue, and shall be open to the general public for inspection at such time and under such conditions as the commissioner of revenue may prescribe. A charge, not exceeding $1.00 per page, may be made for any copy of such documents and information as may be furnished any person by the commissioner of revenue. (Code 1985, § 24-28).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-56.


5.25.190 False or misleading information in statements or reports required by article.

It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and knowingly give any false, incorrect or misleading information to the commissioner of revenue in filing statements or reports required by this article, whether such report or statement is verified or not. (Code 1985, § 24-29).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-59(a).


5.25.200 Receipts required for certain contributions.

No charitable or civic organization shall accept any contribution exceeding $5.00 in cash or tangible property, without providing, on request of the donor, a written receipt acknowledging such contribution and personally signed by the person accepting such contribution. (Code 1985, § 24-30).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(g).


5.25.210 Soliciting without authority from organization.

(1) No person shall make any representation that he is soliciting contributions for or on behalf of a charitable or civic organization or shall use or display any emblem, device or printed matter belonging to or associated with a charitable or civic organization, for the purpose of soliciting or inducing contributions from the public, without first being authorized to do so by such organization.

(2) No professional solicitor shall solicit in the name of or on behalf of any charitable or civic organization, unless such solicitor has written authorization of two officers of such organization, a copy of which shall be filed with the commissioner of revenue. Such written authorization shall bear the signature of the solicitor and shall expressly state on its face the period for which it is valid, which shall not exceed one year from the date issued. Such authorization shall be carried by such solicitor when making solicitations and shall be exhibited, on request, to persons solicited, police officers or agents of the commissioner of revenue. (Code 1985, § 24-31).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(e),(f).


5.25.220 Soliciting by certain persons prohibited.

No person, and no organization of which such person is an officer, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor, shall solicit within the city, if:

(1) Such person has been convicted, in any jurisdiction, of embezzlement, larceny or other crime involving the obtaining of money or property by false pretenses or the misapplication of funds impressed with a trust, unless such person has received a pardon for such offense or the public is informed of such conviction in a manner approved in writing by the commissioner of revenue before any solicitation occurs; or

(2) Such person has ever been enjoined by any court or otherwise prohibited from soliciting in any jurisdiction, unless the commissioner of revenue shall first determine, in writing, that such person is entitled to solicit in such jurisdiction at the time of soliciting within the city, or that the reason for such injunction or prohibition does not involve moral turpitude. (Code 1985, § 24-32).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(h).


5.25.230 Soliciting for benefit of nonresident who fails to supply information to commissioner.

No person shall solicit within the city for the benefit of any other person located without the city, if such other person refuses to supply any information which the commissioner of revenue deems necessary to assure himself that the provisions of this article are complied with. A solicitation shall be deemed to be on behalf of every person who receives, directly or indirectly, more than 10 percent of the gross amount collected. (Code 1985, § 24-33).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(i).


5.25.240 Misleading solicitations generally.

(1) No charitable organization shall use or exploit the fact of registration under this article so as to lead the public to believe that such registration in any manner constitutes an endorsement or approval by the city. The use of the following statement shall not be deemed a prohibited exploitation: “Registered with the commissioner of revenue as required by law. Registration does not imply endorsement of a public solicitation for contributions.”

(2) No person shall, in connection with the solicitation of contributions or sale of tangible personal property or services, represent, or lead anyone, by any manner, means, practice or device whatsoever, to believe, that the person on whose behalf such solicitation or sale is being conducted is a bona fide charitable organization or that the proceeds of such solicitation or sale will be used for charitable purposes, if he has reason to believe such not to be the fact. (Code 1985, § 24-34).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(a),(b).


5.25.250 Misrepresentations as to sponsors, endorsers, etc.

(1) No person shall, in connection with the solicitation of contributions or the sale of tangible personal property or services for charitable purposes, represent, or lead anyone, by any manner, means, practice or device whatsoever, to believe, that any other person sponsors or endorses such solicitation of contributions or sale of tangible personal property or services for charitable purposes or approves of such charitable purposes or a charitable organization connected therewith, when such other person has not given written consent to the use of his name for these purposes.

(2) Any member of the board of directors or trustees of a charitable organization, or any other person who has agreed to either serve or to participate in any voluntary capacity in the campaign, shall be deemed thereby to have given his consent to the use of his name in such campaign.

(3) Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the publication of names of contributors, without their written consent, in an annual or other periodic report issued by a charitable organization for the purpose of reporting on its operations and affairs to its membership or for the purpose of reporting contributions to contributors. (Code 1985, § 24-35).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(c).


5.25.260 Misrepresentations as to income tax deductions.

(1) No person shall denominate any membership fee or purchase price of goods or services sold as a contribution or as a donation or in any other manner represent or imply that the member or the purchaser of such goods or services will be entitled to an income tax deduction for his cost or any portion thereof, unless:

(a) There shall have been first obtained a signed opinion of counsel or an Internal Revenue Service ruling or determination letter holding such cost to be deductible; or

(b) The member or purchaser is informed, in writing, that such cost may not be deductible.

(2) No charitable organization, other than an organization exempt under SCC 5.25.050(1)(c), shall represent or imply that a contributor thereto will be entitled to an income tax deduction for his contribution, unless there shall have been first obtained a signed opinion of counsel or an Internal Revenue Service ruling or determination letter holding gifts to such organization to be so deductible. (Code 1985, § 24-36).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(d). 


Chapter 5.30 TAXICABS*

Sections:

Article I. In General

5.30.010    Definitions.

5.30.020    Application of, and compliance with, chapter.

5.30.030    Violations of chapter.

5.30.040    Council rules and regulations governing operation.

5.30.050    Business license.

5.30.060    Liability insurance or bond.

5.30.070    Maintenance of vehicles.

5.30.080    Identification of vehicles.

5.30.090    Radios capable of receiving police calls prohibited.

5.30.100    Driver to use shortest practical route.

5.30.110    Display of rates – Passenger to be informed of charge for waiting time.

5.30.120    Refusal of passenger to pay fare.

5.30.130    Accident reports.

5.30.140    Records of calls.

Article II. Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity

5.30.150    Required.

5.30.160    Application.

5.30.170    Determinations by city manager.

5.30.180    Issuance or denial – Contents.

5.30.190    Term.

5.30.200    Application for renewal.

5.30.210    Revocation or suspension.

5.30.220    Appeal from denial, revocation, etc.

*Charter reference – Authority of council to regulate taxicabs, § 11(15).

Cross reference – Motor vehicles and traffic, Title 10.

State law reference – Authority of city to regulate taxicabs and similar for-hire vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.1-353.

Article I. In General


5.30.010 Definitions.

Unless it appears from the context that a different meaning is intended, the following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

“Certificate” shall mean the certificate of public convenience and necessity granted by the city manager to persons in the business of operating taxicabs, as provided for in this chapter.

“Driver” shall mean any person in charge of or driving any taxicab.

“Owner” shall mean any person having control of the operation or maintenance of taxicabs, including any person having control of the collection of revenue derived from the operation of taxicabs, and including the purchaser of any taxicab under a conditional sales contract or other title-reserving agreement.

“Taxicab” shall mean any motor-driven vehicle used for the transportation, for hire or reward, of passengers upon the streets of the city, except buses being operated under franchise or by the city and over fixed routes between fixed termini.

“Taximeter” shall mean and include any mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated and on which the charge is plainly indicated. (Code 1964, § 27.1-1; Code 1985, § 28-1).


5.30.020 Application of, and compliance with, chapter.

The operation of taxicabs in the city shall be subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth in this chapter and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, within the city any taxicab, unless the conditions, regulations and restrictions herein set forth and prescribed have been complied with. (Code 1964, § 27.1-10; Code 1985, § 28-2).


5.30.030 Violations of chapter.

Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. (Code 1985, § 28-3).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


5.30.040 Council rules and regulations governing operation.

The council may, from time to time, by resolution, promulgate such rules and regulations applicable to the safe and efficient operation of taxicabs on the streets of the city as in its discretion are necessary for the public safety and convenience, which shall be in addition to the provisions of this chapter relating to the same. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such regulations. (Code 1964, § 27.1-3; Code 1985, § 28-4).


5.30.050 Business license.

It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated within the city any taxicab, unless a license therefor has been issued to the owner thereof in accordance with the license tax ordinance of the city. The commissioner of revenue shall not issue such license, unless the owner has a current certificate issued under this chapter. (Code 1964, §§ 27.1-9, 27.1-11; Code 1985, § 28-5).


5.30.060 Liability insurance or bond.

(1) Every owner of any taxicab operated in the city shall file with the city manager and keep in full force and effect at all times a policy of insurance in accordance with the provisions of Section 56-299 et seq. of the Code of Virginia; or, in the event that no policy of insurance has been so filed, the owner of any taxicab operating in the city shall provide a surety bond, approved by the city attorney and with surety in the amount herein specified, conditioned on such owner responding in damages, or provide a cash bond in the amount herein specified, covering damages for any liability incurred on account of any injury to persons or damage to property resulting from the operation of such taxicabs in the following amounts: for injury to one person in any one accident, $100,000; for injury to two or more persons in any one accident, $300,000; for property damage in any one accident, $50,000.

(2) Surety or cash bonds shall be for or in the amount of at least $15,000 for each taxicab for which a certificate is issued under this chapter.

(3) If any such policy of insurance is canceled, the owner shall not operate or cause to be operated any vehicle covered by such policy until other insurance is obtained or surety or cash bond given.

(4) Each policy of insurance filed pursuant to this section shall contain a clause to the effect that the insurance carrier may cancel the policy upon 30 days’ written notice to the city clerk, as well as such other notice as may be required by law to be given the owner.

(5) If judgment is rendered against the owner or driver, or both, in any court of competent jurisdiction by reason of any accident for which the insurance policy or surety or cash bond is provided pursuant to this section, the owner shall, within 24 hours after the rendition of such judgment, whether appealed from or not, increase the total amount of insurance or the amount of the surety or cash bond so that there shall be kept in effect, in the manner contemplated by law and by this chapter, insurance or bond, upon which there has been no recovery, of not less than the minimum provided herein. (Code 1964, § 27.1-2; Code 1985, § 28-6).


5.30.070 Maintenance of vehicles.

Every taxicab shall be kept in good order and repair at all times when in operation. (Code 1964, § 27.1-6; Code 1985, § 28-7).


5.30.080 Identification of vehicles.

Every taxicab shall bear, on the outside and on at least two sides thereof, the name of the owner, in letters not less than two inches high and plainly visible at a distance of 100 feet, and on two sides and the back, the owner’s number, in letters three inches high and plainly visible at a distance of 100 feet. Operators shall be permitted, if they so desire, to maintain one unmarked taxicab for each four marked taxicabs, to be used for private charter trips. (Code 1964, § 27.1-7; Code 1985, § 28-8).


5.30.090 Radios capable of receiving police calls prohibited.

It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab along the streets of the city in which a radio is installed which is capable of receiving police calls. (Code 1964, § 27.1-8; Code 1985, § 28-9).


5.30.100 Driver to use shortest practical route.

The driver of a taxicab shall operate the same over the shortest practical route from the place of the beginning of the trip to the place of destination. (Code 1964, § 27.1-21; Code 1985, § 28-10).


5.30.110 Display of rates – Passenger to be informed of charge for waiting time.

Cards displaying the rates charged shall be posted in a prominent place in all taxicabs and the drivers of such vehicles shall, on each occasion when waiting time is charged, inform the passenger being charged the exact amount thereof. (Code 1964, § 27.1-22; Code 1985, § 28-11).


5.30.120 Refusal of passenger to pay fare.

It shall be unlawful for any person to engage a taxicab and, without previously making arrangements for credit, use the same and refuse to pay the lawful fare for such use. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. (Code 1964, § 27.1-20; Code 1985, § 28-12).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


5.30.130 Accident reports.

Every accident, however slight, in which any taxicab is involved shall be immediately reported to the police department. Such report shall not be used against the owner or driver making it in any criminal proceeding. Such report shall be available to any person, or his attorney, injured in such accident or by reason thereof. (Code 1964, § 27.1-4; Code 1985, § 28-13).


5.30.140 Records of calls.

Every taxicab owner shall keep a clear, neat record of the origin and destination of all calls and it shall be the duty of all drivers and employees of the owner to report such calls. Such records shall be open at all times to inspection by any member of the police department and shall be preserved for a period of not less than six months. No person shall knowingly make a record of a fictitious call or use any fictitious name in reporting a bona fide call, nor shall a fictitious or false address of the point of origin or destination be knowingly reported. (Code 1964, § 27.1-5; Code 1985, § 28-14).

Article II. Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity


5.30.150 Required.

No person shall operate a taxicab on the streets of the city, unless the owner thereof has a current certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to this article and authorizing such operation. (Code 1964, § 27.1-11; Code 1985, § 28-25).


5.30.160 Application.

Application for a certificate required by this article shall be made by the owner or proposed owner to the city manager, upon forms provided therefor by the city, and shall furnish the following information under oath of the applicant:

(1) The full name and the home and business address of the applicant.

(2) The trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business.

(3) The financial status and responsibility of the applicant, as shown by a financial report for the preceding calendar year, audited by a certified public accountant.

(4) The name and address of any person lending money or furnishing capital to the applicant, where the operation or proposed operation is to be financed, wholly or in part, by means of borrowed money or capital in any form furnished by any person other than the owner.

(5) The character and location of the depots and terminals to be used, if any.

(6) Each conviction or plea of guilty for the violation of any criminal law, whether such violation is of a city ordinance, state law or federal law.

(7) The specific experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers for hire.

(8) All facts or circumstances upon which the applicant bases his belief that public convenience and necessity require the granting of his application. (Code 1964, § 27.1-12; Code 1985, § 28-26).


5.30.170 Determinations by city manager.

The city manager shall determine whether a certificate shall be issued for the operation of the taxicabs for which application has been filed under this article. In making this determination, the following shall be considered:

(1) The adequacy, efficiency and safety of existing taxicab service and other forms of transportation for passengers already in existence.

(2) The probable permanence and quality of the service offered by the applicant.

(3) The qualifications and responsibility of the applicant. (Code 1964, § 27.1-13; Code 1985, § 28-27).


5.30.180 Issuance or denial – Contents.

(1) The city manager shall have the authority to grant a certificate applied for under this article or to grant a certificate for a lesser number of vehicles than that specified in the application or to deny the application, in the exercise of sound discretion.

(2) Upon determination by the city manager that any application filed under this article shall be granted, a certificate shall be issued to the applicant by the city manager and shall contain the following:

(a) The name and address of the owner.

(b) The date of issuance and the date of expiration.

(c) The fact that the certificate is being issued subject to the provisions of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances governing the operation of taxicabs in the city. (Code 1964, §§ 27.1-14, 27.1-15; Code 1985, § 28-28).


5.30.190 Term.

Every certificate issued under this article shall be good and valid, unless revoked or suspended as provided in this article, from the date of issuance until the following December 31st. (Code 1964, § 27.1-16; Code 1985, § 28-29).


5.30.200 Application for renewal.

Application for renewal certificates similar to original applications under this article shall be filed with the city manager. (Code 1964, § 27.1-17; Code 1985, § 28-30).


5.30.210 Revocation or suspension.

The city manager may, for cause, revoke or suspend any certificate issued pursuant to this article after due notice to the certificate holder. (Code 1964, § 27.1-18; Code 1985, § 28-31).


5.30.220 Appeal from denial, revocation, etc.

(1) An applicant or a certificate holder whose certificate is denied, revoked, suspended or not renewed, who is aggrieved because of that decision by the city manager affecting his application or certificate, shall have the right to appeal the decision to the council, provided such person gives notice, in writing, to the city manager not less than 10 days following notification of the decision of the city manager. Upon receipt of such notice, the city manager shall cause a hearing to be scheduled, by placing the matter on the agenda of a regularly scheduled council meeting to occur within 45 days of the receipt of the notice of appeal. The appeal shall stay any revocation or suspension by the city manager of a certificate otherwise in effect. Notification of appeal shall not be deemed to renew an expired certificate or to issue any certificate not yet in effect.

(2) Notice shall be given by mail to the aggrieved party of the time and place of the hearing provided for in this section not less than 10 days prior to the hearing. The burden of establishing that the decision of the city manager was erroneous shall be upon the aggrieved party.

(3) On an appeal under this section, the decision of the council shall be by majority vote of those members present, in the exercise of sound discretion and after taking into consideration the factors prescribed by this chapter. (Code 1964, § 27.1-23; Code 1985, § 28-32).

CITY OF STAUNTON, VIRGINIA

Application by Owner for Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity

To the Council of the city of Staunton, Virginia:

The undersigned owner and applicant hereby furnishes the following information under oath and hereby applies to the Council of the City of Staunton, Virginia, for a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity for the operation and maintenance of public vehicles, taxicabs and for hire cars, along and over the public streets and highways in said City for the transportation of passengers for hire and reward:

(1)     Full name of applicant

(2)     Home address of applicant

(3)     Business address of applicant

(4)     Trade name under which applicant does business

(5)     Assets $    

        Liabilities $

        Net Worth $

Financial ability and responsibility of applicant (state gross assets and gross liabilities).

(6)     Name and address of any person lending money or furnishing capital to applicant where operation is financed wholly or in part by means of borrowed money or capital in any form furnished by any person other than the owner.

(7)     Number of vehicles    Seating capacity

    Kind of vehicles

    Design and color scheme of each vehicle

(8)     Character and location of depots and terminals

(9)     Each conviction or plea of guilty for violation of any criminal law, whether City, State or Federal

(10)    Specific experiences of application in the transportation of passengers for hire:

(11)    State facts and circumstances upon which applicant bases his belief that public convenience and necessity require the granting of his/her application:

    

    	____________________________________

    Individual

    	

    Partners, trading as

    	

    	

    By 	

    President

Attest:

______________________________________ 

    Secretary

STATE OF VIRGINIA

CITY OF STAUNTON, TO-WIT:

I, the undersigned Notary Public in and for the City of Staunton, in the State of Virginia, do hereby certify that __________________________________, whose name is signed to the foregoing application, bearing date on the _____________day of _______________________, _____, personally appeared before me and made oath that the information furnished therein is true and correct, except as to matters stated upon information and belief and as to those believes it to be true and correct.

Given under my hand this ____________ day of ___________________, _____.

    	

    Notary Public

My Commission Expires: ________________________

CITY OF STAUNTON, VIRGINIA

THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT

    _____________________________________________________________________________________

is hereby granted a certificate of public convenience and necessity for the operation and maintenance of the public vehicles, taxicabs and for hire cars hereinafter designated, along and upon the streets and highways of the City of Staunton, Virginia, in accordance with the ordinances and resolutions of the Council of said City:

    

Name of Owner    Address of Owner

Number, kind and description of vehicles the operation of which is authorized hereby:

	YEAR	 MAKE	 MOTOR NUMBER	 YEAR	 MAKE	 MOTOR NUMBER

	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 

Date of issuance:    

Date of expiration:    

This certificate is issued subject to the provisions of the ordinances of the City of Staunton regulating the operation of public vehicles, taxicabs and for hire cabs and all amendments thereto, as well as subject to all other laws or ordinances governing said operation within said City.

    	

    Clerk of Council


Chapter 5.40 ADULT BUSINESSES

Sections:

5.40.010    Definitions.

5.40.020    Permit required from chief of police – Application – Issuance – Duration – Renewal.

5.40.030    Permit – Grounds for revocation.

5.40.040    Procedure upon denial of an application or revocation of a permit.

5.40.050    Availability of prompt judicial review and determination.

5.40.060    Inspection.

5.40.070    Regulations pertaining to adult businesses providing adult entertainment.

5.40.080    Regulations pertaining to adult motels.

5.40.090    Transfer of permit prohibited.

5.40.100    Violations.

5.40.110    Severability.


5.40.010 Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

“Adult bookstore” or “adult video store” means an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, other periodicals, videotapes, computer disks, CD-ROMs, DVD-ROMs, virtual reality devices or similar media that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

“Adult business” means any adult bookstore, adult video store, adult model studio, adult motel, adult movie theater, adult nightclub, adult store, business providing adult entertainment, or any other establishment that regularly exploits an interest in matter relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or regularly features live entertainment intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons. 

“Adult entertainment” means dancing, modeling or other live entertainment if the entertainment is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or is intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons; or the showing of films, motion pictures, videotapes, slides, photographs, CD-ROMs, DVD-ROMs, or other media that are characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 

“Adult merchandise” means magazines, books, other periodicals, videotapes, films, motion pictures, photographs, slides, CD-ROMs, DVD-ROMs, virtual reality devices, or other similar media that are characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; instruments, devices or paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs; or lingerie or leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices. 

“Adult model studio” means a commercial establishment, including a lingerie store or novelty store, in which a person performs or simulates specified sexual activities, exposes specified anatomical areas, or engages in other performances intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons. 

“Adult motel” means a motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment that: (1) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, internet selections or sites, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or (2) offers a sleeping room for rent for a time period of less than 10 hours; or (3) allows a tenant or occupant to subrent the sleeping room for a time period of less than 10 hours. 

“Adult movie theater” means an enclosed building regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons, excluding movies that have been rated “G,” “PG,” “PG-13,” or “R” by the Motion Picture Association of America. 

“Adult nightclub” means a restaurant, bar, club, or similar establishment that regularly features adult entertainment. 

“Adult store” means an establishment having adult merchandise as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade.

“Associate” means any entity or person acting in concert with an owner, operator, manager or employee in the management or control of the adult business, whether or not compensated.

“Employee” means an individual working or performing services for any adult business, including any independent contractor who provides services on behalf of any adult business to the patrons of such business, whether or not the individual receives any remuneration, gratuity, or tips of any kind, or pays the permittee or manager for the right to perform or entertain in the adult business. 

“Live entertainment” means entertainment provided in person including, but not limited to, musical performances, music played by disc jockeys, public speaking, dramatic performances, dancing, modeling, or comedy performances.

“Specified anatomical areas” means less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 

“Specified sexual activities” means human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; sexual intercourse or sodomy; or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast, including masturbation. (Ord. 2007-28).


5.40.020 Permit required from chief of police – Application – Issuance – Duration – Renewal.

(1) Every person either operating or desiring to operate an adult business, in addition to obtaining any required business license from the commissioner of revenue, shall apply to the chief of police, or designee, for a permit to conduct such activity. Each such application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $300.00.

(2) Information required on and with the permit application shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(a) The applicant’s full name, any previous or current aliases, age, sex, race, weight, height, hair and eye color, address, telephone number, date and place of birth and Social Security number.

(b) Names and addresses of at least three references.

(c) Whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of the offense, when and where convicted and the penalty or punishment assessed.

(d) Whether the applicant holds or has held, in the name of this business or any other, any other permits under this chapter or similar adult use provisions from another locality within the past five years, and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses.

(e) Whether the applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked or suspended under any statute or ordinance requiring a permit to operate an adult business and, if so, when and where the denial or revocation or suspension occurred.

(f)  Photograph and fingerprints of applicant.

(g) Name, including any fictitious names, and address of the business for which a permit is sought.

(h) A criminal records check of the applicant shall be provided by the applicant with the application, along with the applicant’s written authorization to investigate whether the information provided by the applicant is true.

(i) A description of the intended business activity and, if adult entertainment is to be provided, a detailed description of such entertainment.

(j) Written declaration, dated and signed by the applicant, in affidavit form that the information contained in the application is true and correct.

(3) For a corporation, partnership or other legal entity, “applicant” includes each officer, director, partner, member or principal of the entity and the managers and other associates of the business.

(4) The chief of police or designee shall act on the application within 30 days of the filing of an application containing all the information required by this section, unless information requested from other law enforcement agencies is not received within that 30-day period, in which case the chief of police or designee shall have an additional 30 days to act on the application. Upon the expiration of the applicable time period, unless the applicant requests and is granted a reasonable extension of time, the applicant may, at its option, begin operating the business for which the permit is sought, unless and until the chief of police or designee notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reasons for denial.

(5) The applicant shall be issued a permit unless the city’s investigation or the information furnished by the applicant shows any of the following:

(a) The applicant has failed to provide information required by this section or has falsely or misleadingly answered a question.

(b) The applicant has been convicted of a felony within the past five years.

(c) The applicant has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude or a crime involving obscenity laws within the past five years.

(d) The applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked or suspended within the past 12 months under any statute or ordinance requiring a permit to operate an adult business.

(e) Failure of the applicant’s business to comply with the city’s business license, zoning, building, plumbing, utility, health, electric or fire prevention codes, or with any other applicable city or state laws or regulations.

(f)  The application fee has not been paid.

(6) If the application is denied, the chief of police or designee shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reasons for the denial.

(7) The permit shall be valid for 12 months from the date thereof and may be renewed in the same manner as it was initially obtained. The application fee for a renewal permit shall be $300.00. No permit shall be transferable.

(8) Any changes in the ownership or principals of the business entity to which the permit is issued or in the managers or other associates of the business will automatically make the permit void. Such changes shall be immediately reported to the chief of police or designee, and a new application may be submitted for review. (Ord. 2007-28).


5.40.030 Permit – Grounds for revocation.

The chief of police or designee may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter for the following:

(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or any false or misleading statement contained in the application.

(2)  Conviction of the permittee for any felony, crime involving moral turpitude, or crime involving the obscenity laws after the permit is issued.

(3) The permittee or an employee or associate of the permittee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of illegal controlled substances in or on the premises.

(4) The permittee or an employee or associate of the permittee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises.

(5) The permittee or an employee or associate has refused to allow an inspection of the adult business premises as authorized by this chapter.

(6) On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, employees or associates of the adult business at the time of the offenses committed an offense in or on the permitted premises for which a conviction has been obtained constituting:

(a) Aiding, abetting or harboring a runaway child;

(b) Prostitution or promotion of prostitution;

(c) Exposing minors to harmful materials;

(d) Dissemination of obscenity;

(e)  Sexual assault.

The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the permit.

(7) The permittee is convicted of violations regarding any taxes or fees related to the adult business.

(8) The permittee has failed to operate or manage an adult business in a peaceful and law abiding manner.

(9) The permittee or an employee of the permittee, except a permittee or employee of a permittee of an adult motel, has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual activity to occur in or on the permitted premises.

(10) The permittee has been operating an adult business not approved under the applicable permit.

(11) The permittee has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

(12) The permittee’s business fails to comply with other applicable city or state laws or regulations. (Ord. 2007-28).


5.40.040 Procedure upon denial of an application or revocation of a permit.

(1) If the chief of police or designee denies an application or revokes a permit, the chief of police shall notify the applicant or permittee in writing of such action, the reasons therefor, and the right to request a hearing. To receive a hearing, the applicant or permittee must make a written hearing request which must be received by the chief of police or designee within 10 days of the date of the notice of denial or revocation. If a timely hearing request is not received by the chief of police or designee, the decision of the chief of police or designee shall be final. If a hearing is properly requested, it shall be held within 10 days from receipt of the hearing request. The hearing shall be presided over by the chief of police or designee. The applicant or permittee shall have the right to present evidence and argument or to have counsel do so. Within five days of the hearing, the chief of police or designee shall render a decision which shall be final. A permittee must discontinue operation of its business when the decision to revoke the permit becomes final.

(2) When an imminent threat of substantial harm to public health or safety requires such action, unless the matter is one for which another city official has specific enforcement authority, the chief of police or designee may immediately revoke a permit issued under this chapter by so stating in a written notice to the permittee. When action is taken pursuant to this subsection, the permittee shall immediately discontinue operation of its business, but shall have the right to a hearing as stated in subsection (1) of this section. (Ord. 2007-28).


5.40.050 Availability of prompt judicial review and determination.

After denial of an initial or renewal application or after revocation of a permit by the chief of police or designee, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in the circuit court of the city. Any such request for judicial review shall be filed within 30 days of when the administrative action becomes final. The city will facilitate the applicant’s obtaining prompt review and determination. (Ord. 2007-28).


5.40.060 Inspection.

(1) In addition to any existing legal authority, representatives of city departments shall have the authority to inspect an adult business for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

(2) The provisions of subsection (1) of this section shall not apply to sleeping rooms of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer. (Ord. 2007-28).


5.40.070 Regulations pertaining to adult businesses providing adult entertainment.

(1) For purposes of this section, “adult entertainment” is defined as dancing, modeling or other live entertainment if the entertainment is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or is intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons.

(2) No person shall provide adult entertainment for patrons of an adult business except upon a stage located in an area open to all patrons of the business. The stage shall be at least 18 inches above the level of the floor and separated by a distance of at least three feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons. No patron shall be permitted within three feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer.

(3) The adult business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for female and male entertainers, which shall not be occupied or used in any way by anyone other than them.

(4) The adult business shall provide entertainers access between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If separate access is not physically feasible, the establishment shall provide a walk aisle at least four feet wide for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers which prevents any physical contact between patrons and entertainers.

(5) No entertainer shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer while in or on the premises of the adult business.

(6) No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer. A patron who wishes to pay or give a gratuity to an entertainer shall place the gratuity in a container that is at all times located separately from the entertainers for the purpose of preventing any physical contact between a patron and an entertainer. No entertainer shall solicit any gratuity from any patron.

(7) Patrons must be at least 18 years of age.

(8) No operator or manager of an adult business shall cause or allow an entertainer to contract to or engage in any entertainment such as a “couch,” a “straddle,” or a “lap” dance with a patron while in or on the premises of an adult business. No entertainer shall contract to or engage in a “couch,” “straddle,” or “lap” dance with a patron while in or on the establishment premises. For purposes of this subsection, “couch,” “straddle,” or “lap” dance is defined as an employee of the establishment intentionally touching any patron while engaged in any specified sexual activity or other activity intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons, or the exposure of any specified anatomical area.

(9) This section shall not apply to an employee of an establishment who, while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or bartender, comes within three feet of a patron. No employee shall engage in any specified sexual activity or other activity intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons, or expose any specified anatomical area while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or bartender. (Ord. 2007-28).


5.40.080 Regulations pertaining to adult motels.

(1) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in less than 10 hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in SCC 5.40.010.

(2) No person who is in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have an adult business permit shall rent or subrent a sleeping room to a person, and, within 10 hours from the time the room is rented, rent or subrent the same sleeping room again.

(3) For purposes of subsection (2) of this section, the terms “rent” or “subrent” mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. (Ord. 2007-28).


5.40.090 Transfer of permit prohibited.

(1) A permittee shall not operate an adult business at any place other than at the address designated in the approved permit.

(2) A permittee shall not transfer its permit to another person. (Ord. 2007-28).


5.40.100 Violations.

Except as permitted in SCC 5.40.020(4), operation of an adult business without a permit is prohibited. Violations of this chapter shall be unlawful and subject to the provisions of SCC 1.05.100(1). (Ord. 2007-28).


5.40.110 Severability.

If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-28).


Title 6 ANIMALS AND FOWL*

Chapters:

6.05    In General

6.10    Dogs and Cats

6.15    Wild and Exotic Animals

6.20    Seizure, Impoundment and Miscellaneous Provisions

6.25    Hybrid Canines

*Charter reference – Authority of council to regulate or prevent the keeping of animals and fowl, § 11(13).

Cross reference – Application of traffic regulations to persons riding or driving animals, SCC 10.05.040. 

State law references – General authority of city to regulate animals and fowl, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6544; comprehensive animal laws, Code of Virginia §§ 3.2-5900 and 3.2-6500; rabies, Code of Virginia § 32.1-48.1, et seq.


Chapter 6.05 IN GENERAL

Sections:

6.05.010    Definitions.

6.05.020    Violations of title.

6.05.030    Animal control officer generally.

6.05.040    Repealed.

6.05.050    Removal of manure from stables.

6.05.060    Fowl or livestock running at large.

6.05.070    Shooting at or killing birds or animals.

6.05.080    Care of animals by owner – Penalty.

6.05.090    Tethering animals.


6.05.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases shall, as used in this title, have the following meanings:

“Abandon” means to desert, forsake, or absolutely give up an animal without having secured another owner or custodian for the animal or by failing to provide the elements of basic care as set forth in Section 3.2-6503 of the Code of Virginia for a period of five consecutive days.

“Adequate care” or “care” means the responsible practice of good animal husbandry, handling, production, management, confinement, feeding, watering, protection, shelter, transportation, treatment, and, when necessary, euthanasia, appropriate for the age, species, condition, size and type of the animal and the provision of veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering or impairment of health.

“Adequate exercise” or “exercise” means the opportunity for the animal to move sufficiently to maintain normal muscle tone and mass for the age, species, size, and condition of the animal.

“Adequate feed” means access to and the provision of food which is of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain each animal in good health; is accessible to each animal; is prepared so as to permit ease of consumption for the age, species, condition, size and type of each animal; is provided in a clean and sanitary manner; is placed so as to minimize contamination by excrement and pests; and is provided at suitable intervals for the species, age, and condition of the animal, but at least once daily, except as prescribed by a veterinarian or as dictated by naturally occurring states of hibernation or fasting normal for the species.

“Adequate shelter” means provision of and access to shelter that is suitable for the species, age, condition, size, and type of each animal; provides adequate space for each animal; is safe and protects each animal from injury, rain, sleet, snow, hail, direct sunlight, the adverse effects of heat or cold, physical suffering, and impairment of health; is properly lighted; is properly cleaned; enables each animal to be clean and dry, except when detrimental to the species; during hot weather, is properly shaded and does not readily conduct heat; during cold weather, has a windbreak at its entrance and provides a quantity of bedding material consisting of straw, cedar shavings, or the equivalent that is sufficient to protect the animal from cold and promote the retention of body heat; and, for dogs and cats, provides a solid surface, resting platform, pad, floor mat, or similar device that is large enough for the animal to lie on in a normal manner and can be maintained in a sanitary manner. Under this chapter, shelters whose wire, grid, or slat floors (1) permit the animals’ feet to pass through the openings, (2) sag under the animals’ weight, or (3) otherwise do not protect the animals’ feet or toes from injury are not adequate shelter.

“Adequate space” means sufficient space to allow each animal to (1) easily stand, sit, lie, turn about, and make all other normal body movements in a comfortable, normal position for the animal and (2) interact safely with other animals in the enclosure. When the animal is tethered, “adequate space” means that the tether to which the animal is attached permits the above actions and is appropriate to the age and size of the animal; is attached to the animal by a properly applied collar, halter, or harness, not of the choker type, that is configured so as to protect the animal from injury and prevent the animal or tether from becoming entangled with other objects or animals, or from extending over an object or edge that could result in the strangulation or injury of the animal; is at least the greater of 10 feet or three times the length of the animal, as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail, except when the animal is being walked on a leash or is attached by a tether to a lead line; does not, by its material, size, or weight or any other characteristic, cause injury or pain to the animal; does not weigh more than one-tenth of the animal’s body weight; and does not have weights or other heavy objects attached to it. The walking of an animal on a leash by its owner shall not constitute the tethering of the animal for the purpose of this definition. When freedom of movement would endanger the animal, temporarily and appropriately restricting movement of the animal according to professionally accepted standards for the species is considered provision of adequate space. The provisions of this definition that relate to tethering shall not apply to agricultural animals.

“Adequate water” means provision of and access to clean, fresh, potable water of a drinkable temperature which is provided in a suitable manner, in sufficient volume, except as prescribed by a veterinarian or as dictated by naturally occurring states of hibernation or fasting normal for the species; and is provided in clean, durable receptacles which are accessible to each animal and are placed so as to minimize contamination of the water by excrement and pests; or an alternative source of hydration consistent with generally accepted husbandry practices.

“Adoption” means the transfer of ownership of a dog or cat from a releasing agency to an individual.

“Agricultural animals” means all livestock and poultry.

“Ambient temperature” means the temperature surrounding the animal. 

“Animal” means any nonhuman vertebrate species except fish. For the purposes of Section 3.2-6522 of the Code of Virginia, “animal” means any species susceptible to rabies. For the purposes of Section 3.2-6570 of the Code of Virginia, “animal” means any nonhuman vertebrate species including fish except those fish captured and killed or disposed of in a reasonable and customary manner. 

“Animal control officer” means any person employed, contracted, or appointed by the commonwealth or any political subdivision for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this title or any other law or ordinance relating to the licensing of dogs, control of dogs and cats, cruelty to animals, or seizure and impoundment of companion animals and includes any state or municipal police officer, sheriff, constable, or other employee whose duties in whole or in part include assignments which involve seizure or taking into custody of any dog or other animal. 

“Board” means the Board of Agriculture and Consumer Services.

“Boarding establishment” means a place or establishment other than a public or private animal shelter where companion animals not owned by the proprietor are sheltered, fed, and watered in exchange for a fee. “Boarding establishment” shall not include any private residential dwelling that shelters, feeds, and waters fewer than five companion animals not owned by the proprietor.

“Collar” means a well-fitted device, appropriate to the age and size of the animal, attached to the animal’s neck in such a way as to prevent trauma or injury to the animal.

“Companion animal” means any domestic or feral dog, domestic or feral cat, nonhuman primate, guinea pig, hamster, rabbit not raised for human food or fiber, exotic or native animal, reptile, exotic or native bird, or any feral animal or any animal under the care, custody, or ownership of a person or any animal which is bought, sold, traded, or bartered by any person. Agricultural animals, game species, or any animals regulated under federal law as research animals shall not be considered companion animals for the purposes of this chapter.

“Consumer” means any natural person purchasing an animal from a dealer or pet shop or hiring the services of a boarding establishment. The term “consumer” shall not include a business or corporation engaged in sales or services.

“Dealer” means any person who in the regular course of business for compensation or profit buys, sells, transfers, exchanges, or barters companion animals. Any person who transports companion animals in the regular course of business as a common carrier shall not be considered a dealer.

“Dog” means any member of the canine or canine crossbreed family, regardless of sex, age, size, breed, or other characteristics.

“Emergency veterinary treatment” means veterinary treatment to stabilize a life-threatening condition, alleviate suffering, prevent further disease transmission, or prevent further disease progression.

“Enclosure” means a structure used to house or restrict animals from running at large.

“Euthanasia” means the humane destruction of an animal accomplished by a method that involves instantaneous unconsciousness and immediate death or by a method that involves anesthesia, produced by an agent which causes painless loss of consciousness, and death during such loss of consciousness.

“Exhibitor” means any person who has animals for or on public display, excluding an exhibitor licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture.

“Firearm” means any weapon that will or is designed to or may readily be converted to expel single or multiple projectiles by the action of an explosion of a combustible material; or the frame or receiver of any such weapon. 

“Housing facility” means any room, building, or area used to contain a primary enclosure or enclosures.

“Humane” means any action taken in consideration of and with the intent to provide for the animals’ health and well-being.

“Humane investigator” means a person who has been appointed by a circuit court as a humane investigator as provided in Section 3.2-6558 of the Code of Virgina.

“Humane society” means any chartered, nonprofit organization incorporated under the laws of this commonwealth and organized for the purpose of preventing cruelty to animals and promoting humane care and treatment of animals.

“Kennel” means any establishment in which five or more canines, felines, or hybrids of either are kept for the purpose of breeding, hunting, training, renting, buying, boarding, selling, or showing.

“Livestock” includes all domestic or domesticated bovine animals; equine animals; ovine animals; porcine animals; cervidae animals; capradae animals; animals of the genus Lama or Vicugna; ratites; fish or shellfish in aquaculture facilities, as defined in Section 3.2-2600 of the Code of Virginia; enclosed domesticated rabbits or hares raised for human food or fiber; or any other individual animal specifically raised for food or fiber, except companion animals.

“Local ordinance” means any law, rule, regulation, or ordinance promulgated by the governing body of any county, city, or town.

“New owner” means an individual who is legally competent to enter into a binding agreement pursuant to subdivision B 2 of Section 3.2-6574 of the Code of Virginia, and who adopts or receives a dog or cat from a releasing agency.

“Other officer” includes all other persons employed or elected by the people of Virginia, or by any municipality, county, or incorporated town thereof, whose duty it is to preserve the peace, to make arrests, or to enforce the law.

“Owner” means any person who: (1) has a right of property in an animal, (2) keeps or harbors an animal, (3) has an animal in his care, or (4) acts as a custodian of an animal.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, joint-stock company, corporation, association, trust, estate, or other legal entity.

“Pet shop” means an establishment where companion animals are bought, sold, exchanged, or offered for sale or exchange to the general public.

“Poultry” includes all domestic fowl and game birds raised in captivity.

“Primary enclosure” means any structure used to immediately restrict an animal or animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, cage, compartment, or hutch. For tethered animals, the term includes the shelter and the area within reach of the tether.

“Private animal shelter” means a facility operated for the purpose of finding permanent adoptive homes for animals that is used to house or contain animals and that is owned or operated by an incorporated, nonprofit, and nongovernmental entity, including a humane society, animal welfare organization, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or any other similar organization.

“Properly cleaned” means that carcasses, debris, food waste and excrement are removed from the primary enclosure with sufficient frequency to minimize the animals’ contact with the above-mentioned contaminants; the primary enclosure is sanitized with sufficient frequency to minimize odors and the hazards of disease; and the primary enclosure is cleaned so as to prevent the animals confined therein from being directly or indirectly sprayed with the stream of water, or directly or indirectly exposed to hazardous chemicals or disinfectants. 

“Properly lighted” means sufficient illumination to permit routine inspections, maintenance, cleaning, and housekeeping of the shelter, and observation of the animal; to provide regular diurnal lighting cycles of either natural or artificial light, uniformly diffused throughout the animal facilities; and to promote the well-being of the animals.

“Public animal shelter” means a facility operated by the commonwealth, or any locality, for the purpose of impounding or sheltering seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, unwanted, or surrendered animals or a facility operated for the same purpose under a contract with any locality.

“Releasing agency” means a public animal shelter or a private animal shelter, humane society, animal welfare organization, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or other similar entity or home-based rescue that releases companion animals for adoption.

“Research facility” means any place, laboratory, or institution licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture at which scientific tests, experiments, or investigations involving the use of living animals are carried out, conducted, or attempted.

“Running at large” means an animal off the real property of its owner or custodian and not under the owner’s or custodian’s immediate control.

“Sanitize” means to make physically clean and to remove and destroy, to a practical minimum, agents injurious to health.

“State Veterinarian” means the veterinarian employed by the Commissioner of Agriculture and Consumer Services as provided in Section 3.2-5901 of the Code of Virginia.

“Sterilize” or “sterilization” means a surgical or chemical procedure performed by a licensed veterinarian that renders a dog or cat permanently incapable of reproducing.

“Tether” means to restrain an animal by tying the animal to any object or structure, including but not limited to a house, tree, fence, post, garage, or shed, by any means, including but not limited to a chain, rope, cord, leash, pulley, trolley or running line. Tethering shall not include using a leash to walk an animal, the tying of an animal temporarily in emergency circumstances to prevent or minimize harm, or the tying of an animal temporarily for purposes of positioning, restraining, moving, or transporting it.

“Treasurer” includes the treasurer and his assistants of each county or city or other officer designated by law to collect taxes in such county or city.

“Treatment” or “adequate treatment” means the responsible handling or transportation of animals in the person’s ownership, custody or charge, appropriate for the age, species, condition, size, and type of the animal.

“Under control” means an animal secured by a leash or lead, or penned up or in the immediate vicinity of a responsible owner or custodian, obedient to that person’s command, and not engaged in destructive activity.

“Veterinary treatment” means treatment by or on the order of a duly licensed veterinarian.

“Weaned” means that an animal is capable of and physiologically accustomed to ingestion of solid food or food customary for the adult of the species, and has ingested such food, without nursing, for a period of at least five days. (Ord. 2019-37; Ord. 2018-20; Ord. 2017-12; Ord. 2010-14; Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-1).


6.05.020 Violations of title.

(1) Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this title shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor.

(2) Unless otherwise specifically provided, any owner convicted of a second violation of a provision of this title (which violation occurs within 12 months of the occurrence of the first violation) shall be fined not less than $75.00. Any owner convicted of a third or more subsequent violation (which violation occurs within 12 months of the occurrence of the first violation) shall be fined $150.00.

(3) Any owner convicted of a violation of this title shall, in addition to the fine imposed, be required to pay restitution to the city for any costs expended for investigation, handling, care, housing or medical care for the animal concerned.

(4) The foregoing notwithstanding, violations of SCC 6.05.060, 6.10.010, 6.10.020, 6.10.040, 6.10.070, 6.10.190, 6.10.200, and 6.10.240 are hereby designated as civil violations, with the civil penalty for such violation set as follows:

	Section	First Offense	Second Offense	Third and Subsequent Offense(s)

	6.05.060	$25.00	$75.00	$150.00

	6.10.010	$15.00*	$75.00*	 

	6.10.020	$25.00	$75.00	$150.00

	6.10.040	$25.00	$50.00	$150.00

	6.10.070	$15.00*	$75.00*	 

	6.10.190	$25.00	$75.00	$150.00

	6.10.200	$25.00	$75.00	$150.00

	6.10.240	$25.00	$75.00	$150.00

	*Violator must also obtain proper license and/or rabies vaccination certificate.

(5) Nothing herein shall preclude an action brought by the city for injunctive, declaratory, or other equitable relief. (Ord. 2011-04; Ord. 2008-03; Ord. 2004-27. Code 1985, § 6-2; Ord. 5-23-02).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100. 


6.05.030 Animal control officer generally.

(1) The position of animal control officer for the city is hereby created, and vested with the power to enforce Title 3.2 of the Code of Virginia, all ordinances enacted pursuant to that chapter or the City Charter, and all laws for the protection of domestic animals. The animal control officer and deputies, if any, shall be appointed as prescribed by law.

(2) The animal control officer shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this title, except as otherwise specifically provided, and to the extent that it shall be necessary for the enforcement of this title, the animal control officer shall have the powers of a police officer and, to that end, shall have authority to enter upon private property in the city to the extent necessary. (Ord. 2017-12; Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-3).


6.05.040 Keeping of swine or sheep.

Repealed by Ord. 2017-12. (Code 1964, § 6-1; Code 1985, § 6-4).


6.05.050 Removal of manure from stables.

(1) It shall be the duty of every person maintaining a stable of any character within the city to daily cause all manure therein to be gathered up and removed to a room or container provided for that purpose, which room or container shall be so screened or covered as to prevent access thereto by flies or insects of any kind. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any unnecessary collection of manure in such room or container and the same shall be removed at least once a week between April 1st and October 31st of each year.

(2) It shall be the duty of the health officer to inspect, or cause to be inspected, stables within the city and to report any violation of this section to the chief of police, and to include in his reports to the city council any instances of violation of this section which he may discover. (Code 1964, § 6-6; Code 1985, § 6-5).


6.05.060 Fowl or livestock running at large.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any fowl, poultry, or livestock of any description to stray to public property or private premises of another, and all poultry, fowl, and livestock shall be sufficiently housed or fenced by the owner or person exercising control over the same, so as to prevent the same from trespassing or straying.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any horse, mule, cow, calf, ox, swine, or goat owned or controlled by him to walk or to be driven along any paved sidewalk in the city or to turn loose or permit the same to go at large in any public street or alley of the city. (Code 1964, § 6-2; Code 1985, § 6-6).


6.05.070 Shooting at or killing birds or animals.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to shoot at or kill, by use of a firearm, any bird or animal.

(2) In case of a nuisance from birds or animals, they may be shot under the supervision of the police department, upon permission of the city manager or designee.

(3) The provisions of this section shall not prohibit authorized wildlife management activities or hunting, fishing or trapping as regulated under other titles of the Code of Virginia, including, but not limited to, Title 29.1, or to farming activities as provided under the Code of Virginia, ordinances adopted pursuant to the Code of Virginia, or regulations promulgated thereto. 

(4) Urban archery hunting with an arrow from a bow for the purposes of deer hunting within the city limits shall be permitted during the urban archery season, the early archery season, the late archery season, and the general firearms deer season, as designated in regulations set forth or authorization otherwise by the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries, under the following strict conditions:

(a) Any person discharging a bow shall, at all times, while engaged in such activity, have in his possession a copy of valid written permission from the landowner(s) or designee to discharge such a weapon on their property;

(b) Agreement shall have been made in writing, in advance as part of the permission, between the participant and landowner(s) in reference to field dress, with immediate disposition of deer carcasses in such a way that removes all aspects of the carcass from the land and away from any street, sidewalk, alley, roadway, or public land or place within city limits;

(c) All participants must strictly comply with all applicable provisions of the Virginia State Code and Virginia Hunting Regulations and the following conditions:

(i) All hunting shall be done internally to the property for which prior written permission has been granted.

(ii) A person shall neither discharge a bow from, over or across any city-owned property without prior written permission of the city manager or designee, or over or across any street, sidewalk, alley, roadway, or public land or public place within city limits or toward any building or dwelling in such a manner that an arrow may strike it nor shall a person discharge a bow over or across the private property of another without prior written permission.

(iii) No person shall hunt deer within the city limits by use of dog or dogs.

(d) Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor for each such offense. (Ord. 2011-25; Ord. 2011-24; Ord. 2008-03. Code 1964, § 6-4; Code 1985, § 6-7; Ord. 11-11-93).

Charter reference – Authority of council to prohibit abuse of animals, § 11(15).

State law reference – § 3.2-6544 of the Code of Virginia.


6.05.080 Care of animals by owner – Penalty.

(1) Each owner shall provide for each of his companion animals:

(a) Adequate feed;

(b) Adequate water;

(c) Adequate shelter that is properly cleaned;

(d) Adequate space in the primary enclosure for the particular type of animal depending upon its age, size, species, and weight;

(e) Adequate exercise;

(f) Adequate care, treatment, and transportation; and

(g) Veterinary care when needed or to prevent suffering or disease transmission.

The provisions of this section shall also apply to every animal shelter, pound, dealer, pet shop, exhibitor, kennel, groomer, and boarding establishment. This section shall not require that animals used as food for other animals be euthanized.

(2) The first violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. The second violation as to the same animal shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. Subsequent violations as to the same animal shall constitute Class 2 misdemeanors. Upon being found guilty of a third or subsequent violation related to the same animal, the court may also order the confiscation and the proper disposition of the animal. (Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-8; Ord. 5-23-02).


6.05.090 Tethering animals.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to tether any animal less than four months of age within the city of Staunton. Animals over four months of age are prohibited from being tethered between the hours of 10:00 p.m. through 6:00 a.m. local time.

(2) Whenever the police department or animal control officer receives a complaint as to a violation of this section, and the complaint is found to be warranted, the police department or animal control officer shall notify the person in writing to abate such violation within 30 days. If, after such written notice, the person fails to correct the violation, the police department or animal control officer shall take the necessary legal action to abate the violation by having the animal impounded or the person charged with a violation of this section, or both.

(3) The first violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. A subsequent violation shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. (Ord. 2010-14).


Chapter 6.10 DOGS AND CATS

Sections:

Article I. Generally

6.10.010    Rabies vaccination or inoculation of cats, dogs and ferrets.

6.10.020    Same – Certificate and tag.

6.10.030    Procedure in event of widespread rabies epizootic.

6.10.040    Prohibited in cemeteries.

6.10.050    Teasing or enticing dog to bite or otherwise take vicious action.

6.10.060    Owner or custodian of companion animal to clean bowel evacuation.

Article II. License

6.10.070    Required.

6.10.080    Application – Applicant to be city resident.

6.10.090    Tax imposed.

6.10.100    When tax due and payable.

6.10.110    Failure to pay tax when due.

6.10.120    Issuance.

6.10.130    Composition and contents.

6.10.140    Preservation and exhibition of license receipt – Tag to be worn – Exceptions.

6.10.150    Unlawful removal of tag.

6.10.160    Duplicate tags.

6.10.170    Record of tags issued.

6.10.180    Kennel license.

Article III. General Requirements and Prohibitions

6.10.190    Running at large.

6.10.191    Notification by persons finding companion animals – Penalty.

6.10.200    Leash required at certain places.

6.10.210    Impoundment generally – Public animal shelter designated.

6.10.220    Impoundment and disposition of animals.

6.10.230    Repealed.

6.10.240    Nuisance animals.

Article IV. Dangerous and Vicious Dogs

6.10.250    Repealed.

6.10.260    Repealed.

6.10.270    Repealed.

6.10.280    Repealed.

Article I. Generally


6.10.010 Rabies vaccination or inoculation of cats, dogs and ferrets.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, hold or harbor any cat, dog or ferret over the age of four months within the city limits unless such cat, dog or ferret shall have been vaccinated with a vaccine licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture as recommended in the current “Compendium of Animal Rabies Control,” prepared by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc. If, however, the requirement of vaccination or inoculation threatens the physical well-being of such cat, dog or ferret, the owner or custodian of such animal shall have a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian certifying the same; and the owner shall provide a copy of the signed veterinarian certificate to the city’s animal control officer. A copy of such certificate will be forwarded to the local health department officer within one working day of receipt by the animal control officer. The owner or custodian of a dog, cat or ferret shall furnish upon request of an animal control officer, deputy animal control officer, humane investigator, law enforcement officer or official of the local health department, the current certificate of vaccination for such animal.

(2) Any person transporting a cat, dog or ferret into the city from another jurisdiction shall immediately conform with the provisions of this section.

(3) The first violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. The second violation as to the same animal shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. Subsequent violations as to the same animal shall constitute Class 2 misdemeanors. Upon being found guilty of a third or subsequent violation related to the same animal, the court may also order the confiscation and the proper disposition of the animal. (Ord. 2008-03. Code 1964, §§ 6-20, 6-21; Code 1985, § 6-18).


6.10.020 Same – Certificate and tag.

(1) At the time of vaccination of a dog or cat, as required by SCC 6.10.010, a suitable and distinctive collar tag indicating such vaccination and a certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of the dog or cat.

(2) A certificate issued pursuant to this section shall be properly executed and signed by a licensed veterinarian and shall certify that the dog or cat has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of SCC 6.10.010. Such certificate shall show the date of vaccination, the vaccination tag number, a brief description of the dog or cat, its sex and breed, and the name of the owner thereof.

(3) The vaccination tag issued pursuant to this section shall be securely fastened to a substantial collar by the owner of the dog or cat and worn by such dog or cat; provided, however, that the owner may remove such collar and tag under the circumstances stated in SCC 6.10.140. (Code 1964, § 6-22; Code 1985, § 6-19).


6.10.030 Procedure in event of widespread rabies epizootic.

When, in the judgment of the health department, an emergency is deemed to exist in the city, or any section thereof, due to a widespread rabies epizootic, the health department shall, for the protection of the public health, immediately report such emergency to the city council for such action as to quarantines as is provided for by law. The city council may, in its discretion, declare a quarantine and restrict all dogs or cats to the owners’ premises or to the immediate custody of a responsible person, either or both, for the duration of such emergency as it is set forth. (Code 1964, § 6-28; Code 1985, § 6-20).


6.10.040 Prohibited in cemeteries.

It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit such dog to go, be or remain on any of the property of any cemetery in the city, whether such dog is leashed or otherwise under restraint or not, unless such cemetery is otherwise open for such use in accordance with authorized rules for the cemetery. (Ord. 2011-04; Code 1964, § 6-9; Code 1985, § 6-21).


6.10.050 Teasing or enticing dog to bite or otherwise take vicious action.

It shall be unlawful for any person to tease or entice a dog so as to cause such dog to bite, attack, charge or otherwise take vicious action against any person or other animal. (Code 1964, § 6-10; Code 1985, § 6-22).


6.10.060 Owner or custodian of companion animal to clean bowel evacuation.

If an owner, custodian, or any other person in charge of a companion animal, as defined in SCC 6.05.010, has knowledge that the animal has evacuated its bowels on property other than that of the owner, custodian, or person in charge, such person shall immediately clean up such evacuation and dispose of the same in some sanitary manner. If such evacuation occurs while said animal is under the control of the owner, custodian, or other person in charge, it shall be presumed that such knowledge exists. A violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00. (Code 1985, § 6-23; Ord. 3-13-97).

Article II. License


6.10.070 Required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog four months old or older in this city, unless such dog is licensed under the provisions of this article. (Code 1964, § 6-13; Code 1985, § 6-36).


6.10.080 Application – Applicant to be city resident.

(1) Any person may obtain a dog license by making oral or written application to the city treasurer, accompanied by the amount of the license tax and the certificate referred to in SCC 6.10.120. The city treasurer shall only have authority to license dogs of resident owners or custodians who reside within the limits of the city and may require information to this effect from any applicant.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false statement in or present any false evidence with an application submitted under this section, in order to secure a dog license to which such person is not entitled. (Code 1985, § 6-37).


6.10.090 Tax imposed.

(1) An annual license tax is hereby imposed on dogs required to be licensed under this article in the following amounts:

(a) Male or female sexed dog: $10.00.

(b) Neutered or spayed dog: $10.00, with a veterinarian’s certificate that the dog has been neutered or spayed.

(2) A multi-year license may be issued for an individual dog for a period equal to and concurrent with the effective period of the rabies inoculation or vaccination administered to such dog, provided in no event shall the multi-year license be valid for a period in excess of three years. When a multi-year license has been issued for an individual dog, the license tax shall next be due within 30 days of the expiration of the multi-year license. A multi-year tax shall be payable in an amount of $15.00 for a two-year license or $20.00 for a three-year license.

(3)  No license tax shall be levied under the provisions of this section on any dog that is trained and serves as a guide dog for a blind person or that is trained and serves as a hearing dog for a deaf or hearing impaired person. As used herein, the term “hearing dog” means a dog trained to alert its owner, by touch, to sounds of danger and sounds to which the owner should respond.

(4) In no event shall the treasurer pay any refund of the license tax imposed by this section.

(5) Any person giving false information in the procurement of a license pursuant to the provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. (Ord. 2008-20; Ord. 2008-03. Code 1964, § 6-22.1; Code 1985, § 6-38).


6.10.100 When tax due and payable.

The license tax on dogs shall be due and payable, unless otherwise specifically provided, not later than 30 days of the dog becoming in the possession of the owner or the dog becoming four months of age. (Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-39).


6.10.110 Failure to pay tax when due.

(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to fail to pay the tax imposed by the provisions of this article when the same is due. Payment of such tax subsequent to a summons to appear before a court for failure to do so within the time required shall not operate to relieve such owner from the penalties provided for such failure. 

(2) The first violation for failure to pay the tax when due shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. The second violation as to the same animal shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. Subsequent violations as to the same animal shall constitute Class 2 misdemeanors. Upon being found guilty of a third or subsequent violation related to the same animal, the court may also order the confiscation and the proper disposition of the animal. (Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-40).


6.10.120 Issuance.

Upon receipt of a proper application and the prescribed license tax, the city treasurer shall issue a dog license; provided, that no such license shall be issued for any dog, unless there is presented to the city treasurer a vaccination certificate issued for such animal pursuant to SCC 6.10.020. When the license has been issued, such certificate shall be so marked and returned to the owner. It shall be unlawful for any person to present such a certificate of vaccination for a dog or cat other than that for which it was issued. (Code 1964, §§ 6-23, 6-24; Code 1985, § 6-41).


6.10.130 Composition and contents.

Each license issued under this article shall consist of a license tax receipt and a metal tag. Such receipt shall have recorded thereon the amount of tax paid, the name and address of the owner or custodian of the animal, the date of payment, the year for which the license is issued, the serial number of the tag, and whether the license is for a male, female, or unsexed dog. Such metal tag shall be stamped or otherwise permanently marked to show the name of the city, the sex of the animal, and the calendar year for which issued and shall bear a serial number. (Code 1985, § 6-42).


6.10.140 Preservation and exhibition of license receipt – Tag to be worn – Exceptions.

(1) A dog license receipt shall be carefully preserved by the person to whom it is issued and exhibited promptly on request for inspection by the animal control officer or any other officer. License tags shall be securely fastened to a substantial collar by the owner or custodian and worn by such animal. The owner of the animal may remove the collar and license tag required by this section when the animal is engaged in lawful hunting; when the animal is competing in a show; when the animal has a skin condition which would be exacerbated by the wearing of a collar; when the animal is confined; or when the animal is under the immediate control of its owner.

(2) Any animal not wearing a collar bearing a license tag of the proper calendar year shall prima facie be deemed to be unlicensed, and in any proceedings under this article, the burden of proof of the fact that such animal has been licensed or is otherwise not required to bear a tag at the time shall be on the owner of the animal. (Ord. 2008-03. Code 1964, § 6-13; Code 1985, § 6-43).


6.10.150 Unlawful removal of tag.

It shall be unlawful for any person, except the owner or custodian, to remove a legally acquired license tag from a dog, without the permission of the owner or custodian. (Code 1985, § 6-44).


6.10.160 Duplicate tags.

If a license tag issued hereunder is lost, destroyed, or stolen, the owner or custodian shall at once apply to the city treasurer for a duplicate license tag, presenting the original license receipt. Upon affidavit of the owner or custodian before the city treasurer that the original license tag has been lost, destroyed, or stolen, the treasurer shall issue a duplicate license tag, which the owner or custodian shall immediately affix to the collar of the animal. The city treasurer shall endorse the number of the duplicate and the date issued on the face of the original license receipt. The fee for a duplicate tag shall be $1.00. (Code 1985, § 6-45).


6.10.170 Record of tags issued.

The city treasurer shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers of all dog license tags issued and shall make this record available to the public during the period for which such tags are valid. (Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-46).


6.10.180 Kennel license.

(1) In the event a person, firm or corporation operates a kennel, as defined in this article, in lieu of the licensing requirements set forth heretofore, there is hereby imposed a license tax on such kennel operation of $50.00.

(2) Application for a kennel license shall be made on or before January 1st and not later than January 31st of each year, or in the case of a new kennel opening during a calendar year, prior to opening a business for such kennel. A new business opened during a calendar year shall not be entitled to a license tax proration.

(3) The application made hereunder shall be accompanied by the certificate referred to in SCC 6.10.120, the provisions of which are applicable hereto.

(4) No operation of a kennel shall occur in the city unless and until a license has been issued, and no license shall be issued absent compliance with all applicable provisions of SCC Title 18. (Ord. 2008-20; Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-47; Ord. 3-13-97).

Article III. General Requirements and Prohibitions


6.10.190 Running at large. 

It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit such dog, whether it is licensed or unlicensed, to run at large within the city at any time. (Code 1964, § 6-16; Code 1985, § 6-53).


6.10.191 Notification by persons finding companion animals – Penalty.

(1) Any person who finds a companion animal and (a) provides care or safekeeping, or (b) retains a companion animal in such a manner as to control its activities shall, within 48 hours: 

(a) Make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner of the companion animal, if the owner can be ascertained from any tag, license, collar, tattoo, or other form of identification or markings, or if the owner of the animal is otherwise known to the person; and

(b) Notify the Shenandoah Valley Animal Services Center (SVASC) and provide to such SVASC contact information including at least a name and a contact telephone number, a description of the animal including information from any tag, license, collar, tattoo, or other identification or markings, and the location where the companion animal was found. 

(2) If a person finds a companion animal and (a) provides care or safekeeping, or (b) retains a companion animal in such a manner as to control its activities, the person shall comply with the provisions of SCC 6.05.080.

(3) Any person who violates this section may be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $50.00 per companion animal. (Ord. 2017-12; Ord. 2008-03). 


6.10.200 Leash required at certain places.

It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit such dog, whether it is licensed or not, to go, be, or remain on any property of the public school system or on any city park or playground or at any place where 10 or more people may be present, unless such dog is on a leash and under the direct control of some responsible person. (Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-54).


6.10.210 Impoundment generally – Public animal shelter designated.

Any animal observed running at large by the animal control officer, or any other officer or in violation of any provision of this title, may be impounded and confined at the city public animal shelter. The Shenandoah Valley Animal Services Center is the city-designated public animal shelter facility for the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-12; Ord. 2008-03. Code 1964, § 6-17; Code 1985, § 6-55).


6.10.220 Impoundment and disposition of animals.

(1) If an animal impounded under SCC 6.10.210 is wearing a tag indicating the name and address of its owner, or such name and address are otherwise known, the impounding officer shall give notice to the owner within 24 hours after seizure of such animal. If such animal has upon it a license tag, the impounding officer shall give notice to the person in whose name the license stands within 24 hours after obtaining such name. Notice of the impounding shall be in writing, by mail, postage prepaid, or posted on the front door of the address of the owner, if known, and shall be construed as having been given at the time of posting. If the animal impounded has no name, address or license tag upon it and the owner is not otherwise known, then no notice shall be necessary. 

(2) An animal confined pursuant to subsection (1) of this section shall be kept for a period of not less than five days, such period to commence on the day immediately following the day the animal is initially confined in the facility, unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner thereof, or, if the animal’s rightful owner has surrendered all property rights in such animal and has read and signed a statement as required by subsection (7) of this section, disposed of as provided in subsections (5)(b), (c), (d), and (e) of this section.

(3) Any feral dog or feral cat not bearing a collar, tag, tattoo, or other form of identification which, based on the written certification of a disinterested person, exhibits behavior that poses a risk of physical injury to any person confining the animal, may be euthanized after being kept for a period of not less than three days, at least one of which shall be a full business day, such period to commence on the day the animal is initially confined in the facility, unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner. The certification of the disinterested person shall be kept with the animal as required by Section 3.2-6557 of the Code of Virginia. For purposes of this subsection, a disinterested person shall not include a person releasing or reporting the animal to the facility.

(4) Within 10 days after the notice provided for above or, in case such notice is not required, within five days after seizure of the animal, the owner of an animal impounded under this section shall be entitled to possession of such animal by complying with the following:

(a) Presenting proof of ownership satisfactory to the city’s animal control officer.

(b) Complying with all applicable provisions of this article, including vaccination against rabies and licensing, if applicable.

(c) Paying the customary charges of the shelter for providing maintenance and shelter, not to exceed the actual expenses incurred thereby.

(d) Paying the civil penalty, as established in SCC 6.05.020(4), to the city, payment of which shall be deemed to be an admission of violation and waiver of a court hearing. Such payment shall be deemed to be in full satisfaction of such violation.

(5) If an animal confined pursuant to this section has not been claimed, it may be humanely destroyed or disposed of by:

(a) Sale or gift to a federal agency, state-supported institution, agency of the commonwealth of Virginia, agency of another state, or a licensed federal dealer having its principal place of business located within the commonwealth; provided, that such agency, institution, or dealer agrees to confine the animal for an additional period of not less than five days;

(b) Delivery to any humane society or animal shelter within the commonwealth;

(c) Adoption by any person who is a resident of the county or city for which the pound is operated and who will pay the required license fee, if any, on such animal;

(d) Adoption by a resident of an adjacent political subdivision of the commonwealth; or

(e) Delivery, for the purposes of adoption or euthanasia only, to a humane society or an animal shelter located in and lawfully operating under the laws of another state; provided, that such humane society or animal shelter: (i) maintains records which would comply with Section 3.2-6557 of the Code of Virginia; (ii) requires that adopted dogs and cats be sterilized; and (iii) has been approved by the State Veterinarian or his designee as a facility which maintains such records, requires adopted dogs and cats to be sterilized, and provides adequate care and euthanasia.

(6) The operator or custodian of the pound shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain if the animal has a collar, tag, license, or tattooed identification. If such identification is found on the animal, a reasonable effort shall be made to return the animal to its owner or place the animal for adoption before humanely destroying the animal. Such animal may not be disposed of by sale or gift to a federal agency, state-supported institution, agency of the commonwealth, agency of another state, or a licensed federal dealer. Such identified animal shall be held for five days more than the holding period prescribed in subsection (2) of this section unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner. If the rightful owner of any animal confined may be readily identified, the operator or custodian of the pound shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of the animal’s confinement within the next 24 hours following its confinement. At the expiration of the holding period required for such identified animal, the animal may be delivered to any resident who proposes to adopt it as a pet and who will pay the required license fee, if any, on the animal or to any humane society or animal shelter, or to a resident of an adjacent political subdivision of the commonwealth; however, no more than two animals or a family of animals shall be delivered during any 30-day period to any one such person.

(7) No provision herein shall prohibit the immediate destruction of a critically injured or critically ill animal for humane purposes. Any animal destroyed pursuant to the provisions of this title shall be euthanized by one of the methods prescribed or approved by the State Veterinarian. The pound shall be accessible to the public at reasonable hours during the week. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit confinement of other companion animals in such a pound or enclosure. Neither shall any provision in this section prohibit the immediate destruction, for humane purposes, of any animal not weaned, whether or not the animal is critically injured or critically ill. 

Nothing in this section shall prohibit the immediate destruction or disposal by the methods listed in subsections (5)(b) through (e) of this section of an animal that has been delivered voluntarily or released to a pound, animal shelter, animal control officer, or humane society by the animal’s rightful owner after the rightful owner has, in writing, surrendered all property rights in such animal and has read and signed a statement (a) certifying that no other person has a right of property in the animal and (b) acknowledging that the animal may be immediately euthanized or disposed by the methods listed in subsections (5)(b) through (e) of this section.

For purposes of this section, the term “animal” shall include agricultural animals; the term “rightful owner” shall mean a person with a right of property in the animal; and “humane society,” when referring to an organization without the commonwealth, means any nonprofit organization organized for the purpose of preventing cruelty to animals and promoting humane care and treatment or adoption of animals. (Ord. 2017-12; Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-56).


6.10.230 Prosecution of owner redeeming dog. 

Repealed by Ord. 2008-03. (Code 1985, § 6-57).


6.10.240 Nuisance animals.

(1) No person shall own or maintain a nuisance animal in the city.

(2) Nuisance Animal Defined. Any animal or animals that unreasonably annoy humans, endanger the life or health of other animals or persons, or substantially interfere with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The term “nuisance animal” shall mean and include, but is not limited to, any animal that:

(a) Is repeatedly found at large;

(b) Damages the property of anyone other than its owner;

(c) Molests or intimidates pedestrians or passersby;

(d) Chases vehicles;

(e) Excessively makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored;

(f) Causes fouling of the air by body odor and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored;

(g) Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored;

(h) Attacks other domestic animals; or

(i) Has been found, after notice to its owner and a hearing by a court of competent jurisdiction, to be a public nuisance animal by virtue of being a menace to the public health, welfare, or safety.

(3) Whenever a formal complaint has been received by the police department or animal control officer of such a nuisance and the complaint is found to be justified, the police department or animal control officer shall notify the owner of the animal of the complaint and instruct such owner to abate such nuisance. If, after such notice, the owner fails to properly control the animal that creates or constitutes the nuisance, the police department or animal control officer shall take the necessary legal action to abate the nuisance by having the animal impounded or the owner of the animal charged with a violation of this section, either or both.

(4) Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, whenever in the discretion of the police department or animal control officer a complaint hereunder is justified and an immediate threat to the public health, welfare, or safety is posed, the police department and/or animal control officer may have the animal impounded immediately and charges filed hereunder. In such case, the provisions of SCC 6.10.220 shall apply except that the animal shall remain impounded until disposition of the charges by the court.

(5) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a nuisance animal is impounded absent a complaint, the owner of such animal shall pay all charges of the impoundment, including charges for shelter and maintenance, not to exceed the actual expenses.

(6) Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit any person from bringing a charge of violation hereunder directly without proceeding through the police department or animal control officer. (Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-58; Ord. 5-23-02).

Article IV. Dangerous and Vicious Dogs


6.10.250 Purpose.

Repealed by Ord. 2008-03. (Code 1985, § 6-70).


6.10.260 Definitions.

Repealed by Ord. 2008-03. (Ord. 2004-24. Code 1985, § 6-71).


6.10.270 Procedure.

Repealed by Ord. 2008-03. (Code 1985, § 6-72; Ord. 2-26-98).


6.10.280 Determination by animal control officer.

Repealed by Ord. 2008-03. (Code 1985, § 6-73; Ord. 2-26-98).


Chapter 6.15 WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS

Sections:

6.15.010    Definitions.

6.15.020    Display or exhibition.

6.15.030    Keeping as a pet.

6.15.040    Notice required at place of sale.

6.15.050    Temporary permit for keeping certain wild animals.

6.15.060    Release of certain wild animals kept under temporary permit.

6.15.070    Penalty.

6.15.080    Enforcement.

6.15.090    Effective date.


6.15.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:

(1) “Animal” shall include any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, not to include birds.

(2) “Pet” shall mean any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.

(3) “Vicious animal” shall mean any animal that has (a) killed a person; (b) inflicted serious injury to a person, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or (c) in the case of a dog, continued to exhibit the behavior which resulted in a previous finding by a court that it is a “dangerous dog,” provided the owner or custodian of said dog has been given notice of that finding.

(4) “Wild or exotic animal” shall mean any live monkey (nonhuman primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm-blooded animal, poisonous snake or tarantula which can normally be found in the wild state or any other member of crocodilian, including, but not limited to, alligators, crocodiles, caimans, and gavials. Ferrets, guinea pigs, nonpoisonous snakes, rabbits, and laboratory rats which have been bred in captivity and which have never known the wild shall be excluded from this definition. (Code 1985, § 6-80).


6.15.020 Display or exhibition.

No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild, exotic or vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, circuses, or veterinary clinics which are properly licensed by the federal government or commonwealth of Virginia. In no case, however, shall such wild or exotic animals be exhibited or displayed in such a manner that persons other than their handlers can pet, fondle or otherwise come in direct physical contact with such animals. (Code 1985, § 6-81).


6.15.030 Keeping as a pet.

No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild, exotic, or vicious animal as a pet. (Code 1985, § 6-82).


6.15.040 Notice required at place of sale.

Any person who offers for sale a wild or exotic animal as defined by SCC 6.15.010 shall post conspicuously at the place of sale or display the following notice:

No person may lawfully keep or permit to be kept in the city of Staunton any live monkey (nonhuman primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or any other warm-blooded animal, poisonous snake or tarantula, crocodile or alligator, which can normally be found in the wild state or any other member of the crocodilian, including but not limited to alligators, crocodiles, caimans, and gavials.

(Code 1985, § 6-83).


6.15.050 Temporary permit for keeping certain wild animals.

The animal control officer may issue a temporary permit for the keeping, care, and protection of injured wild animals or infant wild animals native to this area which have been deemed to be incapable of surviving without assistance. (Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-84).


6.15.060 Release of certain wild animals kept under temporary permit.

The animal control officer shall have the power to release or order the release of any wild animal kept under temporary permit which is deemed capable of survival. (Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-85).


6.15.070 Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and the penalty shall be as provided by SCC 1.05.100. Each day a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1985, § 6-86).


6.15.080 Enforcement.

The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the animal control officer, or in the absence of the animal control officer, by the department of police for the city of Staunton. (Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-87).


6.15.090 Effective date.

(1) Any person who keeps a wild, exotic, or vicious animal in contravention of this chapter may dispose of the animal by removal of the animal from the city, by giving or selling the animal to a zoological park.

(2) This chapter shall be effective immediately; provided, that any person currently keeping any wild or exotic animals in the city of Staunton shall dispose of same within five years of date of adoption; and provided further, that such wild animals shall be registered with the animal control officer within 60 days from the date of adoption.

(3) The provisions of this chapter regarding the keeping of skunks which have been bred and raised in captivity shall be effective immediately; provided, that any person currently keeping any pet skunk in the city of Staunton may keep the skunk for the rest of its natural life; and provided further, that such animal shall be registered with the animal control officer within 60 days from the date of adoption of this subsection. (Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-88).


Chapter 6.20 SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sections:

6.20.010    Seizure and impoundment – Disposition of animal – Disposition of proceeds upon sale – Posting of bond for boarding of animals.

6.20.020    Dogs and cats deemed personal property – Rights relating thereto.

6.20.030    Intentional interference with a guide or leader dog.

6.20.040    Jurisdiction of general district courts – Right of appeal.

6.20.241    Limitations on number of dogs kept per dwelling unit.


6.20.010 Seizure and impoundment – Disposition of animal – Disposition of proceeds upon sale – Posting of bond for boarding of animals.

(1) The animal control officer, or any police officer, is hereby authorized to seize and impound any animal suspected of:

(a) Suffering a direct or immediate threat to its life, safety or health which the owner or custodian has failed or refused to remedy;

(b) Being abandoned or at large;

(c) Being cruelly treated;

(d) Being unlicensed;

(e) Being used for gaming or other illegal activity;

(f) Being a nuisance animal in violation of SCC 6.10.240; or

(g) A violation of any other state or federal law or regulation concerning animals.

(2) Any animal seized pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be impounded at the city-designated facility. Animals requiring specialized veterinary or other care may be impounded at another city-designated facility. Any expense incurred in seizure or impoundment including, but not limited to, boarding, veterinary care, or license fee shall be the responsibility of the owner or custodian of the animal and become a lien on the animal impounded and must be discharged before the animal is released from the facility. The city shall not be required to hold the seized animal for a period longer than 30 days from the date of the seizure unless a bond has been posted. In the event no bond has been posted, at the expiration of the 30-day period, the animal may be disposed of.

(3) The impoundment of any animal pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be in addition to any other remedy, action, or process available for any violation of this chapter.

(4) Written notice of the impoundment of any animal seized will be given to the identifiable owner or custodian of the animal at the time of seizure. If the owner or custodian is not on the premises from which the animal is seized, notice shall be posted upon the door or other structure in plain view. If such owner or custodian cannot be located, written notice shall be given to any family member or person 16 years old or older residing at the owner’s or custodian’s last known address; by posting of the notice at the owner’s or custodian’s last known address or at the site of the seizure; or by delivery or facsimile to the owner’s or custodian’s last known place of employment. If the owner or custodian cannot be located or identified the animal control officer shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction wherein such animal is seized notice of the hearing at least one time prior to the hearing and shall further cause notice of the hearing to be posted at least five days prior to the hearing at the place provided for public notices at the city hall or courthouse wherein such hearing shall be held.

(a) The written notice of the seizure shall contain the following information:

(i) The time, date and place of the hearing;

(ii) Basic identification of the animal seized;

(iii) Notice of the owner’s or custodian’s financial obligation for the board, necessary medical care, and costs incident to seizure of the animal and that a lien may be placed against the owner or custodian for such costs; and

(iv) Notice of the owner’s right to surrender all property rights to the seized animal and thereby avoid incurring further costs after such surrender.

(b) A seizure hearing shall be conducted by the animal control officer not more than 10 business days from the date of the seizure of the animal. The hearing shall be to determine whether the animal has been abandoned, has been cruelly treated, or has not been provided adequate care. The owner or the custodian shall be permitted to attend the hearing to present information concerning the violation.

(c) The animal control officer may determine within five working days prior to the seizure hearing that the seized animal shall be returned to the owner, custodian or other person under the conditions set by the animal control officer for one of the following reasons:

(i) The owner or custodian has provided evidence to the animal control officer that such owner or custodian can provide adequate care, for the seized animal or any number of seized animals pending the court hearing on any violation related to the animal in a manner which will ensure public safety. Animals will be returned to their owner or custodian upon payment of the boarding, medical care, and license fees incurred during seizure and impoundment by the city and upon bail set for the safe keeping of the animal pending the trial of the criminal matters. Any animal returned pursuant to this subsection will be required to be kept in the city limits and available for inspection by the animal control officer until any criminal matter has concluded; or

(ii) Another interested party has provided adequate evidence of ownership of the animal and can provide adequate care, for the animal in a manner which will ensure public safety; or

(iii) A private veterinarian or kennel facility will continuously board the animal at the owner’s or custodian’s expense pending the conclusion of any criminal matters. Such veterinarian must be appropriately licensed to board animals and must provide written agreement to board such animal under the conditions set by the court. Seized animals will be released to such a private veterinarian or kennel facility upon payment by the owner or custodian of all boarding, medical care, license and related seizure expenses incurred by the city and arrangement by the owner or custodian to have such animal transported to the boarder. Failure to pay the private veterinarian or kennel facility shall constitute a violation of the conditions of the pre-trial release of the animal by the court. All expenses due to the boarder shall be a private matter between the owner or custodian and the boarder. The city shall not be held responsible for any such costs.

(d) The procedure for appeal and trial shall be the same as provided by law for misdemeanors. Trial by jury shall be as provided in Article 4 (Section 19.2-260 et seq.) of Chapter 15 of Title 19.2 of the Code of Virginia. The commonwealth shall be required to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt.

(i) The humane investigator, law enforcement official, or animal control officer shall provide for such animal until the court has concluded the hearing. If the court determines that the animal has been neither abandoned, cruelly treated, nor deprived of adequate care, the animal shall be returned to the owner. If the court determines that the animal has been abandoned, cruelly treated, or deprived of adequate care, then the court shall order that the animal be:

(A) Sold by a local governing body;

(B) Humanely destroyed, or disposed of by sale or gift to a federal agency, state-supported institution, agency of the commonwealth, agency of another state, or a licensed federal dealer having its principal place of business located within the commonwealth; or

(C) Delivered to any local humane society or shelter, or to any person who is a resident of the county or city where the animal is seized, or an adjacent county or city in the commonwealth and who will pay the required license fee, if any, on such animal; or

(D) Delivered to the person with a right of property in the animal as provided in subsection (4)(d)(ii) of this section.

(ii) In no case shall the owner be allowed to purchase, adopt, or otherwise obtain the animal if the court determines that the animal has been abandoned, cruelly treated, or deprived of adequate care; however, the court shall direct that the animal be delivered to the person with the right of property in the animal, upon his request, if the court finds that the abandonment, cruel treatment, or deprivation of adequate care is not attributable to the actions or inactions of such person.

(iii) The court shall order the owner of any animal determined to have been abandoned, cruelly treated, or deprived of adequate care to pay all reasonable expenses incurred in caring and providing for such animal from the time the animal is seized until such time that the animal is disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this section, to the provider of such care.

(iv) The court may prohibit the possession or ownership of other companion animals by the owner of any companion animal found to have been abandoned, cruelly treated, or deprived of adequate care. In making a determination to prohibit the possession or ownership of companion animals, the court may take into consideration the owner’s past record of convictions under this title or other laws prohibiting cruelty to animals or pertaining to the care and treatment of animals and the owner’s mental and physical condition. 

(v) If the court finds that an agricultural animal has been abandoned or cruelly treated, the court may prohibit the possession or ownership of any other agricultural animal by the owner of the agricultural animal if the owner has exhibited a pattern of abandoning or cruelly treating agricultural animals, as evidenced by previous convictions of violating Section 3.2-6504 or 3.2-6570 of the Code of Virginia. In making a determination to prohibit the possession or ownership of agricultural animals, the court may take into consideration the owner’s mental and physical condition.

(vi) Any person who is prohibited from owning or possessing animals pursuant to subsections (4)(d)(iv) or (v) of this section may petition the court to repeal the prohibition after two years have elapsed from the date of entry of the court’s order. The court may, in its discretion, repeal the prohibition if the person can prove to the satisfaction of the court that the cause for the prohibition has ceased to exist.

(vii) When a sale occurs, the proceeds shall first be applied to the costs of the sale, then next to the unreimbursed expenses for the care and provision of the animal, and the remaining proceeds, if any, shall be paid over to the owner of the animal. If the owner of the animal cannot be found, the proceeds remaining shall be paid into the literary fund of the state treasury.

(viii) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the humane destruction of a critically injured or ill animal for humane purposes by the impounding humane investigator, law enforcement official, animal control officer, or licensed veterinarian.

(ix) The provisions of this section which address whether an animal has been provided with or deprived of adequate care shall apply only with respect to companion animals. 

(e) Any owner or custodian of an animal seized and impounded by the animal control officer for violations of this chapter shall post a bond, with cash or corporate surety, for the cost of impoundment, boarding and medical costs of any animal which is held for longer than 10 days after impoundment. The bond shall be for a period of 30 days.

(i) Such bond or security shall not prevent the animal control officer from disposing of such animal at the end of the 30-day period covered by the bond or security unless the person claiming an interest posts an additional bond, with cash or corporate surety, with the city treasurer to secure payment of reasonable expenses for additional 30-day periods and does so prior to the expiration of the previous 30-day period.

(ii) The amount of the bond shall be determined by the animal control officer based on the current rate for board and medical condition of the animal as determined by the animal control officer.

(iii) At the conclusion of the case, the bond shall be forfeited to the city unless there is a finding that the owner is able to adequately provide for such animal and is a fit person to own the animal. If the animal is returned to the owner or another person despite a violation of this chapter, the person posting the bond will be entitled to receive the bond less the incurred costs of boarding, medical care and impoundment of the animal.

(iv) If a cash bond is paid to the city treasurer and a judicial determination is made that the owner or custodian was not in violation of this chapter and also that the owner or custodian can adequately provide for such animal and is a fit person to own the animal, the person posting the cash bond shall be entitled to a refund of the cash bond from the treasurer. If the court finds that the animal may be released to the owner or another person despite any violation of this chapter, the person posting the bond will be entitled to a return of the cash bond less the incurred costs of boarding, medical care and impoundment. (Ord. 2017-12; Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-90).


6.20.020 Dogs and cats deemed personal property – Rights relating thereto.

(1) All dogs and cats shall be deemed personal property and may be the subject of larceny and malicious or unlawful trespass. Owners may maintain any action for the killing of any such animals, or injury thereto, or unlawful detention or use thereof as in the case of other personal property. The owner of any dog or cat which is injured or killed contrary to the provisions of this title by any person shall be entitled to recover the value thereof or the damage done thereto in an appropriate action at law from such person. 

(2) An animal control officer or other officer finding a stolen dog or cat, or a dog or cat held or detained contrary to law, shall have authority to seize and hold such animal pending action before a general district court or other court. If no such action is instituted within seven days, the animal control officer or other officer shall deliver the dog or cat to its owner.

(3) The presence of a dog or cat on the premises of a person other than its legal owner shall raise no presumption of theft against the owner, and the animal control officer may take such animal in charge and notify its legal owner to remove it. The legal owner of the animal shall pay a reasonable charge as the local governing body by ordinance shall establish for the keep of such animal while in the possession of the animal control officer. (Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-91).


6.20.030 Intentional interference with a guide or leader dog.

(1) It is unlawful for a person to willfully and maliciously impede or interfere with the duties performed by a dog if the person knows or has reason to believe the dog is a guide or leader dog. Violation of this subsection is a Class 3 misdemeanor. 

(2) It is unlawful for a person to willfully and maliciously assault or injure a dog if the person knows or has reason to believe the dog is a guide or leader dog. Violation of this subsection is a Class 2 misdemeanor.

(3) Any person who commits an offense under this section shall be liable for actual damages to any person aggrieved thereby, including damages due to injury to the guide or leader dog and, if necessary, compensation for the loss and replacement of the dog.

(4) “Guide or leader dog” means a dog that serves as a dog guide for a blind person as defined in Section 51.5-60 of the Code of Virginia, or for a person with visual disability; serves as a listener for a deaf or hard-of-hearing person as defined in Section 51.5-111 of the Code of Virginia; or provides support or assistance for a physically disabled or handicapped person. (Ord. 2017-12. Code 1985, § 6-92).


6.20.040 Jurisdiction of general district courts – Right of appeal.

Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any general district court in cities or counties wherein the offense is committed, or the offender or owner may be found. Every such offender shall have the right of appeal to the appropriate circuit court. (Code 1985, § 6-93; Ord. 1-23-97).


6.20.241 Limitations on number of dogs kept per dwelling unit.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor more than four dogs over four months of age in or on the premises of any dwelling unit or on an unimproved lot within the city unless authorized by permit issued by the animal control officer. Such permit may be issued only if the animal control officer finds that exceptional circumstances exist for such period of time specified in the permit. 

(2) Dogs permitted in subsection (1) of this section shall be allowed only when there is compliance with the current city zoning code (SCC 18.110.030) to allow only two shelters in the yard of each dwelling to house not more than two adult dogs and their dependents. 

(3) The first violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. The second violation shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. Subsequent violations shall constitute Class 2 misdemeanors. Upon being found guilty of a third or subsequent violation related to the same animal, the court may also order the confiscation and the proper disposition of the animal. (Ord. 2008-03). 


Chapter 6.25 HYBRID CANINES

Sections:

6.25.010    Definitions.

6.25.020    General.

6.25.030    Permit required.

6.25.040    Transfer of animal.

6.25.050    Control by owner.

6.25.060    Suspension – Violation – Inspection.

6.25.070    Treasurer notification to animal control officer.


6.25.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

(1) “Adequate confinement” means that, while on the property of its owner and not under the direct supervision and control of the owner or custodian, a hybrid canine shall be confined in a humane manner in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height and design to (a) prevent the animal’s escape; or if the hybrid canine is determined to be a dangerous dog pursuant to Section 3.2-6540 of the Code of Virginia, the structure shall prevent direct contact with any person or animal not authorized by the owner to be in direct contact with the hybrid canine; and (b) provide a minimum of 100 square feet of floor space for each adult animal. Tethering of a hybrid canine not under the direct supervision and control of the owner or custodian shall not be considered adequate confinement.

(2) “Hybrid canine” means any animal that is or can be demonstrated to be a hybrid of the domestic dog and any other species of the Canidae family; that at any time has been permitted, registered, licensed, or advertised as such; or that at any time has been described, represented, or reported as such by its owner to a licensed veterinarian, law enforcement officer, animal control officer, humane investigator, official of the Department of Health, or State Veterinarian’s representative.

(3) “Responsible ownership” means the ownership and humane care of a hybrid canine in such a manner as to comply with all laws and ordinances regarding hybrid canines and prevent endangerment by the animal to public health and safety. (Ord. 2018-21; Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-100).


6.25.020 General.

Pursuant to Section 3.2-6582 et seq. of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, no person, firm, corporation or other entity shall own, possess, breed, sell, trade, transfer, purchase, import or release hybrid canines within the city except as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-12; Code 1985, § 6-101).


6.25.030 Permit required.

(1) No person shall own a hybrid canine without obtaining a permit. Only persons residing within the boundary limits of the city shall be eligible to receive a permit for a hybrid canine except as otherwise provided in this section. Permits shall be granted for a period of 12 months and shall be renewed annually. The owner shall apply for a separate permit for each hybrid canine, except as provided for litters of hybrid canines in subsection (4) of this section. Annual permits shall not be issued for more than two hybrid canines six months of age or older to any one person or residence.

(2) A nonrefundable annual permit fee in the amount of $50.00 for each hybrid canine will be collected from the owner by the treasurer or other officer charged with issuing the permits. A nonrefundable fee of $20.00 will be collected for issuance of each temporary permit. A fee of $10.00 will be collected for duplication of an existing permit.

(3) The treasurer, or agent, shall issue an identification tag for the hybrid canine which shall be stamped or otherwise permanently marked to identify the animal as a hybrid canine, show the jurisdiction issuing the tag, the calendar year for which issued, and bear a serial number. The serial number shall be listed on the permit issued for the hybrid canine. The identification tag shall be securely fastened to a substantial collar by the owner or custodian and worn by such hybrid canine at all times. Upon affidavit of the owner or custodian before the treasurer, or agent, that the original identification tag has been lost, destroyed, or stolen, the treasurer shall issue a duplicate identification tag which the owner or custodian shall immediately affix to the collar of the hybrid canine. The treasurer, or agent, shall endorse the number of the duplicate and the date issued on the face of the original license receipt.

(4) Any person possessing a hybrid canine under the age of six months as of August 13, 1997, shall be required to obtain a temporary permit for each such hybrid canine or litter. The permit shall include the information required in subsection (8) of this section and shall be in effect until 30 days after the animal reaches six months of age, at which time an annual permit shall be required for each animal that remains in the city in accordance with this section.

(5) The hybrid canine permit shall be carefully preserved by the owner and exhibited promptly upon the request of inspection by any animal control officer, law enforcement officer, official of the Department of Health, humane investigator, or a State Veterinarian’s representative.

(6) It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish false information for the purpose of obtaining a permit pursuant to this section.

(7) As a condition of maintaining a permit under this chapter, the permit holder shall agree to allow the animal control officer, or his agent, to inspect at any reasonable time, any premises where the hybrid canine is kept to ensure compliance with this chapter.

(8) Prior to approval of an application for a hybrid canine permit, the animal control officer shall inspect the facility where the hybrid canine will be confined to determine compliance with this chapter and state law. A hybrid canine permit or temporary permit shall have attached and shall include, but not be limited to:

(a) Date of permit and date of expiration;

(b) Name, address, age, and phone number of the owner of the hybrid or litter of hybrids;

(c) Description, sex, age, color, height, length, and any identifying marks or numbers unique to the hybrid canine;

(d) Location where the hybrid canine or hybrid canine litter will be kept;

(e) Proof that the owner has coverage by a general liability insurance policy protecting the general public from any and all damages or injuries caused by the hybrid canine in their charge in an amount not less than $50,000 per incident;

(f) A statement of all vaccinations administered to the hybrid canine and the name and the address of the licensed veterinarian administering the vaccinations;

(g) The number of the individual hybrid canines owned by the permittee; and

(h) The signature of the owner. (Ord. 2017-12; Ord. 2008-03. Code 1985, § 6-102).


6.25.040 Transfer of animal.

(1) If the owner cannot keep the hybrid canine, he shall:

(a) Transfer it to another hybrid canine permittee, residing within the city, providing that the owner so notifies the city prior to transfer of ownership and the transfer is approved by the city after said notification that the new owner is in compliance with this chapter and records maintained by the city for the hybrid canine are amended to indicate the new owner and location of the hybrid;

(b) Transfer the hybrid canine to a person who resides outside the jurisdiction of the city, where the ownership of hybrid canines is legal; or

(c) Cause the hybrid canine to be humanely euthanized by a veterinarian. If the hybrid canine is transferred outside of the city, or euthanized, the original owner of the hybrid canine must notify the city within 10 days.

(2) The hybrid canine shall be adequately confined as that term is defined herein above. (Code 1985, § 6-103).


6.25.050 Control by owner.

(1) Hybrid canines when not on the owner’s property shall be:

(a) Securely kept on a leash;

(b) Properly identified with the tag issued pursuant to SCC 6.25.030(3); and

(c) Under the direct supervision and control of the owner.

(2) The owner of a hybrid canine shall immediately notify the animal control officer if the hybrid canine is:

(a) Loose or not confined;

(b) Bites or attacks a person or another animal;

(c) Dies; or

(d) Has been moved to a different location. (Code 1985, § 6-104).


6.25.060 Suspension – Violation – Inspection.

(1) The city may deny, suspend, or revoke a permit if the applicant or permittee fails or refuses to obtain or renew any required permit for any hybrid canine or violates the provision of this chapter or any other law pertaining to the responsible ownership of the hybrid canine. In addition, the violator may be required by the city to surrender the hybrid canine for euthanasia in accordance with this chapter.

(2) The animal control officer shall inspect annually each hybrid canine pen to ensure that the hybrid canine cannot escape and that the pen meets the definition of adequate confinement as defined herein.

(3) A violation of this chapter shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor for the first violation and a Class 1 misdemeanor for a second or subsequent violation. The city may require a violator to surrender the hybrid canine for euthanasia. (Code 1985, § 6-105).


6.25.070 Treasurer notification to animal control officer.

Whenever an application is made to the treasurer of the city for a hybrid canine permit, the treasurer shall notify the animal control officer who shall inspect the facility where the hybrid canine will be confined and advise the treasurer as to the applicant’s compliance or not with the terms of this chapter. (Code 1985, § 6-106; Ord. 2-26-98).

 


Title 7            

(Reserved)

 


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.05    Advertising

8.10    Alarm Systems

8.15    Fire Warning Systems

8.20    Regulation of Open Burning

8.25    Noise

8.30    Solid Waste

8.35    Discharge of Fireworks


Chapter 8.05 ADVERTISING*

Sections:

8.05.010    Violations of chapter.

8.05.020    Suspending or hanging advertisements over streets or other public property – Posting advertisements on utility poles – Etc.

8.05.030    Deposit of advertisements on streets or other public property.

8.05.040    Attaching advertisements to private property.

8.05.050    Distribution of handbills and other advertisements.

*Cross references – Permit for use of loud speakers on vehicles or in mercantile establishments, SCC 8.25.130; sound trucks, SCC 8.25.200 et seq.; stopping vehicles on street for purpose of advertising, SCC 10.25.020; bond as prerequisite to issuance of sign permit, SCC 15.10.100; fees for sign permits, SCC 15.10.150.


8.05.010 Violations of chapter.

Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. (Code 1985, § 3-1).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


8.05.020 Suspending or hanging advertisements over streets or other public property – Posting advertisements on utility poles – Etc.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to suspend or hang any advertisement over the streets, alleys or other public places or property in the city, or to nail, tack, paste, paint, chalk, write or in any manner attach, or cause to be attached, any notice, advertisement, banner, streamer, poster or handbill to any telegraph, telephone, electric light or other pole, or to any wires thereto attached, on, over or upon the streets, alleys, parks, bridges, public places or public property in the city, without first having obtained the consent thereto of the city council. It shall further be unlawful for any person to nail, tack, paste, paint, chalk, write or in any manner attach, or cause to be attached, any notice, poster, handbill, advertisement, painting or writing on, over or upon any street, sidewalk, bridge or any other public place or public property in the city, without first having obtained the consent thereto of the city council.

(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent any person from having signs in accordance with the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the city. (Code 1964, § 16-2; Code 1985, § 3-2).


8.05.030 Deposit of advertisements on streets or other public property.

It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, leave or deposit any advertisement, poster or handbill on the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public property of the city. A sandwich board sign, as defined in SCC 18.10.200, however, may be placed temporarily in parts of the public right-of-way median, to be specifically identified by the city manager or designee, on the following conditions in connection with the city’s promotion of city tourism business:

(1) The sandwich board sign may be no larger than four feet in height and two feet in width;

(2) The locations shall solely be at the intersections of Thornrose Avenue and Churchville Avenue; Richmond Road and Greenville Avenue; and Richmond Road and Statler Boulevard;

(3) The sandwich board sign may be placed no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and must be removed no later than 12:00 midnight, local time, on the same day of the event; and

(4) The sandwich board sign shall be in connection with and be so placed for not more than 20 events offered as part of a specific series to the public as musical or sports entertainment opportunities held during the period of May through August on the property that is a part of the city’s Gypsy Hill Park complex, including Moxie Stadium. (Ord. 2013-06. Code 1964, § 16-3; Code 1985, § 3-3).


8.05.040 Attaching advertisements to private property.

It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an officer of the law in his official capacity, to attach, or cause to be attached, any sign, advertisement, poster or handbill to any house, wall, fence, automobile or other private property, without first having obtained the permission of the owner. (Code 1964, § 16-3; Code 1985, § 3-4).


8.05.050 Distribution of handbills and other advertisements.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, or cause to be distributed, any advertisement, poster or handbill in any automobile or vehicle or on any other private property within the city.

(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent personal presentation of a handbill to an individual or to a householder who is given the opportunity to decline to receive it. (Code 1964, § 16-3; Code 1985, § 3-5).


Chapter 8.10 ALARM SYSTEMS*

Sections:

8.10.010    Violations of chapter.

8.10.020    Definitions – Classifications of systems.

8.10.030    Monitoring devices for police and fire direct connection systems.

8.10.040    Telephone dialer systems prohibited – Exceptions.

8.10.050    Response to alarms – Waiver of liability.

8.10.060    Discontinuance or disconnection of city’s alarm service generally.

8.10.070    False alarms and malfunctions.

8.10.080    Service complaints – Appeals concerning operation or procedure of system.

*Cross reference – Required approval for fire warning systems and installation thereof, SCC 8.15.010. 


8.10.010 Violations of chapter.

Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. (Code 1985, § 4-1).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


8.10.020 Definitions – Classifications of systems.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

“Alarm system” means an assembly of equipment and devices intended, arranged or designed to detect and signal the presence or occurrence of a peril or hazard for attention and to which police, firefighters, rescue, or other public safety or emergency personnel are expected to respond in emergency situations. Such system may be installed, maintained, altered or serviced by an alarm company operator in both commercial and residential premises. For purposes of this chapter, “alarm system” also refers to all systems which include notifications, alarm bells, horns, sirens and lights, which are transmitted, available, or visible beyond the lot lines of the premises. Alarm systems are further classified in terms of terminating signal location or device as follows:

(1) Local Alarms. An alarm system installed in a vehicle or upon a premises location, which system, when activated, sounds an audible or visual signal only at the location involved. Such local alarm systems must be installed, operated, monitored and maintained in such a manner as to avoid violation of any provision of this code.

(2) Direct Connection, Central Service. An alarm system installed in a premises location, which system, when activated, sends a signal to a central service terminal device operated by a private or commercial enterprise which, in turn, telephonically contacts appropriate emergency services.

(3) Direct Connection, Police and Fire. An alarm system installed in a premises location, which system, when activated, sends a signal to the communications center, where, in turn and subject to the availability of resources, a police or fire unit is normally dispatched to investigate the cause for alarm activation.

(4) Telephone Dialer Alarm. An alarm device or system consisting of any mechanical, electrical or radio-electronic device or system so made or designed as to automatically actuate or call any city police or fire department telephone or radio circuit and use a pretaped or programmed verbal message or signal, which operates through overhead or underground wires or by radio frequencies and which is set or programmed to directly dial, actuate, call or in any other manner make direct contact with any telephone line or radio circuit of the police department or fire department.

“Communications center” means the city’s police and fire communications center. (Ord. 2015-15. Ord. 1-27-82, §§ 21-24, 21-26; Code 1985, § 4-2).


8.10.030 Monitoring devices for police and fire direct connection systems.

All direct connection type private alarms terminating in the police and fire communications center must use interfacing equipment, approved by the chief of police and installed at service company expense, which connects the subscriber alarm system to alarm monitor devices installed in the communications center. These alarm monitor devices may be provided by alarm service companies, which may charge installation fees and periodic maintenance fees to all subscribers for this service. (Ord. 1-27-82, § 21-25; Code 1985, § 4-3).


8.10.040 Telephone dialer systems prohibited – Exceptions.

(1) Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to install, sell, lease or use, or cause or allow to be installed, sold, leased or used, within the corporate limits of the city, any police or fire telephone dial alarm device or system.

(2) Alarm service companies may have installed in the communications center a telephone line and unlisted telephone number which they may make available on a subscription basis for those telephone dialer alarm users who wish to avail themselves of this service.

(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the installation, sale, lease or use of any alarm device, so long as such device is not designed or programmed to dial, actuate, call or in any other manner directly contact, by telephone or radio circuit, the police department or fire department on any telephone line or radio circuit assigned to such department. (Ord. 1-27-82, § 21-26; Code 1985, § 4-4).


8.10.050 Response to alarms – Waiver of liability.

(1) Police and fire alarm service response will be in accordance with response policies of the police and fire departments.

(2) The city assumes no responsibility or obligation as to any omission or commission resulting from an alarm termination in the communications center. The city does not, cannot and will not guarantee that an alarm signal transmitted to the communications center will be received and responded to, either administratively or operationally, by dispatcher personnel or by police or fire personnel under dispatcher assignment or control. It is recognized that there may be signal failure or interruption or malfunction beyond the immediate control of the city. It is further recognized that there may be emergencies underway carrying a higher priority or that police or other response units may not be immediately available for response to an alarm. The city will not assume responsibility or liability for losses, damages or injuries to persons or property, alleged or in fact, as a result of any failure of alarm signals, the handling of signals within the communications center or response thereto and further disclaims any and all responsibility for any such loss, damage or injury. (Ord. 1-27-82, § 21-28; Code 1985, § 4-5).


8.10.060 Discontinuance or disconnection of city’s alarm service generally.

(1) The city may discontinue its alarm service by giving 12 months’ written notice to any or all subscribers, if the city makes a determination to discontinue this service.

(2) It is the intent of the city, in the provision of alarm service as established in this chapter, to provide an efficient, effective and responsive service. To this purpose, if any connection, subscriber or company making a connection or furnishing maintenance to a connection is not in reasonable accordance with this intent and objective or is disruptive to this intent and objective or to the response procedures of the city, the city may proceed to apply the discontinuance or disconnection process. (Ord. 1-27-82, § 21-28; Code 1985, § 4-6).


8.10.070 False alarms and malfunctions.

(1) “False alarm” is an alarm signal or notification transmitted to or received by the communications center as a result of human error or equipment or line or other equipment or software malfunction, and includes negligently or accidentally activated signal or notification, whether purposely activated or not for attention of police, firefighters, rescue, or other public safety or emergency personnel in non-emergency situations. Because each such alarm requires the commitment of city emergency resources, false alarms are discouraged.

(2) A service charge of $100.00 will be assessed for each false alarm or malfunction signal in excess of three per calendar year that results in response to the location. This service charge shall be payable within 10 days of written notification of the assessment to the subscriber or owner or tenant at the premises. Failure to pay also may result in disconnection of any service in the communications center.

(3) The city may discontinue or disconnect service in the communications center, upon five days’ prior written notice, when false or malfunction signals in excess of five in any one calendar year are received from any location. A reconnection or continuation charge of $100.00 will be payable and must be accompanied by a written assurance that measures have been taken to preclude further false or malfunction notifications or signals as to the location involved. After two instances of service disconnection, permanent disconnection may be made.

(4) When advance notice is provided to the communications center, maintenance of an alarm system or testing of an alarm system which generates a signal will not be counted as a false alarm.

(5) When alarm or trouble condition signals are generated as a result of major power failure, lightning, snow, sleet or ice storms, or by trouble in transmission lines between a subscriber and the communications center, such signals will not be counted as false alarms. (Ord. 2015-15. Ord. 1-27-82, §§ 21-27, 21-28; Code 1985, § 4-7).


8.10.080 Service complaints – Appeals concerning operation or procedure of system.

Any complaints as to alarm service provided by either the city or an alarm service company should be directed, in writing, to the chief of police. Any appeal of decisions made concerning the operation and procedure of the alarm system may be made in writing to the city manager. (Ord. 1-27-82, § 21-28; Code 1985, § 4-8).


Chapter 8.15 FIRE WARNING SYSTEMS

Sections:

8.15.010    Required approval for fire warning systems and installation thereof.


8.15.010 Required approval for fire warning systems and installation thereof.

(1) No person shall offer for sale, sell, install or cause to be installed in the city any fire warning system which is not approved by the chief of the fire code official and the building official, nor shall any person install or cause to be installed any such system except in a manner approved by the chief of the fire code official and the building official.

(2) The electrical review board is hereby designated as the appeals board from rulings or decisions under this section of the chief of the fire code official and/or the building official.

(3) A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. (Code 1964, §§ 12-24 – 12-26; Code 1985, § 13-1; Ord. 12-14-01).

Cross references – Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100; electrical review board, SCC 15.10.060; alarm systems generally, Ch. 8.10 SCC.


Chapter 8.20 REGULATION OF OPEN BURNING

Sections:

8.20.010    Title.

8.20.020    Purpose.

8.20.030    Definitions.

8.20.040    Prohibitions on open burning.

8.20.050    Exemptions.

8.20.060    Permissible open burning.

8.20.070    Permits.

8.20.075    Permit fees.

8.20.080    Penalties for violation.


8.20.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the city of Staunton open-burning ordinance and is in addition to the provisions of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code. (Ord. 2015-16. Code 1985, § 13-40).


8.20.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect public health, safety, and welfare by regulating open burning in the city of Staunton to achieve and maintain, to the greatest extent practicable, a level of air quality that will provide comfort and convenience while promoting economic and social development. To the fullest extent permitted by law, this chapter is intended to supplement the applicable regulations promulgated by the State Air Pollution Control Board and other applicable regulations and laws. (Ord. 2015-16. Code 1985, § 13-41).


8.20.030 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter and subsequent amendments or any orders issued by the city of Staunton or the fire code official, the words or phrases all have the meaning given them in this section.

(1) “Automobile graveyard” means any lot or place which is exposed to the weather and upon which more than five motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, and which it would not be economically practical to make operative, are placed, located or found.

(2) “Clean-burning waste” means waste which does not produce dense smoke when burned and is not prohibited to be burned under this chapter.

(3) “Construction waste” means solid waste which is produced or generated during construction of structures. Construction waste consists of lumber, wire, sheetrock, broken brick, shingles, glass, pipes, concrete, and metal and plastics if the metal or plastics are a part of the materials of construction, or empty containers for such materials. Paints, coatings, solvents, asbestos, any liquid, compressed gases of semi-liquids, and garbage are not construction wastes and the disposal of such materials must be in accordance with the regulations of the Virginia Waste Management Board.

(4) “Debris waste” means stumps, wood, brush, and leaves from land clearing operations.

(5) “Demolition waste” means that solid waste which is produced by the destruction of structures and their foundations and includes the same materials as construction waste.

(6) “Garbage” means rotting animal and vegetable matter, waste material and trash normally accumulated by a household in the course of ordinary day-to-day living and other forms of solid or liquid waste, including, but not limited to, waste resulting from residential, agricultural, commercial, industrial, institutional, trade, construction, land clearing, forest management and emergency operations.

(7) “Hazardous waste” means refuse or combination of refuse which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:

(a) Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating illness; or

(b) Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed, or otherwise managed.

(8) “Industrial waste” means all waste generated on the premises of manufacturing and industrial operations such as, but not limited to, those carried on in factories, processing plants, refineries, slaughter houses, and steel mills.

(9) “Junkyard” means an establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk, or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard, and the term shall include garbage dumps and sanitary fills.

(10) “Open burning” means the burning of any matter in such a manner that the products resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or chimney.

(11) “Open pit incinerator” means a device used to burn waste for the primary purpose of reducing the volume by removing combustible matter. Such devices function by directing a curtain of air at an angle across the top of a trench or similarly enclosed space, thus reducing the amount of combustion byproducts emitted into the atmosphere. The term also includes trench burners, air curtain destructors and overdraft incinerators.

(12) “Red flag warning” means high fire danger with increased probability of a quickly spreading vegetation fire in the area within 24 hours.

(13) “Residential burning” means the outdoor burning of leaves, clippings, prunings and other yard and gardening refuse originating on lands immediately adjacent and in close proximity to a human dwelling and burned on such lands by the property owner or his designee.

(14) “Salvage operations” means any operation consisting of a business, trade or industry participating in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material, such as, but not limited to, reprocessing of used motor oils, metals, chemicals, shipping containers or drums, and specifically including automobile graveyards and junkyards.

(15) “Sky lantern” means an unmanned device with a fuel source that incorporates an open flame in order to make the device airborne.

(16) “Smoke” means small gas-borne particulate matter consisting mostly, but not exclusively, of carbon, ash and other material in concentrations sufficient to form a visible plume.

(17) “Special incineration device” means a pit incinerator, conical or teepee burner, or any other device specifically designed to provide good combustion performance. (Ord. 2016-03; Ord. 2015-16; Ord. 2005-09. Code 1985, § 13-42; Ord. 12-13-01).


8.20.040 Prohibitions on open burning.

(1) No owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or the use of a special incineration device for disposal of refuse except as provided in this chapter.

(2) No owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or the use of a special incineration device for disposal of rubber tires, asphaltic materials, crankcase oil, impregnated wood or other rubber or petroleum-based materials except when conducting bona fide firefighting instruction at firefighting training schools having permanent facilities.

(3) No owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or the use of a special incineration device for disposal of hazardous waste or containers for such materials.

(4) No owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or the use of a special incineration device for the purpose of a salvage operation or for the disposal of commercial/industrial waste.

(5) Open burning, or the use of special incineration devices permitted under the provisions of this chapter, does not exempt or excuse any owner or other person from the consequences, liability, damages or injuries which may result from such conduct; nor does it excuse or exempt any owner or other person from complying with other applicable laws, ordinances, regulations and orders of the governmental entities having jurisdiction, even though the open burning is conducted in compliance with this chapter. In this regard special attention should be directed to Section 10.1-1142 of the Forest Fire Law of Virginia, the regulations of the Virginia Waste Management Board, and the State Air Pollution Control Board’s Regulations for the Control and Abatement of Air Pollution.

(6) Upon declaration of an alert, warning or emergency state of an air pollution episode as described in Part VII of the Regulations for the Control and Abatement of Air Pollution or when deemed advisable by the State Air Pollution Control Board to prevent a hazard to, or an unreasonable burden upon, public health or welfare, no owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or use of a special incineration device; and in any process burning or use of special incineration devices shall be immediately terminated in the designated air quality control region.

(7) Upon declaration of a “red flag warning” by order of the fire code official, no owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or use of a special incineration device.

(8) The use or release of sky lanterns or similar devices is prohibited. (Ord. 2015-16. Code 1985, § 13-43).


8.20.050 Exemptions.

The following activities are exempted to the extent covered by the State Air Pollution Control Board’s Regulations for the Control and Abatement of Air Pollution:

(1) Open burning for training and instruction of government and public firefighters under the supervision of the designated official and industrial in-house firefighting personnel;

(2) Open burning for campfires or other fires that are used solely for recreational purposes, for ceremonial occasions, for outdoor noncommercial preparation of food, and for warming of outdoor workers no more than three feet in diameter;

(3) Open burning for the destruction of any combustible liquid or gaseous material by burning in a flare or flare stack;

(4) Open burning for forest management and agriculture practices approved by the State Air Pollution Control Board; and

(5) Open burning for the destruction of classified military documents. (Ord. 2015-16. Code 1985, § 13-44).


8.20.060 Permissible open burning.

(1) Open burning is permitted for the disposal of leaves and tree, yard and garden trimmings located on the premises of private property; provided, that the following conditions are met:

(a) The burning takes place on the premises of the private property; and

(b) The location of the burning is not less than 300 feet from any occupied building unless the occupants have given prior permission, other than a building located on the property on which the burning is conducted; and

(c) No regularly scheduled public or private collection service for such trimmings is available at the adjacent street or public road.

(2) Open burning is permitted for disposal of debris waste resulting from property maintenance, from the development or modification of roads and highways, parking areas, railroad tracks, pipelines, power and communication lines, buildings or building areas, or from any other clearing operations which may be approved by the fire code official, provided the following conditions are met:

(a) All reasonable effort shall be made to minimize the amount of material burned, with the number and size of the debris piles approved by fire code official;

(b) The material to be burned shall consist of brush, stumps and similar debris waste and shall not include demolition material;

(c) The burning shall be at least 500 feet from any occupied building unless the occupants have given prior permission, other than a building located on the property on which the burning is conducted;

(d) The burning shall be conducted at the greatest distance practicable from highways and air fields;

(e) The burning shall be attended at all times and conducted to ensure the best possible combustion with a minimum of smoke being produced;

(f) The burning shall not be allowed to smolder beyond the minimum period of time necessary for the destruction of the materials; and

(g) The burning shall be conducted only when the prevailing winds are away from any city, town or built-up area. (Ord. 2015-16. Code 1985, § 13-45; Ord. 12-13-01).


8.20.070 Permits.

(1) When open burning of debris waste (SCC 8.20.060(2)) is to occur within the city of Staunton, the person responsible for the burning shall obtain a permit from the fire code official prior to the burning. Such a permit may be granted only after confirmation by the fire code official that the burning can and will comply with the provisions of this chapter and any other conditions which are deemed necessary to ensure that the burning will not endanger the public health and welfare or to ensure compliance with any applicable provisions of the State Air Pollution Control Board’s Regulations for the Control and Abatement of Air Pollution. The permit may be issued for each occasion of burning or for a specific period of time deemed appropriate by the fire code official or their designee.

(2) Prior to the initial installation (or reinstallation, in cases of relocation) and operation of special incineration devices, the person responsible for the burning shall obtain a permit from the office of the fire code official, such permits to be granted only after confirmation by the fire code official that the burning can and will comply with the applicable provisions in Regulations for the Control and Abatement of Air Pollution and that any conditions are met which are deemed necessary by the fire code official to ensure that the operation of the devices will not endanger the public health and welfare. Permits granted for the use of special incineration devices shall, at a minimum, contain the following conditions:

(a) All reasonable effort shall be made to minimize the amount of material that is burned. Such efforts shall include, but are not limited to, the removal of pulpwood, sawlogs and firewood.

(b) The material to be burned shall consist of brush, stumps and similar debris waste and shall not include demolition material.

(c) The burning shall be at least 300 feet from any occupied building unless the occupants have given prior permission, other than a building located on the property on which the burning is conducted; burning shall be conducted at the greatest distance practicable from highways and air fields. If the fire code official or designee determines that it is necessary to protect public health and welfare, the fire code official may direct that any of the above cited distances be increased.

(d) The burning shall be attended at all times and conducted to ensure the best possible combustion with a minimum of smoke being produced. Under no circumstances should the burning be allowed to smolder beyond the minimum period of time necessary for the destruction of the materials.

(e) The burning shall be conducted only when the prevailing winds are away from any city, town or built-up area.

(f) The use of special incineration devices shall be allowed only for the disposal of debris waste, clean-burning construction waste, and clean-burning demolition waste.

(g) Open burning is prohibited before 4:00 p.m. local time each day between February 15th through April 30th if the fire is in, or within 300 feet of, woodland, brushland or fields containing dry grass or other flammable materials.

(h) Permits issued under this section shall be limited to a specific period of time deemed appropriate by the fire code official. (Ord. 2016-03; Ord. 2015-16; Ord. 2005-09. Code 1985, § 13-46; Ord. 12-13-01).


8.20.075 Permit fees.

(1) No permit required by the Staunton City Code to begin burning shall be issued until the fees prescribed in this section have been paid to the department of building inspection or other authorized municipal agency, nor shall an amendment to such a permit necessitating an additional fee be approved until the additional fee has been paid.

(a) A fee of $25.00 shall be paid for any open burning permit issued for the purpose of residential burning or for burning of residential construction waste.

(b) A fee of $100.00 shall be paid for any open burning permit issued for the purpose of burning debris waste and other than residential construction waste.

(2) Refunds shall be granted at the discretion of the fire code official based on amount of staff time involved in permitting at the time the permit application is to be requested withdrawn with no more than 50 percent of the fee to be refunded. (Ord. 2015-16; Ord. 2005-09).


8.20.080 Penalties for violation.

(1) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, and for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.

(2) Each separate incident shall be considered a new violation. (Ord. 2015-16. Code 1985, § 13-47; Ord. 5-9-96).


Chapter 8.25 NOISE*

Sections:

Article I. In General

8.25.010    Title and application of chapter generally.

8.25.020    Definitions.

8.25.030    Declaration of findings and policy.

8.25.040    Administration and enforcement of chapter generally.

8.25.050    Testing of metering devices used to enforce chapter.

8.25.060    Exemptions from chapter.

8.25.070    Violations of chapter.

8.25.080    Excessive sound generally.

8.25.090    Quiet zones.

8.25.100    Maximum sound levels between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in residential zones.

8.25.110    Operation of television sets, radios or phonographs.

8.25.120    Maximum level of sound emitted by motor vehicles.

8.25.130    Permit for use of loudspeakers on vehicles or in mercantile establishments.

8.25.140    Sounding of vehicle warning device.

8.25.150    Noise from loading and unloading operations or opening or destruction of bales, boxes, etc.

8.25.160    Noise from horns, drums, shouting, etc.

8.25.170    Building operations at night.

8.25.180    Noisy animals and birds.

8.25.190    Entertainment area exception.

Article II. Sound Trucks

8.25.200    Definitions.

8.25.210    Operation near hospitals, schools, etc.

8.25.220    Hours of operation – Operation on Sunday or legal holidays prohibited.

8.25.230    Permitted sounds.

8.25.240    Profane, indecent, etc., speech or music prohibited.

8.25.250    Control of volume of sound.

8.25.260    Inspection of sound-amplifying equipment.

8.25.270    Minimum speed of vehicle – Time limit on operation of sound-amplifying equipment when vehicle stopped.

*Charter reference – Authority of council to prevent unnecessary noise, § 11(13).

Cross reference – Use of noise-making devices on vehicles used for vending on streets, SCC 10.30.060.

Article I. In General


8.25.010 Title and application of chapter generally.

This chapter may be cited as the “Noise Control Ordinance of the city of Staunton.” It shall be applicable to the control of noises originating within the city limits. (Code 1985, § 17-1).


8.25.020 Definitions.

The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them, unless otherwise clearly provided or indicated by the context:

“A-weighted sound level” means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA.

“Apparent property boundary” means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which from observation of the existing conditions appears to separate the real property owned or controlled by one person from that owned or controlled by another person, but not including intra-building real property divisions.

“Decibel (dB)” means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter).

“Emergency” means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action.

“Emergency work” means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency.

“Excessive sound” means noise that exceeds 65 dBA unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter.

“Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)” means the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination weight rating (GCWR), which is the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used.

“Motor carrier vehicle engaged in interstate commerce” means any vehicle for which regulations apply pursuant to Section 18 of the Federal Noise Control Act of 1972 (P.L. 92-574), as amended, pertaining to motor carriers engaged in interstate commerce.

“Motor vehicle” means any self-propelled device or device designed for self-propulsion, upon or by which any person or property is or may be drawn or transported upon a street, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary wheels or tracks.

“Motorcycle” means any motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground and any four-wheeled vehicle weighing less than 500 pounds and equipped with an engine of less than six horsepower, excepting farm tractors.

“Noise” means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.

“Residential zone” means any location within any area zoned residential pursuant to the city’s zoning ordinance.*

“Sound” means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency.

“Sound level” means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and the A-frequency weighting network, as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters.

“Sound level meter” means an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels. (Ord. 2009-11. Code 1985, § 17-2).

*Cross reference – Zoning, Title 18.


8.25.030 Declaration of findings and policy.

The city council hereby finds and declares that excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, peace and safety and the quality of life; that a substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be substantially abated; that the people have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from excessive sound that may jeopardize the public health, welfare, peace and safety or degrade the quality of life; and that it is the policy of the city to prevent such excessive sound. (Code 1985, § 17-3).


8.25.040 Administration and enforcement of chapter generally.

The noise control program established by this chapter shall be enforced and administered by the police department with the assistance of other city departments as required. (Code 1985, § 17-4).


8.25.050 Testing of metering devices used to enforce chapter.

In order to implement and enforce this chapter effectively, the chief of police may develop and promulgate standards and procedures for testing and validating sound level meters used in the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-11. Code 1985, § 17-5).


8.25.060 Exemptions from chapter.

(1) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or to the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. This section shall not be construed so as to relieve any person from the responsibility of obtaining the permit required by SCC 8.25.170.

(2) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to those persons, firms or corporations performing city-approved musical performances or other city-approved events such as, but not limited to, the Stonewall Brigade Band concerts, parades pursuant to license or lease, musicals held in Gypsy Hill Park, and other similar events open to the public at large. (Ord. 2009-11. Code 1985, § 17-6; Ord. 4-13-95).


8.25.070 Violations of chapter.

Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. (Code 1985, § 17-7).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


8.25.080 Excessive sound generally.

Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the creation of any excessive sound is prohibited. (Ord. 2009-11. Code 1964, § 16-26; Code 1985, § 17-8).


8.25.090 Quiet zones.

(1) The city manager shall have the authority to designate and suitably mark as quiet zones such territory in the neighborhood of churches, schools, hospitals or other places as may be deemed proper.

(2) No person shall make any excessive sound of any character in any quiet zone designated and marked pursuant to this section. (Ord. 2009-11. Code 1964, §§ 15-10, 15-19; Code 1985, § 17-9).


8.25.100 Maximum sound levels between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in residential zones.

No person shall operate or cause any source of sound in such a manner as to create a sound level in a residential zone, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. local time, in excess of 65 dBA, when measured at any point on the receiving land. (Ord. 2009-11. Code 1985, § 17-10).


8.25.110 Operation of television sets, radios or phonographs.

No person shall operate, play, or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, record, tape, or compact disc player, drum, musical instrument, or similar device in such a manner as to create excessive sound across a residence, apparent property boundary, or through partitions common to two dwelling units within a building in which it is located or when the excessive sound source is located within a motor vehicle and the excessive sound reaches a point a distance of 50 feet or more from its source. (Ord. 2009-11. Code 1964, § 16-26; Code 1985, § 17-11; Ord. 3-9-95).


8.25.120 Maximum level of sound emitted by motor vehicles.

(1) No person shall operate or cause to be operated a public or private motor vehicle or motorcycle on a public right-of-way at any time in such a manner that the level of sound emitted by the motor vehicle or motorcycle, when measured at a distance of 50 feet or more, exceeds the level set forth in the following table:

	 	Sound Level in dBA

	Vehicle Class	Speed Limit 35 MPH or Less	Speed Limit over 35 MPH

	All motor vehicles of GVWR or GCWR of 6,000 lbs. or more	86	90

	Any motorcycle	82	86

	Any other motor vehicle or any combination of vehicles towed by any motor vehicle	76	82

(2) This section shall not apply to any motor carrier vehicle engaged in interstate commerce or to any sound truck operated pursuant to, and in compliance with, the provisions of Article II of this chapter. (Code 1985, § 17-12).


8.25.130 Permit for use of loudspeakers on vehicles or in mercantile establishments.

(1) No person shall use any mechanical loudspeaker or amplifier on any motor vehicle or other moving vehicle or in any mercantile establishment, for advertising or other purposes, without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the chief of police.

(2) Whenever the chief of police shall be of the opinion that the use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on motor vehicles or other moving vehicles or in mercantile establishments, for advertising or other purposes, will not create excessive sound, he shall grant a permit therefor. (Ord. 2009-11. Code 1964, § 16-27; Code 1985, § 17-13).


8.25.140 Sounding of vehicle warning device.

No person shall sound the horn or other audible signal device on any motor vehicle, motorcycle or other vehicle while such vehicle is not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control. If such vehicle is in motion, such device shall be sounded only as a danger signal to pedestrians or vehicles, after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended. The creation, by means of any such device, of any excessive sound and the sounding of such device for more than two seconds is prohibited. (Ord. 2009-11. Code 1964, § 16-26; Code 1985, § 17-14).


8.25.150 Noise from loading and unloading operations or opening or destruction of bales, boxes, etc.

The creation of excessive sound in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., is prohibited. (Ord. 2009-11. Code 1964, § 16-26; Code 1985, § 17-15; Ord. 7-10-03).


8.25.160 Noise from horns, drums, shouting, etc.

(1) No person shall make, or have a part in the making of, excessive sound by means of horns, trumpets, drums, bells or whistles, or by shouting or loud talking. This subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting shouting, singing or loud talking by spectators at and during athletic contests or as otherwise permitted by law.

(2) No two or more persons or a band or an orchestra shall play musical instruments in or on the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public places in the city, unless such persons shall have first obtained a permit so to do from the chief of police.

(3) The mayor, pursuant to express authorization of the city council, may, by proclamation, suspend the operation of this section at such times, to such extent and as to such places as shall be determined by the council. (Ord. 2009-11. Code 1985, § 17-16).


8.25.170 Building operations at night.

No person shall engage in the erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, in a residential or business district, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the chief of police, which permit may be renewed for a period of three days or less while the emergency continues. (Code 1964, § 16-26; Code 1985, § 17-17; Ord. 7-10-03).

Cross reference – Building regulations, Title 15.


8.25.180 Noisy animals and birds.

No person shall have or keep any animal or bird which, by making or causing excessive sound, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity. (Ord. 2009-11. Code 1985, § 17-18).


8.25.190 Entertainment area exception.

(1) The foregoing sections notwithstanding, musical entertainment may be provided by businesses situated in the central business district as described herein. In such cases, the level of noise created by or from the musical entertainment shall not exceed 80 dBA as measured at any point 50 feet perpendicular to the apparent property boundary of the property from which the noise emanates; and, notwithstanding the foregoing, during the period beginning 11:30 p.m. local time and ending 9:00 a.m. local time, such noise shall not occur or extend beyond the interior of such businesses. “Musical entertainment” as used herein shall mean music made by what are commonly known as musical instruments, recordings of music, choral or vocal singings sponsored or provided by the business wherefrom the noise emanates.

(2) The central business district as used herein is described as:

Beginning at the intersection of Coalter Street and Frederick Street, thence with Frederick Street, west, to its intersection with Lewis Street, thence with Lewis Street, south, crossing Middlebrook Avenue to the C&O Railroad right-of-way, thence with the C&O right-of-way, east, to Coalter Street, thence with Coalter Street, north, to its intersection with Frederick Street, the point of beginning.

(3) The musical entertainment, subject hereof, is exempt from the provisions of SCC 8.25.080, 8.25.100, 8.25.110, and 8.25.160, except as provided in subsection (1) of this section. (Ord. 2012-01; Ord. 2009-11. Code 1985, § 17-19; Ord. 7-10-03).

Article II. Sound Trucks*

*Cross reference – Motor vehicles and traffic, Title 10.


8.25.200 Definitions.

For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

“Sound-amplifying equipment” shall mean any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. Such term shall not be construed to include standard automobile radios, when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed, or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic-safety purposes.

“Sound truck” shall mean any motor vehicle or horse-drawn vehicle having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound-amplifying equipment the use of which is authorized by a permit issued pursuant to SCC 8.25.130. (Code 1985, § 17-29).


8.25.210 Operation near hospitals, schools, etc.

Sound shall not be emitted from the sound-amplifying equipment of a sound truck within 100 yards of any hospital, school, church or courthouse. (Code 1985, § 17-30).


8.25.220 Hours of operation – Operation on Sunday or legal holidays prohibited.

The operation of the sound-amplifying equipment on a sound truck shall be limited to four hours each day, except on Sundays and legal holidays, when no such operation shall be authorized. The permitted four hours of operation shall be between 11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m., and between 4:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m. (Code 1985, § 17-31).


8.25.230 Permitted sounds.

The only sounds permitted to be broadcast from a sound truck are music or human speech. (Code 1985, § 17-32).


8.25.240 Profane, indecent, etc., speech or music prohibited.

The human speech and music amplified in the operation of a sound truck shall not be profane, lewd, indecent or slanderous. (Code 1985, § 17-33).


8.25.250 Control of volume of sound.

The volume of sound emitted from a sound truck shall be controlled so that it will not create excessive sound at a point of 50 feet or more from the sound truck. (Ord. 2009-11. Code 1985, § 17-34; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


8.25.260 Inspection of sound-amplifying equipment.

Sound-amplifying equipment in operation on a sound truck shall be subject to inspection by a member of the police department at reasonable times. (Code 1985, § 17-35; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


8.25.270 Minimum speed of vehicle – Time limit on operation of sound-amplifying equipment when vehicle stopped.

Sound-amplifying equipment on a sound truck shall not be operated, unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least 10 miles per hour, except when such sound truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. Where stopped by traffic, the sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each such stop. (Code 1985, § 17-36).


Chapter 8.30 SOLID WASTE*

Sections:

Article I. In General

8.30.010    Definitions.

8.30.020    Deposit in streets, parks, etc.

8.30.030    Limitation on use of public-owned receptacles.

8.30.040    Requirements for transportation on streets.

8.30.050    Permit for, and methods used by, private refuse collectors.

8.30.060    Service charge for use of sanitary landfill.

Article II. Collection of Refuse by City

8.30.070    Violations of article.

8.30.080    Provision of service generally.

8.30.090    City solid waste policy by director of public works.

8.30.100    Schedule.

8.30.110    Fees – Prescribed.

8.30.120    Same – Billing and collection.

8.30.130    Same – Responsibility of apartment house owner for payment.

8.30.140    Containers – Required.

8.30.150    Containers and recyclable material.

8.30.160    Other refuse.

8.30.170    Container placement for collection of contents and removal after such collection.

Article III. Tire Storage Ordinance

8.30.180    Purpose of article.

8.30.190    Definitions.

8.30.200    Application of article.

8.30.210    Fire control plans.

8.30.220    Disposal – Permits required.

8.30.230    Penalty for violation of article.

*Cross references – Accumulations of unwholesome or offensive matter on private property, SCC 9.05.190; trash disposal facilities on vehicles used for vending on streets, SCC 10.30.070; sewage disposal, Title 13, Division III; deposit of solid waste in sewers, SCC 13.35.040.

State law reference – Solid waste management, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-177 et seq. Art. I. In General, §§ 25-1 – 25-16 Art. II. Collection of Refuse by City, §§ 25-17 – 25-25 Art. III. Tire Storage Ordinance, §§ 25-26 – 25-31.

Article I. In General


8.30.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the term “refuse” shall mean garbage, rubbish and ashes. (Code 1964, § 13-19; Code 1985, § 25-1).


8.30.020 Deposit in streets, parks, etc.

(1) No person shall place, deposit or cast, or cause to be placed, deposited or cast, upon or in any street, highway, alley, gutter, sidewalk, park, playground or other publicly owned, rented or otherwise publicly controlled land or building within the city, any refuse, timber, wood, lumber, litter, trash, leaves, earth, mud, glass or similar material, metal scraps, nails or similar material or any substance whatsoever, which may obstruct any such street, highway, alley, gutter, sidewalk, park, playground, school ground or other publicly owned, rented or otherwise publicly controlled land or building, or impede or hinder travel thereon, or which may injure or disfigure the same or tend to the injury or disfigurement thereof, or to render the same unsafe, unclean or a nuisance.

(2) A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. (Code 1964, §§ 13-18, 25-6; Code 1985, § 25-2).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


8.30.030 Limitation on use of public-owned receptacles.

(1) No person shall transport or remove from private premises within the city any refuse for the purpose of depositing the same in any publicly owned can or other receptacle within the city parks, at publicly owned buildings or along publicly owned rights-of-way, nor shall any person deposit in any such can or other receptacle any refuse which has been transported or removed from private premises.

(2) A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. (Code 1964, § 13-26; Code 1985, § 25-3).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


8.30.040 Requirements for transportation on streets.

(1) No garbage or decayed or spoiled matter shall be hauled on any vehicle on the streets or alleys of the city, except in containers with tight-fitting covers and solid bottoms, and no refuse or other matter shall be hauled in or on any vehicle in such manner that the same may be strewn along the streets or alleys of the city.

(2) A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. (Code 1964, § 13-27; Code 1985, § 25-4).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


8.30.050 Permit for, and methods used by, private refuse collectors.

(1) No person shall engage in the business of collecting refuse in the city, unless he has a permit to do so issued by the health officer. Every such person shall comply with the collection methods employed by the city.

(2) A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. (Code 1964, § 13-27; Code 1985, § 25-5).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.

State law reference – Authority of city to regulate refuse collectors, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-930.


8.30.060 Service charge for use of sanitary landfill.

(1) There are hereby imposed charges for disposal of solid waste at any landfill owned or operated by or for the city in accordance with the following schedule:

	Passenger tires	$2.00 per tire

	Passenger tires, on a rim	$4.00 per tire

	Truck tires	$8.00 per tire

	Heavy equipment-tractor tires:	 

	agriculture use	$8.00 per tire

	by the ton	$168.00 per ton

	Yard waste	$20.00 per ton

	Commercial or industrial waste	$45.00 per ton

	Construction demolition debris	$45.00 per ton

	Residential waste, privately hauled by passenger car or pickup truck	No charge

	Mulch and wood chips	$10.00 per ton

	Clean fill dirt	No charge

(2) In the event the scale is not operable, the rates shall be as follows:

	Pickup truck with no racks	$5.00

	Single axle trailer, pulled by car or pickup truck, or pickup truck with racks	$20.00

	Single axle dump truck (small, less than 1 ton)	$25.00

	Single axle dump truck (standard) plus tandem axle trailer	$60.00

	Stake body truck or equivalent	$75.00

	Tandem axle dump truck or equivalent	$125.00

	Compactor type or open top vehicle with a capacity less than 10 cubic yards or equivalent, commercial or industrial waste	$150.00

	Compactor type or open top vehicle with a capacity greater than or equal to 10 cubic yards but less than 20 cubic yards or equivalent, commercial or industrial waste	$250.00

	Compactor type or open top vehicle with a capacity greater than or equal to 20 cubic yards but less than 30 cubic yards or equivalent, commercial or industrial waste	$300.00

	Compactor type or open top vehicle with a capacity greater than 30 cubic yards or equivalent, commercial or industrial waste	$350.00 

(3) For all commercial or industrial customers whose loads consist of waste that weighs less than 20 pounds, but is greater in volume than one cubic yard, the tipping fee shall be calculated at a rate of $40.00 per cubic yard. The same rate shall apply in the event it is determined that a commercial or industrial customer’s load is greater in volume than one cubic yard, and such customer has incidentally increased the weight of such load in an effort to avoid calculation of the tipping fee in accordance with this subsection.

(4) All commercial haulers, haulers for hire, commercial or business enterprises hauling and disposing of their own waste or that of others and contractors and subcontractors engaged in construction or excavation for private, residential, commercial or industrial development shall be liable for payment of the charges prescribed in this section. (Ord. 2015-07; Ord. 2007-17. Code 1964, § 13-27.1; Code 1985, § 25-6; Ord. 9-28-89; Ord. 2-28-91; Ord. 3-12-92; Ord. 5-13-93; Ord. 5-12-94; Ord. 6-28-95; Ord. 6-13-96).

Article II. Collection of Refuse by City*

*State law reference – General authority of city relative to collection and disposal of refuse, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-927 et seq.


8.30.070 Violations of article.

(1) The city may, whenever it deems it necessary, after reasonable notice, have trash, garbage, refuse, litter, other debris, and other like substances which might endanger the health of other residents of the locality, removed by its own contractors or employees, in which event the cost thereof shall be charged as an additional refuse collection service fee (as further described in the city’s solid waste policy, which is incorporated by reference herein as may be amended) billed with other such fees and ultimately collected in any way permitted by law. Failure to timely pay such additional refuse collection service fee may result in the city discontinuing its services.

Violation of any provision of this article or the city’s solid waste policy, prescribed and approved pursuant to this article, shall also be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00 for the first violation, or violations arising from the same set of operative facts. The civil penalty for subsequent violations not arising from the same set of operative facts within 12 months of the first violation shall be $200.00. Each business day during which the same violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of specified violations arising from the same set of operative facts result in civil penalties that exceed a total of $3,000 in a 12-month period. Three civil penalties previously imposed on the same person for the same or similar violation, not arising from the same set of operative facts, within a 24-month period, shall also constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. Civil penalties shall be due and payable to the city of Staunton within 10 days from the date of the notice. Repeated violations may result in the city discontinuing its refuse services. Nothing herein, however, shall exempt the person or entity from paying the fees herein prescribed and otherwise due.

(2) Every charge authorized by this article with which the owner of any such property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local real estate taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in Articles 3 (Section 58.1-3940 et seq.) and 4 (Section 58.1-3965 et seq.) of Chapter 39 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. A locality may waive such liens in order to facilitate the sale of the property. Such liens may be waived only as to a purchaser who is unrelated by blood or marriage to the owner and who has no business association with the owner. All such liens shall remain a personal obligation of the owner of the property at the time the liens were imposed. (Ord. 2019-38; Ord. 2008-10. Code 1985, § 25-17; Ord. 4-12-90).


8.30.080 Provision of service generally.

The city will provide refuse collection service on the terms and conditions of this article to residents of the city and businesses located within the city. The city may, at the discretion of the city manager, provide refuse collection service to persons and businesses residing or located outside the city limits. Any service provided outside the city limits shall be subject to the city’s solid waste policy as established by the director of public works and approved by the city manager. (Ord. 2008-10. Code 1964, § 13-20; Code 1985, § 25-18).


8.30.090 City solid waste policy by director of public works.

The director of public works shall prescribe a city solid waste policy relating to the collection, handling and disposal of refuse by and in the city as deemed necessary to implement the provisions of this article. Such policy shall be subject to approval by the city manager. (Ord. 2008-10. Code 1964, § 13-25; Code 1985, § 25-19).


8.30.100 Schedule.

The schedule for collection of refuse by the city in the various areas of the city shall be as established by the director of public works in the city’s solid waste policy. The director may revise such schedule as special occasion or circumstances requires without amending the city’s solid waste policy. (Ord. 2008-10. Code 1964, §§ 13-21, 13-25; Code 1985, § 25-20; Ord. 1-26-84; Ord. 10-24-91).


8.30.110 Fees – Prescribed.

(1) Residential. For a mandatory fee of $20.88 per month for each single-family unit (to include each unit in a multifamily structure), the city shall provide one weekly pickup of refuse from each residential unit in the city, whether inside or outside the central business district, the basis of computation of the fee being a single-family unit. The fee for refuse collection service for all other than single-family units shall be in an amount adequate to cover all costs to the city for such service, such amount to be established by the director of public works as part of the city’s solid waste policy, with the approval of the city manager, but such fee shall not be less than $20.88 per month per unit.

(2) Light Commercial. The mandatory fee for refuse collection service to light commercial customers, whether inside or outside the central business district, shall be $47.40 per month. The light commercial designation shall apply to those customers which place the equivalent of four or fewer bags/containers of refuse at the curb for collection.

(3) Heavy Commercial. The mandatory fee for refuse collection service to heavy commercial customers within the central business district shall be $127.41 and $100.28 for those outside the central business district. The heavy commercial designation shall apply to those customers which place the equivalent of five or more bags/containers at the curb for collection. All full-time restaurants shall be deemed heavy commercial customers.

(4) Special Unscheduled Pickup. When refuse is stored or placed curbside in a manner not otherwise in accordance with the city’s solid waste policy, it shall be deemed a request for a special unscheduled pickup and a crew may be dispatched to collect the refuse. The fee for pickup shall be in an amount adequate to cover all costs to the city for such service, such amount to be established by the director of public works as part of the city’s solid waste policy, with approval of the city manager, but such fee shall not be less than $105.00 and shall be charged to the property owner or tenant.

(5) Recyclables and Recycling Bins.

(a) The mandatory fee for the collection of recyclable materials from customers not otherwise charged a refuse collection service fee shall be $20.88 per month.

(b) Each customer shall pay a service fee of $25.00 for the use of three recycling bins issued by the city. Upon return to the city of the three bins in reasonable condition, ordinary wear and tear excepted, the fee of $25.00 shall be credited or refunded to the customer.

(6) Collection Outside City Limits. The fee for refuse collection service rendered outside of the city limits shall be in an amount equal to 200 percent of the fee charged for such service in the city limits.

(7) Exemption, Deferral, Modification or Waiver of Fee.

(a) By ordinance, persons may be exempted, deferred, or charged a lesser amount from paying any charges and fees authorized for the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse only if based on the income criteria, as provided by Section 58.1-3211 of the Code of Virginia.

(b) The director of public works may waive all or part of the fees for any multifamily structure or commercial customer if contractual arrangements are made and maintained by that customer for adequate containerized service as determined satisfactory by the director of public works. (Ord. 2020-07; Ord. 2019-17; Ord. 2016-09; Ord. 2013-07; Ord. 2013-05; Ord. 2011-14; Ord. 2009-19; Ord. 2008-10; Ord. 2005-18. Code 1964, §§ 13-20, 13-21; Code 1985, § 25-21; Ord. 1-26-84; Ord. 3-23-89; Ord. 9-28-89; Ord. 5-28-92; Ord. 10-8-92; Ord. 5-13-93).


8.30.120 Same – Billing and collection.

(1) The fee for refuse collection service rendered by the city shall be billed in the most economical and practical method established by the city manager.

(2) Payment of the fee for refuse collection shall be made within 30 days from the date the bill becomes due and payable. In the event that any person fails to pay such fee, the city shall use such legal means and procedures as are available to effect collection. (Ord. 2008-10. Code 1964, § 13-21; Code 1985, § 25-22; Ord. 1-26-84).


8.30.130 Same – Responsibility of apartment house owner for payment.

As to any apartment house, the owner thereof shall be responsible for the payment of all fees due the city for the collection of refuse. (Ord. 2008-10. Code 1964, § 13-22; Code 1985, § 25-23).


8.30.140 Containers – Required.

Except as otherwise provided, all persons availing themselves of the city’s refuse collection service shall solely use containers meeting the requirements of the city’s solid waste policy prescribed and approved pursuant to SCC 8.30.090. (Ord. 2013-07; Ord. 2008-10. Code 1964, § 13-23; Code 1985, § 25-24).


8.30.150 Containers and recyclable material.

Residents and businesses located in the city of Staunton are required to separate and handle recyclable material for collection in accordance with the city’s solid waste policy. (Ord. 2008-10. Code 1985, § 25-24.1; Ord. 10-24-91; Ord. 12-17-92; Ord. 11-11-99).


8.30.160 Other refuse.

Refuse, other than the recyclable materials set forth herein, shall be placed and handled by residents and businesses in accordance with the city’s solid waste policy. (Ord. 2008-10. Code 1985, § 25-24.2; Ord. 4-12-90).


8.30.170 Container placement for collection of contents and removal after such collection.

The containers referred to in SCC 8.30.140 shall be placed for collection in accordance with the city’s solid waste policy. (Ord. 2008-10. Code 1964, § 13-24; Code 1985, § 25-25).

Article III. Tire Storage Ordinance


8.30.180 Purpose of article.

The purpose of this article is to regulate the stockpiling of tires in order to promote resource conservation and resource recovery, and to prevent any hazards, fire or otherwise, that might be created by such stockpiling of tires. (Code 1985, § 25-26; Ord. 12-11-86).


8.30.190 Definitions.

For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

“Bureau” means the Bureau of Solid Waste Management of the State Health Department.

“Chief of the fire department” means the chief of the fire department of the city of Staunton, Virginia.

“Disposal” means the deposit, dumping or placing of any solid waste into or on any land or water so that such solid waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air.

“Fire control plan” means a document addressing the requirements established in SCC 8.30.210 of this article. It may include appropriate maps as well as any other management information the submitting party deems relevant.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership, association or any other legal entity.

“Tire” means a solid or air-filled covering for a wheel, typically rubber or a similarly elastic synthetic material, fitted around the wheel’s rim to absorb shock and provide traction.

“Used tire storage” means an accumulation of 5,000 or more used tires or any number of used tires covering more than 10,000 square feet at a location, not under a roof or other similar structure, for some future useful purpose such as retreading, fuel supplement, reef construction or some other innovative use. (Code 1985, § 25-27; Ord. 12-11-86).


8.30.200 Application of article.

(1) All persons operating a used tire storage facility on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall submit to the chief of the fire department a fire control plan. Such plan must be submitted within six months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. If such plan is not approved by the chief of the fire department, or if such plan is not submitted for such approval, the persons operating a used tire storage facility shall cease such operation at once and dispose of said tires in a manner permitted under law within nine months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(2) All persons proposing to operate a used tire storage facility that comes into existence after the effective date of this regulation shall submit to the chief of the fire department a fire control plan. Such plan must be submitted 60 days prior to the date the facility is proposed to come into existence, and such persons shall not operate a used tire storage facility until such plan is approved. (Code 1985, § 25-28; Ord. 12-11-86).


8.30.210 Fire control plans.

(1) A fire control plan must adequately address compliance with the following requirements for used tire storage:

(a) All tires must be stockpiled neatly in cells of 1,000 tires or less per cell and be no higher than 10 feet;

(b) A berm of soil must be provided between all cells of tires in the storage area. The berm shall extend as high as the height of the tires in the cells;

(c) A passageway of 20 feet in width must be maintained between the berms of all cells of tires except where cells consist of only one or two lanes and the cells can be approached directly;

(d) For each cell of tires, a stockpile of 20 cubic yards of soil must be maintained within 200 feet of the cell. This material shall be in addition to any berm material;

(e) In lieu of stockpiled soil for fire suppression as described in subsection (1)(d) of this section, foam with all the necessary equipment for its effective use may be available on the site;

(f) A fence of heavy-gauge wire eight feet in height with two strands of barbed wire extending along the top must enclose the entire storage site;

(g) The access to the site must be controlled with a gate equipped with a lock or some other suitable method of preventing access to the site;

(h) The plan must specify how long the tires will be stored and the ultimate purpose for which they will be used;

(i) Appropriate and adequate equipment to place soil over the tires in case of fire must either be on the site at all times or be readily available.

(2) The chief of the fire department shall review all fire control plans and make a decision on approval or denial of such plans within a reasonable time. Approved plans must be fully implemented within 60 days after the date of notification of approval. Rejected plans may be resubmitted within a reasonable time for further consideration, or may be submitted to the council for the city of Staunton, Virginia, for its consideration.

(3) No used tire storage facility shall be allowed to operate unless it has an approved fire control plan which is fully implemented and in force. (Code 1985, § 25-29; Ord. 12-11-86).


8.30.220 Disposal – Permits required.

Disposal of used tires or storage of used tires prior to disposal shall not occur without a permit from the Bureau of Solid Waste Management of the State Department of Health. Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect, modify or change any requirement imposed by the State Department of Health or the Bureau, or any penalty imposed by said bureau under the laws of the state of Virginia. (Code 1985, § 25-30; Ord. 12-11-86).


8.30.230 Penalty for violation of article.

Any person who violates any provision of this article, by doing a prohibited act, or failing to perform a required act, or failing to perform permitted acts in the prescribed manner, shall be subject to the general penalty for a Class 4 misdemeanor pursuant to the provisions of SCC 1.05.100. (Code 1985, § 25-31; Ord. 12-11-86).


Chapter 8.35 DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS

Sections:

8.35.010    Fireworks.

8.35.020    Penalties for violation.


8.35.010 Fireworks.

It shall be unlawful for any person to set off, release or discharge within the city any torpedo, firecracker, skyrocket, or other substance or object, of whatever form or construction, that contains any explosive or inflammable compound or substance, and is intended or commonly known as fireworks and which explodes, rises into the air or travels laterally, or fires projectiles into the air; and no person shall within the city sell any such articles without a permit. (Ord. 2015-17).


8.35.020 Penalties for violation.

(1) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or the fire prevention code adopted by SCC Title 15, for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue.

(2) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.

(3) Each separate incident shall be considered a new violation. (Ord. 2016-03; Ord. 2015-17).

 


Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:

9.05    Offenses – Miscellaneous


Chapter 9.05 OFFENSES – MISCELLANEOUS

Sections:

9.05.010    General penalty for violations of chapter.

9.05.020    Adoption of state law as to certain misdemeanors.

9.05.030    Interfering with, obstructing, etc., city officers or employees or persons doing work for city.

9.05.040    Interfering with enforcement of code, ordinances, etc.

9.05.050    Disrupting or disturbing proceedings of city council, boards, commissions, etc.

9.05.060    Damaging city property generally.

9.05.070    Damaging park property.

9.05.080    Prohibited conduct in parks.

9.05.090    Prohibited conduct on church property.

9.05.100    Prohibited conduct on parking lots.

9.05.110    Urination or defecation in public.

9.05.120    Alcoholic beverages, taking or offering drink in public.

9.05.130    Meetings, parades, demonstrations, etc., on streets or other public places.

9.05.140    Curfew for minors.

9.05.150    General curfew in emergencies.

9.05.160    Interfering with free passage of others for certain purposes.

9.05.170    Sale of certain weapons to pupils of Virginia School for Deaf and Blind.

9.05.180    Carelessly or negligently throwing stones or missiles or discharging gravel shooter, air gun, etc.

9.05.190    Unlawful conditions on private property generally.

9.05.200    Open storage of inoperative vehicles.

9.05.210    Soliciting for lewd or indecent acts or prostitution.

9.05.220    Unlawful CATV connections.

9.05.230    Regulation of smoking – Generally.

9.05.240    Same – Definition.

9.05.250    Same – Designation of “smoking permitted” and “no smoking” areas.

9.05.260    Same – Posting of signs.

9.05.270    Same – Enforcement.

9.05.280    Repealed.


9.05.010 General penalty for violations of chapter.

Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, it shall be punishable as a Class 4 misdemeanor, unless otherwise specified. (Code 1985, § 18-1).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


9.05.020 Adoption of state law as to certain misdemeanors.

Pursuant to the authority of article I, section 8 of the Constitution of Virginia, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the state contained in Title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, except those provisions and requirements the violation of which constitutes a felony of any class or a Class 1 or 2 misdemeanor, or which, by their very nature, can have no application to or within the city, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made applicable within the city. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted, mutatis mutandis, and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length herein, and it shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate, or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with, any provision of Title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia which is adopted by this section; provided, that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia. (Code 1985, § 18-2).


9.05.030 Interfering with, obstructing, etc., city officers or employees or persons doing work for city.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully interfere with, impede, obstruct, harass or resist any officer or employee of the city in the performance of the duties assigned to him by the Constitution or laws of the state, city ordinance, administrative regulations or orders of the city council or responsible administrative officials of the city or to obstruct or hinder any contractor or other person in the execution of any authorized work for the city.

(2) No person shall resist the orders or directions of officers or employees of the city lawfully given in the discharge of their duties. (Code 1964, §§ 13-1, 16-28, 16-30.1; Code 1985, § 18-3).


9.05.040 Interfering with enforcement of code, ordinances, etc.

It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any way with the lawful enforcement of any provision of this code, any ordinance or resolution of the city or any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer of the city under authority duly vested in him. (Code 1964, § 16-15; Code 1985, § 18-4).


9.05.050 Disrupting or disturbing proceedings of city council, boards, commissions, etc.

It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully interfere with, disrupt, impede or otherwise disturb the proceedings, whether formal or informal, of the city council or of any board, commission or committee of the city. (Code 1964, § 16-11.2; Code 1985, § 18-5).

Cross reference – Council meetings, SCC 2.10.070 et seq.

State law reference – Similar provisions and authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415.


9.05.060 Damaging city property generally.

It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage or deface any city property. It shall be the duty of the city manager, in all cases of injury to the property of the city to ascertain the amount of damages resulting from such injury and collect the same immediately from the party liable therefor. If any party liable for such damages shall fail to refuse to pay the same when demanded, it shall be the duty of the city manager to institute legal proceedings for the recovery of such damages, in the name of the city, and prosecute the same with all diligence to a recovery. (Code 1964, § 16-13; Code 1985, § 18-6).

Cross reference – Damaging waterworks property, SCC 13.15.160.

State law reference – Damaging property, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-137 et seq.


9.05.070 Damaging park property.

It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to damage or interfere with flowers, shrubbery, buildings, animals, fish, water fowl, birds or any other property within any city park or in any manner to injure or deface the fences enclosing such a park. (Code 1964, § 17-1; Code 1985, § 18-7).

Cross reference – Parks and recreation, Ch. 2.80.


9.05.080 Prohibited conduct in parks.

(1) Application of Section. This section shall apply to any park owned or operated by the city.

(2) Climbing Fences. It shall be unlawful for any person to climb any fence enclosing a park.

(3) Operation of Motor Vehicles. No person shall drive any motor vehicle within a park, except on the roadways. No motor vehicles, other than those used exclusively for passengers and pickup trucks of three-fourths-ton capacity or less, shall be operated in any park at any time, except by consent of the director of recreation. 

(4) Selling or Peddling. No person shall expose any article or thing for sale within a park, nor shall any hawking or peddling be allowed in any park, except as authorized by a permit issued by the city manager. Criteria for such permit will be established by the city manager, but in no case shall a permit be issued that is not in conjunction with a specific event or series of events conducted in the park for the benefit of the general public.

(5) Bringing Shrubs, Plants, Etc., into Park. No person, except an employee of the city acting under the direction of the director of recreation, shall bring into any park any tree, shrub, plant or flower, or any newly plucked branch or portion of a tree, shrub, plant or flower.

(6) Walking on Grass. No person shall walk upon the grass, lawn or turf of a park, when signs are in place giving notice of this provision.

(7) Use of Special Areas. No person shall go upon those parts of the parks set apart for swimming, golf, baseball, playgrounds, tennis or other recreation activities, except under the regulations and upon payment of the charges and fees prescribed for their use by the city manager.

(8) Suspension of Section in Fairgrounds. The city manager may suspend, from time to time, any of the provisions of this section in that part of Gypsy Hill Park known as the fairgrounds. (Code 1964, §§ 17-2, 17-4 – 17-8; Code 1985, § 18-8; Ord. 6-11-92).

Cross references – Parks generally, Ch. 2.80 SCC; dogs to be leashed when in city park or playground, SCC 6.10.200; littering in parks, SCC 8.30.020; motor vehicles and traffic, Title 10; speed limit in parks, SCC 10.15.010.


9.05.090 Prohibited conduct on church property.

It shall be unlawful for any person to lounge upon the steps or porch or in the yard of any church in the city, or to offer for sale or barter any article upon such steps or porch or in such yard, without permission from the appropriate church authorities. (Code 1964, § 16-10; Code 1985, § 18-9).


9.05.100 Prohibited conduct on parking lots.

(1) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

(a) “Parking lot” means any outdoor space, plot, place, lot, parcel, yard or enclosure, or any portion thereof, where more than two motor vehicles may be parked, stored, serviced, housed or kept. “Parking lot” includes, but is not limited to, the driving and parking areas of drive-in restaurants, drive-in banks, shopping centers, gasoline service stations, grocery stores, factories and all other business operations. “Parking lot” also includes city-owned or -operated off-street parking lots.

(b) “Public portions of a parking lot” means the parking lot areas designated by the parking lot owners, agents of owners or lessors for off-street parking of motor or other vehicles, driveways, sidewalks, malls, arcades, service areas and entrance ways into stores and buildings.

(c) “Shopping center” means any combination of retail stores and services contained within one or more buildings which are located on one or more parcels of land united to form a general shopping center site and upon which site there are located public areas for the nonexclusive use of members of the general public and occupants, visitors and customers of such retail stores and services.

(2) Entering After Hours. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter, walk upon or drive upon the public portions of a parking lot, without the consent of the owner or operator or the agent of either the owner or lessor, when the place of business on or adjacent to the parking lot is closed to the public and so posted by such responsible person having custody of the property. Posting shall be indicated by conspicuous signs of such size, shape and location as to properly warn the general public, but they shall not constitute an aesthetic nuisance. A notice of such posting of property shall be filed with the police department; provided, however, that failure to file such notice shall not invalidate the effect of such posting. This subsection shall not apply to city-owned parking lots which are intended for, made available to, and used by, the general public.

(3) Prohibited Acts with Reference to Vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person, on the public portions of a parking lot, to race the motor of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any motor vehicle, blow any horn of any motor vehicle needlessly or engage in any race with another vehicle, so as to create a nuisance or a disturbance or to annoy or endanger any person or other vehicle lawfully on the public portions of the parking lot.

(4) Obstructing Passage of Pedestrians. It shall be unlawful for any person, either alone or in concert with others, to be, assemble or congregate on the public portion of any parking lot for the purpose of lingering or loitering in any manner which will obstruct, impede or interfere with the free passage of other pedestrians using such parking lot. (Code 1964, § 16-32.1; Code 1985, § 18-10).


9.05.110 Urination or defecation in public.

No person shall urinate or defecate in public view or on any public street, sidewalk, alleyway, property or park, or in those areas of private buildings or property which are normally open to or accessible by the public, except in such restrooms, toilets or other approved sanitary facilities as are provided. (Code 1985, § 18-11).


9.05.120 Alcoholic beverages, taking or offering drink in public.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to take a drink of alcoholic beverages or to offer or tender a drink of alcoholic beverages to another, whether accepted or not, at or in any public place in the city.

(2) For the purposes of this section, the terms “alcoholic beverages” and “public place” shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Section 4.1-100 of the Code of Virginia.

(3) This section shall not apply to drinking alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof where the same is permitted by Section 4.1-308 of the Code of Virginia. (Ord. 2019-31. Code 1964, § 4-1; Code 1985, § 18-12; Ord. 3-11-93).

State law references – Provisions similar to subsection (1) above, Code of Virginia, § 4-78(a); authority for above section, § 4-96. 


9.05.130 Meetings, parades, demonstrations, etc., on streets or other public places.

(1) No person shall hold any public meeting or public demonstration, or deliver any public address, lecture or discourse, or conduct any parade or race upon any of the streets of the city or within any park or other public place under the control of the city, without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the chief of police.

(2) No person shall participate in any gathering, assemblage, demonstration, parade or race upon any of the streets of the city or within any park or other public place under the control of the city, which gathering, assemblage, demonstration, parade or race is held without a written permit from the chief of police.

(3) Whenever the chief of police shall be of the opinion that any activity mentioned in this section will not unreasonably interfere with the public use of streets or other public property and will not tend to disturb or imperil the public safety or the public peace or otherwise be inimical to the public welfare, he shall grant a permit applied for under this section. (Code 1964, § 16-31; Code 1985, § 18-13).


9.05.140 Curfew for minors.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 16 years to be or remain at or upon the streets, alleys or public places in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 4:30 a.m., unless accompanied by or in the care of his parent or guardian or some other adult with the consent of his parent or guardian, except in the event of an emergency. For the purposes of this subsection, an “emergency” shall constitute a time when assistance from some person or governmental or other agency is needed or mandatory for the health, safety, comfort or general welfare of an individual, family group or other community. An exception to the provisions of this subsection shall be made for one-half hour after the end of organized school or public athletic events attended by such minors.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having legal care and custody of any minor to allow or permit such minor to violate the provisions of subsection (1) of this section.

(3) Any officer taking a minor into custody for violating this section shall comply with the provisions of Section 16.1-247 of the Code of Virginia. (Code 1964, § 16-12; Code 1985, § 18-14).


9.05.150 General curfew in emergencies.

(1) In the event of natural or manmade disasters, civil disturbances or riots, an emergency may be declared upon the recommendation of the ranking police official available, and approved by the city manager, if available, and the individual concurrence of a majority of the members of the city council, if available, but there must be the individual concurrence of at least two members of the council. No meeting of the council shall be necessary to consider this concurrence.

(2) Upon the declaration of an emergency under this section, the ranking police official available, with the concurrence of the city manager, if available, may declare a curfew from sunset to sunrise, or for any time period between sunset and sunrise, prohibiting unauthorized persons from being on or using the public streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way and public areas of the city and no person shall violate the terms of such curfew. The declaration of the curfew shall specify what persons shall be authorized to be on or to use the public streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way and public areas of the city.

(3) Persons who provide health, public safety and general welfare services or members of accredited news media for the community, as well as those people who respond to emergency situations, shall be exempt from any curfew imposed pursuant to this section. (Code 1964, § 16-12.1; Code 1985, § 18-15; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


9.05.160 Interfering with free passage of others for certain purposes.

No person shall, by signaling, addressing, soliciting, catching hold of or in any other way, interfere with the free passage of any other person with whom such person is not personally acquainted, for the purpose of inducing such other person to converse with, accompany or ride with such person. (Code 1964, § 16-21; Code 1985, § 18-16).

State law reference – Obstructing free passage of others, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-404.


9.05.170 Sale of certain weapons to pupils of Virginia School for Deaf and Blind.

It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, give, furnish, or cause to be sold, bartered, given or furnished, to any pupil of the Virginia School for the Deaf and Blind, situated in the city, a pistol, gun, rifle, dirk or bowie knife. (Code 1964, § 30-3; Code 1985, § 18-17).

State law reference – Sale of weapons to minors, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-309.


9.05.180 Carelessly or negligently throwing stones or missiles or discharging gravel shooter, air gun, etc.

It shall be unlawful for any person to carelessly or negligently throw any stone or missile of any character, or discharge any gravel shooter, air rifle, BB gun, bow and arrow, or similar device within the city, so as to endanger life or property. (Code 1964, § 30-5; Code 1985, § 18-18; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


9.05.190 Unlawful conditions on private property generally.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to have or suffer any unwholesome or offensive matter, stagnant water or nuisance of any kind upon any vacant land, in any house or cellar or upon any premises owned by such person in the city. Any grass, weeds, bushes and vegetation, other than trees, ornamental shrubbery, flowers and garden vegetables properly tended, having an overall height of more than 10 inches above the surface of the surrounding ground shall be judged to be in violation of the provisions of this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, in the case of a large tract of land exceeding two acres, the health official or such other person as may be designated by the city manager may require that a strip of land 35 feet in width along all lot lines of said parcel be cleared of any grass, weeds, bushes and vegetation other than the permitted trees, ornamental shrubbery, flowers and garden vegetables properly tended, having an overall height of more than 10 inches above the surface of the surrounding ground, if in the opinion of such official said 35-foot strip serves the purpose of meeting the spirit and intent of this chapter. 

(2) Whenever any condition in violation of this section is found to exist, the health officer, or such other person as may be designated by the city manager, or the city manager, himself, shall give notice to the owner of the premises to abate or remove such condition within 10 days. Such notice shall be in writing, shall include a description of the premises sufficient for identification and shall set forth the violation and state that, if the violation is not corrected within 10 days, the city may proceed to correct the same as authorized by this section. Service of such notice shall be by any one of the following methods:

(a) By delivery to the owner personally or by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode of the owner with a person who is over the age of 16 years and a member of the family of the owner.

(b) By depositing the notice in the United States Post Office addressed to the owner at his last known address with postage prepaid thereon.

(c) By posting and keeping posted, for 24 hours, a copy of the notice, in placard form, in a conspicuous place on the premises on which the violation exists.

(3) If the owner of any property fails to comply with a notice given pursuant to this section, within 10 days after the service of such notice, he shall be subject to prosecution for violation of this section and each day that such failure continues shall be a separate offense. In addition, the city manager may have the condition described in the notice abated, removed or otherwise corrected and all expenses incurred thereby shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of the property and shall be collected as taxes and levies are collected. All such expenses shall constitute a lien against the property on which the work was done. (Code 1964, §§ 13-13.2 – 13-13.4, 13-14, 13-15, 13-16.1, 13-17; Code 1985, § 18-19; Ord. 6-9-94; Amended during the 2003 reformat).

State law reference – Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-901, 15.2-1115. 


9.05.200 Open storage of inoperative vehicles.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep for more than 10 days, except within a fully enclosed building or structure or otherwise shielded or screened from public view, on any property in the city zoned for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, as such are defined in Section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, which is inoperable.

(2) As used in this section, the term “inoperable motor vehicle” shall mean any motor vehicle which is not in operating condition; or which, for a period of 90 days or longer, has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle; or for which there is no valid license plate or inspection sticker. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an antique motor vehicle (as defined by Section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia) is not required to have an inspection sticker if such vehicle is not used for general transportation and is only used (a) for participation in club activities, exhibits, tours, parades and similar events; and (b) on the public streets and highways of the commonwealth and municipalities for the purpose of testing their operation, obtaining repairs or maintenance and transportation to and from the activities set forth in subsection (2)(a) of this section. As used in this section, the term “shielded or screened” does not include covering the vehicle with a tarpaulin or other sheet of material.

(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business which, on June 26, 1970, was regularly engaged in the business as an automobile dealer, salvage yard or scrap processor.

(4) The owners of property zoned for residential or commercial or agricultural purposes, shall, within 10 days of notice to do so given in writing by the city police department and mailed to the post office address shown for such owner in the city tax records, remove therefrom any such inoperable motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers that are not kept within a fully enclosed building or structure. In the event such inoperable motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers are not so removed after the 10-day notice set forth above, the city may, through its own agents and/or employees, remove such vehicles, trailers or semitrailers. Any such vehicles, trailers or semitrailers removed by the city after such notice may be disposed of by the city after giving written notice to the registered owner of such vehicles, trailers or semitrailers. Such additional notice shall be sent by first class mail to the address of the owner of such vehicle shown on the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles. Such additional notice shall advise the owner that, unless the vehicle is claimed by the owner, and all costs of removal and/or storage is paid or reimbursed to the city within 30 days, the same will be disposed of. All costs of any such removal, storage and/or disposal shall be chargeable to the owner of such vehicle or the owner of the premises upon which it was stored prior to removal. Such costs may be collected by the city as taxes are collected. Every cost authorized hereunder with which the owner of the premises has been assessed shall constitute a lien against the property from which the vehicle was removed and such lien shall continue until actual payment of such costs has been paid to the city.

(5) A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. (Code 1964, § 15-296; Code 1985, § 18-20; Ord. 6-13-96; Amended during the 2003 reformat).

Cross references – Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100; time limit for parking inoperable vehicles on streets or city parking lots, SCC 10.25.100.

State law reference – Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-904.


9.05.210 Soliciting for lewd or indecent acts or prostitution.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to solicit another, by word, sign or gesture, to commit any act which is lewd, lascivious, or indecent or to solicit for the purpose of prostitution.

(2) A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. (Code 1964, § 23-12; Code 1985, § 18-21).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.

State law reference – Sexual offenses, prostitution, etc., Code of Virginia, § 18.2-344 et seq.


9.05.220 Unlawful CATV connections.

(1) As used in this section, the terms “community antenna television system,” “franchisee” and “subscriber” shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Staunton Community Antenna Television Ordinance approved November 24, 1981, and on file in the city clerk’s office.

(2) No equipment, cable or other apparatus shall be connected between a franchisee’s system and a subscriber’s receiver, except as furnished and installed by the franchisee. Any person causing such equipment to be installed or used shall be subject to a penalty of $50.00. (Ord. 11-24-81, § 12.8; Code 1985, § 18-22).

Cross reference – Staunton Community Antenna Television Ordinance not affected by code or ordinance adopting code, SCC 1.05.060(8).


9.05.230 Regulation of smoking – Generally.

For the health, benefit and well-being of the citizens of Staunton, Virginia, smoking (as defined herein) shall be regulated by the city manager of the city of Staunton as to all buildings owned or leased by the city of Staunton and used for public purposes, including any buildings owned or leased by associated city departments, including public schools. (Code 1985, § 18-31; Ord. 9-27-90).


9.05.240 Same – Definition.

(1) “Smoke” or “smoking” means the carrying or holding of any lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment, or the lighting, inhaling, or exhaling of smoke from a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind. (Code 1985, § 18-32; Ord. 9-27-90).


9.05.250 Same – Designation of “smoking permitted” and “no smoking” areas.

The city manager for the city of Staunton shall provide reasonable no smoking areas in all city-owned or -leased buildings or spaces open to the public for city business, taking into consideration the nature of the use and the size of the building. Signs shall be posted therein stating “Smoking Permitted” or “No Smoking.” In addition:

(1) No smoking shall be permitted in elevators regardless of capacity.

(2) No smoking shall be permitted in common areas in an educational facility (as defined in Section 15.2-2820 of the Code of Virginia) including, but not limited to, classrooms, hallways, auditoriums, libraries, and public meeting rooms.

(3) No smoking shall be permitted in any part of a restaurant designated a “no smoking” area pursuant to the Virginia Indoor Clean Air Act.

(4) No smoking shall be permitted in indoor service lines and cashier areas.

(5) No smoking shall be permitted in school buses and public conveyances.

(6) No smoking shall be permitted in local or district health departments. (Code 1985, § 18-33; Ord. 9-27-90; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


9.05.260 Same – Posting of signs.

Any person who owns, manages or otherwise controls any building or area in which smoking is regulated by SCC 9.05.230 through 9.05.270, shall post in an appropriate place, in a clear, conspicuous and sufficient manner, “Smoking Permitted” signs, “No Smoking” signs, or “No Smoking Section Available” signs. (Code 1985, § 18-34; Ord. 9-27-90).


9.05.270 Same – Enforcement.

No person may smoke in a designated “no smoking” area and any person who continues to smoke in such area after being asked to refrain from smoking shall be subject to a civil penalty of $25.00. (Code 1985, § 18-35; Ord. 9-27-90).


9.05.280 Application for a concealed handgun permit – Fingerprinting.

Repealed by Ord. 2012-08. (Code 1985, § 18-36; Ord. 6-24-97; amended during the 2003 reformat).


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.05    Motor Vehicles and Traffic

10.10    Repealed

10.15    Operation of Vehicles Generally

10.20    One-Way Streets

10.25    Stopping, Standing and Parking

10.30    Vehicles Used for Vending on Streets

10.35    Abandoned Vehicles

10.40    Bicycles and Various Motorized Devices


Chapter 10.05 MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC*

Sections:

10.05.010    Definitions.

10.05.020    Compliance with chapter – General penalty for violations.

10.05.030    Applicability of chapter to vehicles regardless of ownership.

10.05.040    Application of chapter to persons riding bicycles or mopeds or riding or driving animals.

10.05.050    Enforcement of chapter and direction of traffic by police.

10.05.060    Emergency powers of chief of police to regulate or prohibit traffic or parking.

10.05.070    Authority of fire department officers to direct traffic.

10.05.080    Compliance with orders of police and fire department officials.

10.05.090    General authority of city manager as to traffic and parking fines, etc.

10.05.100    Adoption of state law.

10.05.110    Duty of driver to remove temporarily disabled vehicle.

10.05.120    Authority of police to remove vehicle involved in accident from street.

10.05.130    Identification of funeral processions.

10.05.140    Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers.

10.05.150    Boarding or alighting from moving vehicle.

10.05.160    Terminals for intercity buses.

10.05.170    Pedestrians to obey traffic signs, signals, etc.

*Charter reference – Authority of council to prescribe traffic regulations, § 11(15).

Cross references – Driving vehicle to scene of fire, SCC 2.70.060; license tax on automobile graveyards, SCC 3.10.060; taxicabs, Ch. 5.30 SCC; maximum level of sound emitted by motor vehicles, SCC 8.25.120; permit for use of loud speakers on vehicles, SCC 8.25.130; restriction on sounding of vehicle warning devices, SCC 8.25.140; noise from loading and unloading operations, SCC 8.25.150; sound trucks, SCC 8.25.200 et seq.; transportation of garbage on streets, SCC 8.30.040; operation of motor vehicles in parks, SCC 9.05.080(3); bicycles, Ch. 10.40 SCC; streets and sidewalks, Title 12.

State law reference – General authority of city relative to traffic, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300 et seq.


10.05.010 Definitions.

All definitions of words and phrases contained in the state law adopted by SCC 10.05.100 shall apply to such words and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless clearly indicated to the contrary. (Code 1985, § 16-1).


10.05.020 Compliance with chapter – General penalty for violations.

It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of this chapter shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. (Code 1964, § 15-16; Code 1985, § 16-2).

State law reference – Similar provisions applicable to violations of state traffic laws, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113, city prohibited from imposing penalty for traffic violation which is greater than penalty imposed by state for similar offense, § 46.2-1300.


10.05.030 Applicability of chapter to vehicles regardless of ownership.

The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles regardless of ownership, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter. (Code 1964, § 15-2; Code 1985, § 16-3).

State law reference – Similar provisions as to state traffic regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-801. 


10.05.040 Application of chapter to persons riding bicycles or mopeds or riding or driving animals.

Every person riding a bicycle, moped or an animal upon a street and every person driving an animal thereon shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application. (Code 1964, § 15-3; Code 1985, § 16-4; Amended during the 2003 reformat).

Cross references – Animals, Title 6; bicycles, Ch. 10.40 SCC.

State law reference – Similar provisions as to state traffic regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800.


10.05.050 Enforcement of chapter and direction of traffic by police.

It shall be the duty of the officers and crossing guards of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce this chapter and all other traffic ordinances of this city and all of the state motor vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city. Officers and crossing guards of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic, by voice, hand or signal, in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. (Code 1985, § 16-5; Amended during the 2003 reformat).

State law references – Duty of police to enforce state traffic laws, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-102; direction of traffic by police, § 46.2-1309. 


10.05.060 Emergency powers of chief of police to regulate or prohibit traffic or parking.

During any emergency, the chief of police shall have power to regulate or prohibit traffic or parking on any street within the city. (Code 1985, § 16-6).


10.05.070 Authority of fire department officers to direct traffic.

Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. (Code 1985, § 16-7).

Cross reference – Fire department, SCC 2.70.010 et seq.


10.05.080 Compliance with orders of police and fire department officials.

No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official given pursuant to authority granted in this chapter. (Code 1985, § 16-8).


10.05.090 General authority of city manager as to traffic and parking fines, etc.

(1) The city manager may cause appropriate signs to be erected and maintained, designating residence and business districts, streets and railway grade crossings and such other signs as may be deemed necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter and to control traffic.

(2) The city manager shall have power to provide for the regulation of traffic by means of traffic officers or lights or other traffic control devices on any portion of a street where traffic is heavy or continuous or where, in the city manager’s judgment, conditions may require.

(3) Even if not specifically mentioned otherwise in provisions of the Staunton City Code, the city manager is authorized and has the power to make and enforce any additional regulations concerning parking that may be required, including, but not limited to, a schedule of penalties for violations, deadlines for the payment of fines, and late payment penalties for fines not paid when due. The city manager shall at least 30 days before the effective date of such schedule post the schedule in at least one public place and on the city’s website and notify city council of the schedule. (Ord. 2016-10. Code 1964, §§ 15-18, 15-23; Code 1985, § 16-9).


10.05.100 Adoption of state law.

Pursuant to the authority of Section 46.2-1300 of the Code of Virginia, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the state contained in Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, except those provisions and requirements a violation of which constitutes a felony or a Class 1 or 2 misdemeanor, and except those provisions and requirements which, by their very nature, can have no application to or within the city, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made applicable within the city. References to “highways of the state” contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways and other public ways within the city. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted, mutatis mutandis, and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length herein, and it shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia which is adopted by this section; provided, that in no event, shall the penalty imposed by the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia. (Code 1985, § 16-10; Ord. 10-25-90).


10.05.110 Duty of driver to remove temporarily disabled vehicle.

The driver of any vehicle which is temporarily disabled while on the paved surface of a street shall remove the same as expeditiously as conditions and circumstances may permit. (Code 1964, § 15-117; Code 1985, § 16-11).


10.05.120 Authority of police to remove vehicle involved in accident from street.

Whenever a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer involved in an accident is found upon a city street and is so located as to impede the orderly flow of traffic, the police may, at no cost to the owner or operator, remove such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer from the street to some point in the vicinity where such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer will not impede the flow of traffic. (Code 1985, § 16-12).

State law reference – Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1212.


10.05.130 Identification of funeral processions.

A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the burning of the headlights on each such vehicle or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the police department. (Code 1985, § 16-13).


10.05.140 Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers.

No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. (Code 1985, § 16-14).


10.05.150 Boarding or alighting from moving vehicle.

No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. (Code 1985, § 16-15).


10.05.160 Terminals for intercity buses.

All persons operating buses for the transportation of passengers for hire between the city and points outside the city shall operate their buses into not more than two bus terminals located at such points within the city as may be approved by the city council, which terminals shall be located on private property and not within the street lines of the city. (Code 1964, § 15-125; Code 1985, § 16-16).


10.05.170 Pedestrians to obey traffic signs, signals, etc.

Pedestrians shall obey signs and signals erected on streets for the direction and control of travel and traffic and they shall obey the orders of police officers engaged in directing travel and traffic on the highways and streets. Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $5.00 for each offense. (Code 1985, § 16-17).

State law reference – Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-935.


Chapter 10.10 LOCAL VEHICLE LICENSE

(Repealed by Ord. 2011-12)


Chapter 10.15 OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY

Sections:

10.15.010    Special speed limits in congested areas or at dangerous points.

10.15.020    Speed limit in parks.

10.15.030    Driving across newly made pavement.

10.15.040    Driving on steep grades.

10.15.050    Blocking or impeding traffic by lack of snow tires or tire chains.

10.15.060    Obstructing intersections or crosswalks.

10.15.070    Driving through funeral or other processions.

10.15.080    Driving in funeral or other processions.

10.15.090    Stop and yield intersections.

10.15.100    Entering or leaving limited-access roadway.

10.15.110    Driving on play streets.

10.15.120    Driving to scene of police investigation.

10.15.130    Limitations on backing.

10.15.140    Driving dangerous vehicle or when vision obscured.

10.15.150    Operation of go-carts on streets.


10.15.010 Special speed limits in congested areas or at dangerous points.

The city manager, with the approval of the city council, may decrease the speed limits established by Sections 46.2-870 – 46.2-878 of the Code of Virginia in congested areas or at dangerous points on the streets of the city. Whenever speed limits so designated by the manager are clearly indicated by signs or markers, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of such limits. (Code 1964, § 15-70; Code 1985, § 16-48).

State law reference – Authority to decrease speed limits established by state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300.


10.15.020 Speed limit in parks.

It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle in a city park at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour. (Code 1964, § 15-70; Code 1985, § 16-49).

Cross reference – Parks and recreation, Ch. 2.80 SCC.


10.15.030 Driving across newly made pavement.

No person shall drive any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement in any public street, across or around which pavement there is a barrier or a sign warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement, or a sign stating that the street is closed. (Code 1964, § 15-56; Code 1985, § 16-50).


10.15.040 Driving on steep grades.

The driver of a motor vehicle descending or ascending steep grades shall hold such motor vehicle under control and as near the right-hand side of the street as reasonably possible. (Code 1964, § 15-57; Code 1985, § 16-51).


10.15.050 Blocking or impeding traffic by lack of snow tires or tire chains.

(1) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to block or impede the orderly flow of traffic on any street within the city by reason of not having adequate snow tires or tire chains on his vehicle when snow and ice, either or both, are on the streets.

(2) When any motor vehicle without snow tires or tire chains shall become stalled on the traveled portion of a street of the city, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of such vehicle was in violation of this section.

(3) Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not exceeding $25.00 for each such offense. (Code 1964, §§ 15-57.1; Code 1985, § 16-52).

State law reference – Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1302. 


10.15.060 Obstructing intersections or crosswalks.

No driver of a vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked cross-walk, unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. (Code 1985, § 16-53).


10.15.070 Driving through funeral or other processions.

No operator of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles, persons or animals comprising a funeral or other authorized procession, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. This provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. (Code 1985, § 16-54).

State law reference – Right-of-way of funeral processions under police escort, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-828.


10.15.080 Driving in funeral or other processions.

Each driver of a vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. (Code 1985, § 16-55).


10.15.090 Stop and yield intersections.

The city manager may designate intersections at which vehicles shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way and may cause to be erected appropriate signs or markers at such intersections, so that an ordinarily observant person will be aware of the existence of such designation. When such signs or markers have been so erected, the duty of drivers approaching the same shall be as prescribed by the state law adopted by SCC 10.05.100. (Code 1964, §§ 15-17,15-129; Code 1985, § 16-56).

State law references – Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301; duty of drivers approaching stop or yield sign, § 46.2-821.


10.15.100 Entering or leaving limited-access roadway.

No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited-access roadway, except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. (Code 1985, § 16-57).


10.15.110 Driving on play streets.

(1) When authorized, signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon such street or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon such street or portion thereof.

(2) Constitution Drive, situated within Gypsy Hill Park, is hereby designated a play street under authority of Section 46.2-932 of the Code of Virginia. On said street, the use of roller skates, skate boards or roller blades or other devices on wheels or runners are permitted; provided, however, all such devices must be operated in a clockwise direction on said street facing motor vehicular traffic. No person riding on any bicycle, moped, roller skates, roller blades, skate boards or other devices on wheels or runners shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle on the roadway. (Code 1985, § 16-58; Ord. 6-28-95).


10.15.120 Driving to scene of police investigation.

It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, having information that police have been requested or directed to proceed to any place in the city for the purpose of investigating an accident or a suspected violation of law, to drive his vehicle to such place or the vicinity thereof, except on official business. The presence, at or near any such place, of a vehicle equipped with a radio tunable to police emergency frequencies shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle was driven to such place in violation of this section. (Code 1985, § 16-59).


10.15.130 Limitations on backing.

No vehicle shall be backed on any street without the driver first indicating, by some sign or signal, his intention to back and no vehicle shall be backed on any street if, by so doing, any other vehicle is impeded or any pedestrian is endangered. No vehicle shall, in any event or on any street, be backed a greater distance than 25 feet, unless it is necessary to relieve a traffic jam or on orders from a police officer. (Code 1985, § 16-60).


10.15.140 Driving dangerous vehicle or when vision obscured.

No vehicle shall be driven or operated in the city when so constructed, including equipment, or loaded as to be dangerous or to retard or prevent the driver from having a view sufficient for safety. (Code 1985, § 16-61).


10.15.150 Operation of go-carts on streets.

It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, on the streets of the city, any self-propelled vehicle of the type commonly known as a “go-cart,” weighing less than 500 pounds and designed for transporting a person. (Code 1985, § 16-62).


Chapter 10.20 ONE-WAY STREETS

Sections:

10.20.010    Duty of drivers.

10.20.020    Designated.


10.20.010 Duty of drivers.

It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle upon any street or portion of a street designated by the provisions of SCC 10.20.020 as a one-way street to drive such vehicle in a direction contrary to that designated as the direction for the movement of traffic, if appropriate signs or markers are in place indicating the direction of lawful movement for traffic. (Code 1964, § 15-103; Code 1985, § 16-73).


10.20.020 Designated.

(1) Augusta Street, from its intersection with Johnson Street to Middlebrook Avenue, is hereby designated a one-way street for traffic moving from north to south.

(2) Barrister’s Row (Court House Alley) is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from east to west.

(3) Beverley Street, between Jefferson Street and Coalter Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from west to east.

(4) Central Avenue, between Frederick Street and Johnson Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from north to south.

(5) Frederick Street, between Coalter Street and West Beverley Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from east to west. 

(6) Kalorama Street, between Market Street and Coalter Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from west to east.

(7) Madison Street, between Frederick Street and West Beverley Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from north to south.

(8) Market Street, between East Beverley Street and Kalorama Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from north to south.

(9) New Street. 

(a) New Street, between Johnson Street and Augusta Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from south to north.

(b) New Street, between Johnson Street and the old railroad station, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from north to south.

(10) Sherwood Lane, between Sherwood Avenue and East Beverley Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving west to east. 

(11) Unnamed street between New Street and C & O telegraph office. The street leading from the south end of New Street in front of the office of the White Star Mills to the Chesapeake and Ohio telegraph office is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from east to west.

(12) Washington Street, between Frederick Street and Johnson Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from north to south. 

(13) Church Street, between West Beverley Street and Johnson Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from south to north.

(14) Middlebrook Avenue, between South Augusta Street and South Lewis Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from east to west.

(15) Federal Street, between Church Street and Lewis Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from west to east.

(16) Stafford Street, between Johnson Street and Jackson Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from north to south.

(17) Richardson Street, between Jackson Street and Johnson Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from south to north.

(18) Rose Street, between Augusta Street and Baptist Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from west to east.

(19) Baptist Street, between Rose Street and Sunnyside Street, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from north to south.

(20) Glen Avenue, from its intersection with Donaghe Street to its intersection with Baylor Street, is hereby designated a one-way street for traffic moving from Donaghe Street toward Baylor Street. 

(21) Baldwin Street, from its intersection with Lewis Street to its intersection with Central Avenue, is hereby designated as a one-way street for traffic moving from west to east. (Ord. 2007-25. Code 1964, § 15-104 – 15-111; Code 1985, § 16-79 – 16-98; Ord. 7-25-85; Ord. 9-14-89; Ord. 10-8-92; Ord. 12-17-92; Ord. 4-22-93; Ord. 6-10-93; Ord. 12-14-00; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


Chapter 10.25 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING*

Sections:

Article I. Generally

10.25.010    Stopping and parking generally.

10.25.020    Stopping for the purpose of advertising.

10.25.030    Leaving vehicle on paved, improved or main-traveled portion of certain streets.

10.25.040    Regulation of parking by city manager.

10.25.050    General parking prohibitions.

10.25.060    Parking unlicensed vehicle.

10.25.070    Parking in space reserved for the handicapped.

10.25.080    Time limit for parking on city streets and in or on city-owned parking facilities – Storage prohibited.

10.25.090    Time limit for parking at library.

10.25.100    Time limit for parking inoperable vehicles.

10.25.110    Time limit for parking in loading zone/customer pickup zone.

10.25.120    Parking of trucks, motor homes, etc.

10.25.130    Parking or stopping of bus for purpose of loading or unloading passengers.

10.25.140    Parking for purpose of repairing vehicle.

10.25.150    Backing to curb.

10.25.160    Sale of merchandise from vehicle parked in business district.

10.25.170    Use of city parking lots for commercial purposes.

10.25.180    Charge for parking in city-owned attendant-operated parking lot.

10.25.190    Free parking on streets and in city-owned parking lots.

Article II. Parking Meters

10.25.200    Establishment of meter zones.

10.25.210    Application of article to city parking meter lots.

10.25.220    Installation of meters and marking of parking spaces.

10.25.230    Specifications.

10.25.240    Maintenance.

10.25.250    Rates and parking time.

10.25.260    Hours of operation.

10.25.270    Required use of metered spaces.

10.25.280    Method of parking in metered space.

10.25.290    Deposit of coin required – Overtime parking generally.

10.25.300    Parking meter permit – Exemption.

10.25.310    Extension of time limit by deposit of additional coins.

10.25.320    Parking when signal indicates that time has expired.

10.25.330    Purpose of required deposit.

10.25.340    Reserving or blocking metered spaces.

10.25.350    Loading and unloading spaces in meter zones (including customer pickup zones).

10.25.360    Parking meter permits and 10-hour-limit parking meters.

Article III. Parking Violations

10.25.370    Police to report and make complaint.

10.25.380    Notice to be attached to vehicle.

10.25.390    Penalty – Generally.

10.25.400    Same – Meter violations.

10.25.410    Notice prerequisite to issuance of summons.

10.25.420    Presumption in prosecutions.

10.25.430    Removal or immobilization of vehicles against which there are outstanding parking violation notices.

Article IV. Residential Permit Parking Blocks and Downtown Perimeter Permit Parking Blocks

10.25.440    Purpose and intent.

10.25.450    Definitions.

10.25.460    Parking in certain residential areas prohibited without permits.

10.25.470    Vehicle permits and the regulation of restricted parking blocks.

10.25.480    Vehicle permits, number, categories, terms, eligibility criteria, and fees.

10.25.490    Affected area – Hours.

10.25.500    Format – Display – Issuance of permits.

10.25.510    Creation of new permit parking blocks.

10.25.520    Implementation of a restricted parking block.

*Cross references – Prohibited conduct on parking lots, SCC 9.05.100; parking bicycles in downtown or other commercial areas, SCC 10.40.140; parking facilities in subdivisions, SCC 17.15.260.

State law reference – Authority for local parking regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220.

Article I. Generally


10.25.010 Stopping and parking generally.

(1) Unless in an emergency or otherwise indicated by signs or to allow another vehicle or a pedestrian to cross in front, no vehicle shall be stopped in any street except close to and parallel with the curb, and in no instance shall vehicles be parked less than four feet apart, nor with the wheels further than 12 inches from the curb.

(2) Except upon one-way streets, no vehicle shall be parked except within 12 inches of the right-hand curb, unless otherwise provided by the council or by regulations of the city manager.

(3) Vehicles shall not be stopped in such manner as to block or obstruct the orderly and lawful passage of other traffic, nor between a safety zone and curb, nor within 15 feet of the ends of any obstruction opposite the vehicle. Vehicles stopped two or more abreast parallel with the curb shall be deemed to obstruct traffic in violation of this subsection.

(4) The provisions of subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall not apply to any vehicle so positioned in a parking space designated by painted lines that no portion of the vehicle extends over such painted lines. (Code 1964, §§ 15-57.2, 15-117; Code 1985, § 16-101; Ord. 1-13-00).


10.25.020 Stopping for the purpose of advertising.

It shall be unlawful for any person to stop a vehicle at any time, upon any street, for the purpose of advertising any article of any kind, or displaying thereupon advertisements of any article, or advertisement for the sale of the vehicle itself. (Code 1964, § 15-117; Code 1985, § 16-102).

Cross reference – Advertising, Ch. 8.05 SCC.


10.25.030 Leaving vehicle on paved, improved or main-traveled portion of certain streets.

No person shall leave standing any vehicle, attended or unattended, upon the paved, improved or main-traveled portion of any street outside of a business or residence district, when it is practicable to leave such vehicle standing off the paved, improved or main-traveled portion of such street. (Code 1964, § 15-117; Code 1985, § 16-103).


10.25.040 Regulation of parking by city manager.

(1) The city manager may adopt and put into effect regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, designating the time, place and manner that vehicles may be parked on the city streets and shall make and enforce such additional rules and regulations as parking conditions may require.

(2) When any regulation is made pursuant to this section and when appropriate signs or markers have been erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate such regulation. (Code 1964, § 15-17.1; Code 1985, § 16-104).


10.25.050 General parking prohibitions.

(1) No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:

(a) On a sidewalk.

(b) In front of a driveway.

(c) Within an intersection.

(d) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.

(e) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway.

(f) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by official signs or markings.

(g) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or a railroad grade crossing.

(h) On the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of such entrance, when properly posted.

(i) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when such parking would obstruct traffic.

(j) On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street.

(k) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or within a tunnel.

(l) In any area or space on public or private property open for parking to the public designated and marked as a “fire lane.”

(m) At any place where official signs prohibit parking.

(n) In any parking space marked “Reserved Parking” unless the vehicle so parked is entitled to reserved parking in that particular space.

(o) At any place that obstructs access to a city water meter.

(2) For any violation of subsection (1)(l) of this section, the penalty shall be a fine in an amount as specified in a schedule as promulgated from time to time by the city manager and any law enforcement officer may (a) attach the notice of violation to the vehicle set forth in SCC 10.25.380 and/or (b) may remove the vehicle or have the vehicle removed to a storage area for safekeeping and shall report the removal to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the commonwealth of Virginia and to the owner (with the notice of violation attached) as promptly as possible, all as provided in Section 46.2-1211 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. Before obtaining possession of his property, the owner shall pay to the parties entitled thereto all costs incidental to its removal and storage.

(3) For any violation of subsection (1)(n) or (o) of this section, the penalty shall be a fine in an amount as specified in a schedule as promulgated from time to time by the city manager and any law enforcement officer may (a) attach the notice of violation to the vehicle as set forth in SCC 10.25.380 and/or (b) may remove the vehicle or have the vehicle removed in accordance with Section 46.2-1213(B) of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, the provisions of which are incorporated herein by reference. Such removal shall be reported immediately to the city manager or assistant city manager and to the chief of police of the city of Staunton, and, as promptly as possible, to the owner of the vehicle. (Ord. 2016-11. Code 1964, § 15-119; Ord. 6-9-83, § 2; Code 1985, § 16-105; Ord. 12-17-92; Ord. 12-14-00; Ord. 10-24-02; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


10.25.060 Parking unlicensed vehicle.

It shall be unlawful for any person to park, on any street or parking lot belonging to or operated by the city, any vehicle on which currently legal license plates and decals are not properly displayed, as required by state law and this chapter. (Code 1964, § 15-34; Code 1985, § 16-106).


10.25.070 Parking in space reserved for the handicapped.

(1) No vehicles other than those displaying disabled parking license plates, organizational removable windshield placards, permanent removable windshield placards, or temporary removable windshield placards issued under Section 46.2-1241 of the Code of Virginia, or Disabled Veteran (DV) parking license plates issued under Subsection B of Section 46.2-739 of the Code of Virginia, shall be parked in any parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities.

(2) No person without a disability that limits or impairs his ability to walk shall park a vehicle with the license plates and/or placards set forth above in subsection (1) of this section in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk except when transporting a disabled person in the vehicle.

(3) A summons or parking ticket for an offense in violation of this section may be issued by law enforcement officers, volunteers serving in units established pursuant to Section 46.2-1244, and other uniformed personnel employed by the city of Staunton to enforce parking regulations, without the necessity of a warrant being obtained by the owner of a private parking area.

(4) Parking a vehicle in a space reserved for persons with disabilities in violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine in an amount as specified in a schedule as promulgated from time to time by the city manager.

(5) In any prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons, parking ticket, citation or warrant was parked in violation of this section, together with proof that the defendant was at the time the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by Chapter 6 (Section 46.2-600 et seq.) of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who committed the violation.

(6) No violation of this section shall be dismissed for a property owner’s failure to strictly comply with the requirements for disabled parking signs set forth in Section 36-99.11 of the Code of Virginia, provided the space is clearly distinguishable as a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk.

(7) The provisions of Sections 46.2-1247, 46.2-1248, 46.2-1249, 46.2-1250, 46.2-1251, 46.2-1252, and 46.2-1253 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, relating to counterfeiting disability licenses or placards, use of counterfeit disability licenses or placards, alteration of disabled licenses or placards, unauthorized use of disabled licenses or placards, fraudulently obtaining a disabled license or placard, selling or exchanging a disabled license or placard and providing to another such licenses or placards without sale or exchange of consideration, are incorporated herein by reference.

(8) Upon conviction of a violation set forth in the sections of the Code of Virginia incorporated herein by reference (set forth in subsection (7) of this section), the court shall send notice of the conviction and the number of the license plate or placard involved to the Commissioner of the Department of Motor Vehicles for the Commonwealth of Virginia. (Ord. 2016-11. Code 1985, § 16-107; Ord. 12-10-98; Amended during the 2003 reformat).

State law reference – Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1242 et seq. 


10.25.080 Time limit for parking on city streets and in or on city-owned parking facilities – Storage prohibited.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any street and leave such vehicle standing for a period of more than seven consecutive days.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to store any vehicle on or in a city-owned parking facility without obtaining a permit therefor. For the purposes of this section, any vehicle parked within or upon a city-owned facility for seven consecutive 24-hour periods, without being taken from the facility during that time, shall be considered a stored vehicle.

(3) The city manager, in his discretion, may issue a temporary permit allowing storage upon application therefor in unusual or special circumstances. The permit shall state the dates of permitted storage and be displayed in plain view inside the vehicle.

(4) The presumption set forth in SCC 10.25.420 is incorporated herein by reference.

(5) For a violation of this section, there shall incur a fine in an amount as specified in a schedule as promulgated from time to time by the city manager for the first violation in any 12-month period and penalty of a fine in an amount as specified in a schedule as promulgated from time to time by the city manager for subsequent violations within said 12-month period. The notice provision of SCC 10.25.410 shall apply prior to the issuance of a summons hereunder. (Ord. 2016-11. Code 1964, § 15-124; Code 1985, § 16-108; Ord. 1-13-00).


10.25.090 Time limit for parking at library.

(1) Except for emergencies and inoperable vehicles and excepting vehicles of employees of the city of Staunton having business at the Staunton Public Library, no vehicle shall be parked on the parking premises of the Staunton Public Library between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning.

(2) Whenever special events are being held at the library lasting beyond 9:00 p.m., patrons of those events shall nevertheless be permitted to park until one hour following the termination of the event.

(3) In the case of emergencies or inoperable motor vehicles, the owner or custodian of such vehicle shall proceed to have such vehicle removed from the premises of the library as soon as reasonably possible, but, in any case, within 24 hours of the emergency or disability. (Code 1964, § 15-126; Code 1985, § 16-109; Ord. 6-9-88; Ord. 3-13-97).

Cross reference – Libraries, Ch. 2.75 SCC.


10.25.100 Time limit for parking inoperable vehicles.

It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store, for more than 24 hours, on any street or any parking lot belonging to or operated by the city, any motor vehicle which is incapable of being operated. (Code 1985, § 16-110).

Cross reference – Open storage of inoperable vehicles, SCC 9.05.200.


10.25.110 Time limit for parking in loading zone/customer pickup zone.

(1) No motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall be parked on or in any loading zone for commercial purposes longer than is actually necessary to load or unload freight or merchandise.

(2) No noncommercial motor vehicle shall be parked on or in any customer pickup zone for a period in excess of 15 minutes. (Code 1964, § 15-122; Code 1985, § 16-111; Ord. 6-9-88).


10.25.120 Parking of trucks, motor homes, etc.

(1) No truck, tractor truck, trailer, semitrailer, motor home, bus or school bus shall be parked at any time on the street of any residential area of the city of Staunton, except when such vehicle is being operated in its normal course of business such as pickup and delivery of goods to homes or businesses in such area.

(2) The definition of the above-described vehicles shall be the same as those definitions set forth in Section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia as amended from time to time; except, however, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Truck” means every motor vehicle designed to transport property on its own structure independent of any other vehicle and having a registered gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 13,000 pounds or a vehicle height of not more than eight feet. Vehicle height shall be the distance, measured vertically, from the ground to the highest point of the vehicle, including any features such as toppers, racks, cargo boxes, or any other feature that performs a similar function, or mechanical and electrical equipment;

(b) “Bus” means a motor vehicle designed, or intended, or used to carry 16 or more passengers.

(3) “Residential areas” as used herein shall mean those areas zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-6 of the zoning code of Staunton.

(4) No vehicle described in subsection (1) of this section shall be parked upon any street within the city between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. except when actively engaged in normal pickup and delivery of goods to homes or businesses within the area.

(5) Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of this section shall incur a fine in an amount as specified in a schedule as promulgated from time to time by the city manager. (Ord. 2016-11; Ord. 2012-07. Code 1964, § 15-123; Code 1985, § 16-112; Ord. 6-9-88; Ord. 9-14-00).


10.25.130 Parking or stopping of bus for purpose of loading or unloading passengers.

No person operating a bus for the transportation of passengers for hire between the city and points outside the city shall park or leave standing such bus in the streets of the city while loading or unloading passengers or waiting to begin a trip out of the city. This shall not prevent any such bus from being stopped at a street corner for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers at a point along the route of such bus between the bus terminal and the corporate limits of the city while the bus is en route between such terminal and the point outside of the city, either ingoing or outgoing; provided, however, that no such stop shall be made within the congested business area of the city bounded on the north by the south side of Frederick Street, on the east by the west side of New Street, on the south by the south side of Johnson Street and on the west by the east side of Lewis Street. (Code 1964, § 15-125; Code 1985, § 16-113).


10.25.140 Parking for purpose of repairing vehicle.

No person shall park a vehicle on any street for the principal purpose of repairing such vehicle, except for repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Code 1985, § 16-114).


10.25.150 Backing to curb.

No vehicle shall be backed up to a curb, except that, in the loading zone on the north side of Middlebrook Avenue, from its intersection with South Augusta Street for a distance of 76.45 feet, vehicles may be backed to the curb for loading and unloading purposes only; provided, that between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., no vehicle may remain backed to the curb for loading and unloading purposes in such zone for more than two consecutive hours, unless an emergency permit is obtained from the chief of police. In issuing such emergency permit, the chief of police shall consider, among other things, the danger, if any, to perishable goods, if such permit is not issued. (Code 1964, § 15-117; Code 1985, § 16-115; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


10.25.160 Sale of merchandise from vehicle parked in business district.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any merchandise from any vehicle while such vehicle is parked upon any street in a business district.

(2) A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor.

(3) This section shall not apply to any sale lawfully made pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.30 SCC. (Code 1964, § 15-120; Code 1985, § 16-116).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


10.25.170 Use of city parking lots for commercial purposes.

It shall be unlawful for any person to use any part of any parking lot belonging to or operated by the city for the purpose of parking or storing thereon any motor vehicle for commercial purposes. The storing or parking of each such motor vehicle on any such lot shall be regarded as a separate offense under this section. (Code 1985, § 16-117).


10.25.180 Charge for parking in city-owned attendant-operated parking lot.

(1) The rate for parking in a parking facility shall be as established by the city manager, with the approval of the council.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a vehicle from a city-owned parking facility before paying the attendant the full amount due for the parking of such vehicle or presenting to the attendant a properly validated ticket; provided, however, if no attendant is on duty at the time of such removal of a vehicle, the person removing the same shall, within 48 hours after such removal, pay the attendant at such parking facility the amount due for the parking of such vehicle, or present to the attendant a properly validated ticket. There shall be a prima facie presumption that any vehicle removed from a parking facility contrary to the provisions of this section was removed by the registered owner of the same. (Code 1985, § 16-118; Ord. 12-9-99).


10.25.190 Free parking on streets and in city-owned parking lots.

(1) The city manager may designate certain blocks or portions thereof and certain city-owned parking lots within the parking meter zones as free parking areas, subject to the time limitations and enforcement provisions contained herein pursuant to authority provided in SCC 10.25.040.

(2) A time limitation of two hours is hereby established as the maximum limit for free parking as provided in this section.

(3) Those veterans of military service in one of the branches of armed forces of the United States who are former prisoners of war and/or who have been awarded the Purple Heart and whose vehicle has been issued license plates by the Commonwealth of Virginia bearing Purple Heart and/or former POW designations may park such vehicle without charge at or in city streets, lots, or parking garages. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, all other parking regulations and time limits herein contained shall be applicable to such vehicles.

(4) If a city street or parking lot is designated a two-hour parking area, it shall be unlawful for a person, firm, or corporation to park a vehicle continuously in such street or lot for a time in excess of two hours.

(5) In the case of a violation of subsection (4) of this section, the owner of the vehicle involved shall incur a fine in an amount as specified in a schedule as promulgated from time to time by the city manager.

(6) Notwithstanding subsection (5) of this section, if the owner of the vehicle involved is guilty of a violation of subsection (4) of this section more than five times in a 12-month period, the penalty shall be a fine in an amount as specified in a schedule as promulgated from time to time by the city manager. (Ord. 2016-11; Ord. 2004-11; Ord. 2004-07. Code 1985, § 16-119; Ord. 4-8-93; Ord. 5-13-99; Ord. 12-14-00; Ord. 5-8-03; Amended during the 2003 reformat).

Article II. Parking Meters*

*State law reference – Authority of city with respect to parking meters, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220.


10.25.200 Establishment of meter zones.

(1) Parking meter zones in the city shall be such as are established by the city council or by the city manager, with the approval of the council.

(2) Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any ordinance establishing or designating parking meter zones and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code. (Code 1964, § 15-157; Code 1985, § 16-124).


10.25.210 Application of article to city parking meter lots.

City-owned parking meter lots shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this article. (Code 1964, § 15-175; Code 1985, § 16-125).


10.25.220 Installation of meters and marking of parking spaces.

(1) It shall be the duty of the city manager to cause to be installed parking meters and to cause parking meter spaces to be designated in parking meter zones established in accordance with the provisions of this article.

(2) The city manager shall place or cause to be placed lines or marks on the curb or on the street about or alongside of each parking meter to designate the parking meter space for which such meter is to be used.

(3) Parking meters shall be placed upon the curb alongside of or next to individual parking places designated as herein provided. Each such meter shall be so set as to show or display a signal that the parking meter space assigned to it is or is not in use. (Code 1964, §§ 15-161, 15-162, 15-164; Code 1985, § 16-126).


10.25.230 Specifications.

Each parking meter installed under this article shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking for the time specified on the meter, upon the deposit therein of the coin or coins of the United States of America indicated on the meter. Each such parking meter shall continue in operation from the time of depositing such coin until the expiration of the time fixed as the parking limit for the part of the street upon which the meter is placed. Each parking meter shall also be so arranged that, upon the expiration of the parking limit, it will indicate, by mechanical operation and proper signal, that the lawful parking period has expired. (Code 1964, § 15-165; Code 1985, § 16-127).


10.25.240 Maintenance.

The city manager, or such other officers and employees of the city as he may select, shall provide for the regulation, control, operation and use of the parking meters provided for in this article and shall maintain such meters in good workable condition. (Code 1964, § 15-163; Code 1985, § 16-128).


10.25.250 Rates and parking time.

The coins to be deposited in parking meters installed under this article and the length of time vehicles may be parked in parking meter spaces adjacent to which parking meters are so installed shall be in accordance with the legend appearing upon such meters. (Code 1964, § 15-158; Code 1985, § 16-129).


10.25.260 Hours of operation.

From 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. each day, except Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays recognized by the city council, parking meters in parking meter zones established under this article shall be regarded as being in operation and compliance with the provisions of this article concerning the deposit of coins and operation of such meters shall be required. (Code 1964, § 15-159; Code 1985, § 16-130; Ord. 12-11-86; Ord. 9-22-88).


10.25.270 Required use of metered spaces.

In parking meter zones created in accordance with the provisions of this article, there shall be no parking except in parking meter spaces, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article. (Code 1964, § 15-160; Code 1985, § 16-131).


10.25.280 Method of parking in metered space.

Any vehicle parked in a parking meter space designated pursuant to this article shall be parked with the hood of such vehicle alongside of or next to the parking meter for such space and within the lines marked on the street for such space. (Code 1964, § 15-169; Code 1985, § 16-132).


10.25.290 Deposit of coin required – Overtime parking generally.

(1) When any vehicle is parked in any parking meter space designated as provided in this article, the driver of such vehicle shall, upon entering the parking space, immediately deposit a coin of the United States of America, of such denomination as is indicated on the meter, in the parking meter alongside of or next to such space and such space may then be used by such vehicle during the time indicated on the meter. If such vehicle shall remain parked in such parking meter space beyond the parking limit, as indicated by the parking meter signal, such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and the parking of a vehicle overtime in any part of a street where any such meter is located shall be unlawful. It shall also be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to be parked overtime or beyond the lawful period of time as herein described.

(2) The operator of any vehicle owned by the state, any political subdivision of the state or the United States, while engaged in governmental activity, may park such vehicle within parking meter zones designated pursuant to this article, for a period not to exceed 15 minutes, without being subject to the provisions of this section. (Code 1964, §§ 15-166, 15-173; Code 1985, § 16-133).


10.25.300 Parking meter permit – Exemption.

The operator of any vehicle that possesses a valid and current parking meter permit issued by the city may park such vehicle within the parking meter spaces regulated by 10-hour-limit parking meters placed within the parking meter zones designated pursuant to this article for an indefinite period without being subject to the provision of this section unless said parking requires special restriction as ordered by the chief of police. (Code 1985, § 16-133; Ord. 10-24-91).


10.25.310 Extension of time limit by deposit of additional coins.

It shall be unlawful for any person, except a police officer or parking enforcement officer carrying out a duly authorized courtesy ticket plan, to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter any coin for the purpose of extending the parking time beyond twice the time fixed for parking in the parking meter space. (Code 1964, § 15-167; Code 1985, § 16-134; Ord. 6-9-88; Ord. 3-26-92).


10.25.320 Parking when signal indicates that time has expired.

It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle to remain or be placed in a parking meter space alongside of or next to which any parking meter is placed while such meter is displaying a signal showing that such vehicle has already been parked beyond the parking time fixed for such space unless such vehicle is displaying a valid and current parking meter permit issued by the city and such parking meter space is regulated by a 10-hour-limit parking meter. (Code 1964, § 15-168; Code 1985, § 16-135; Ord. 10-24-91).


10.25.330 Purpose of required deposit.

The coins required to be deposited or the permit fees as provided in this article are hereby levied as police regulation and inspection fees to cover the costs involved in the inspection, installation, regulation, operation, control and use of the parking spaces and parking meters described in this article. (Code 1964, § 15-171; Code 1985, § 16-136; Ord. 10-24-91).


10.25.340 Reserving or blocking metered spaces.

(1) When reserving or blocking a metered parking space is required due to special loading or unloading requirements or nonconstruction service or repair work or other unique occasion, special authorization for this may be obtained and a bag cover will be provided which, when placed over the meter, will designate that space for special use. Such authorization shall be granted and such bag will be provided subject to the following conditions:

(a) Individuals or businesses shall pay a fee equivalent to 10 hours’ full utilization of the meter at the hourly rate indicated on the meter, plus a deposit for the bag which will be refundable upon timely return of the bag.

(b) Tax-exempt, nonprofit organizations will not be required to pay the hourly fee, but will be required to pay the refundable deposit.

(c) Special use blocking of a meter and space shall not be for longer than three days, nor shall more than three spaces be so blocked, except upon written application and approval by the chief of police.

(d) Fees may be paid and bags picked up from and returned to the police department during normal working hours.

(2) Only those vehicles for which the special parking authorization provided for in this section was obtained may be parked in the authorized space.

(3) When reserving or blocking a metered parking space is required due to construction, renovation or demolition, special authorization for this may be obtained from the city manager and a bag cover will be provided at no cost to the contractor or the developer. In such case, all other applicable requirements of this section remain in force. (Code 1985, § 16-137; Ord. 9-13-90).


10.25.350 Loading and unloading spaces in meter zones (including customer pickup zones).

(1) On each side of the street in each block of those streets designated as parking meter zones, the city manager, where it is practicable to do so, the public good is not infringed upon and there is no undue interference with the free movement of traffic, shall cause to be created a space for the loading and unloading of delivery vehicles and in such loading and unloading space there shall be no parking meter installed.

(2) Where a loading and unloading space is created pursuant to this section, the following regulations shall apply, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., with respect to the use of such space:

(a) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of materials, in such space and all delivery vehicles using such space shall be identified by the owner’s or company’s name in letters on both sides of the vehicle.

(b) If the time required to load or unload a delivery vehicle is over 30 minutes, a special permit must be obtained from the chief of police.

(c) In such case where a customer pickup zone is created, no noncommercial vehicle may occupy this space in excess of 15 minutes for any purpose. (Code 1964, § 15-172; Code 1985, § 16-138; Ord. 6-9-88).


10.25.360 Parking meter permits and 10-hour-limit parking meters.

In parking meter zones created in accordance with this article, there shall be parking meters which permit parking for a period up to 10 hours. These meters shall function like all others and be subject to all applicable provisions of this article, except that a permit shall be established to allow unlimited parking at a 10-hour parking meter without the deposit of coins. Such a parking meter permit shall be subject to regulations developed and administered by the city manager with the consent of city council. Such regulations shall include, but not be limited to, the number of permits to be issued, the fee for such a permit, the hours of permit applicability, and any other requirements deemed necessary and proper by the city manager. (Code 1985, § 16-139; Ord. 10-24-91).

Article III. Parking Violations


10.25.370 Police to report and make complaint.

In the event of a violation of the parking regulations set forth in this chapter, the police officer or parking enforcement officer charged with the duty of enforcing such parking regulations shall take the number of any parking meter involved in the violation in question, the state license number of the vehicle, the length of time during which the vehicle is parked in violation of this chapter and any other information or data pertinent to the violation in question and report the same to the police department and make proper complaint regarding such violation. (Code 1964, § 15-177; Code 1985, § 16-144; Ord. 6-9-88).


10.25.380 Notice to be attached to vehicle.

Each officer reporting a violation as provided in SCC 10.25.370 shall attach to the vehicle in question a notice to the owner thereof to the effect that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this chapter and instructing such owner when and where to report with reference to such violation. (Code 1964, § 15-178; Code 1985, § 16-145).


10.25.390 Penalty – Generally.

In the event the violation indicated in the notice required by SCC 10.25.380 involves any of the following:

(1) Parking within 20 feet of the curb line of an intersecting street;

(2) Stopping a vehicle on a crosswalk;

(3) Where parallel parking is permitted, parking so that any part of the vehicle extends beyond the interior of the delineated parking space or, in the case where parking spaces are not delineated, where the curbside wheel or wheels are more than 12 inches from the curb;

(4) Parking on an angle;

(5) Parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;

(6) Parking or stopping with the left side to the curb, except on one-way streets;

(7) Parking in a prohibited zone;

(8) Parking in a loading zone;

(9) Parking in a manner to block the entrance to a driveway;

(10) Parking in a prohibited alley or blocking an alley;

(11) Double parking;

(12) Parking in a bus zone;

(13) Where angle or 90-degree parking is permitted, parking so that any part of the vehicle extends beyond the interior of the delineated parking space or, in the case where parking spaces are not delineated, where the nearest wheel or wheels are more than 12 inches from the curb;

(14) Parking on a sidewalk;

(15) Parking in violation of SCC 10.25.070;

(16) Parking a noncommercial vehicle in a customer pickup zone in excess of the 15-minute time limit;

(17) Parking in violation of SCC 10.25.060;

(18) Parking in violation of SCC 10.25.120;

the owner or operator of the vehicle involved may, within 24 hours of the time when such notice was attached to the vehicle, pay, as a penalty for said violation, the sum set forth on the notice for the particular violation indicated. If said payment is not made within the time set forth therein, a “Law-Enforcement Notice” shall be sent to the violator followed in due course by a summons to court, all as set forth in SCC 10.25.410. (Code 1964, § 15-180; Ord. 11-23-82; Code 1985, § 16-146; Ord. 6-9-88; Ord. 12-17-92; Ord. 10-26-95; Ord. 1-13-00; Ord. 9-14-00).

State law reference – Provision to be made for uncontested payment of parking citations, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1225 – 46.2-1229. Provision for use of notice and summons, Code of Virginia, §§ 19.2-76.2; 19.2-76.3; 46.2-941.


10.25.400 Same – Meter violations.

(1) In the event of a parking violation hereunder involving overtime parking, either parking beyond the time limit of a metered space or beyond the time limits provided in SCC 10.25.190(2), a courtesy ticket may be issued to the vehicle owner/operator allowing the owner/operator to deposit a sum, in an amount as specified in a schedule as promulgated from time to time by the city manager, in the receptacles placed in the vicinity for such purpose, in lieu of any other penalty provided for such violation.

(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, in the event a vehicle is overparked as set forth above and remains in violation for 30 minutes measured from the time a courtesy ticket is issued with respect thereto, a second ticket may be issued for such violation affixing a penalty of a fine in an amount as specified in a schedule as promulgated from time to time by the city manager for such violation if paid by the owner/operator within 10 days by deposit in the receptacles placed for such purpose, or by otherwise paying the same to the treasurer for the city of Staunton.

(3) Upon failure of such owner or operator to make such payment within such 10-day period, an additional penalty of a fine in an amount as specified in a schedule as promulgated from time to time by the city manager shall be considered due and payable in addition to the original penalty thus creating an administrative penalty to compensate the said city for its efforts to notify the owner or operator of such vehicle that a summons to appear in the appropriate district court for the city shall be issued for the prosecution of the violation indicated through the aforementioned notice unless said violation and penalty is paid to and received by the treasurer for the city of Staunton in 10 days.

(4) Upon failure of such owner or operator to make such payment within such 10-day period, or upon the commission by him of a third or succeeding violation in any calendar month, such owner or operator may be summoned to the appropriate district court for the city and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine in an amount as specified in a schedule as promulgated from time to time by the city manager. (Ord. 2016-11. Code 1964, § 15-179; Code 1985, § 16-147; Ord. 4-25-85; Ord. 4-13-89; Ord. 4-8-93; Ord. 5-8-03; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


10.25.410 Notice prerequisite to issuance of summons.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, before any summons shall be issued for the prosecution of a violation of any provision of this code or other city regulation or ordinance regulating parking, the violator shall have been first notified, by mail directed to his last known address or to the address shown for such violator on the records of the State Department of Motor Vehicles, that he may pay the fine provided by law for such violation, within 10 days of receipt of such notice, and the authorized person issuing such summons shall be notified that the violator has failed to pay such fine within such time. The notice to the violator required by the provisions of this section shall be contained in an envelope bearing the words “Law-Enforcement Notice” stamped or printed on the face thereof in 14 point or larger type. (Code 1964, § 15-15-1; Code 1985, § 16-148; Ord. 4-8-93; Ord. 1-13-00; Amended during the 2003 reformat).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-941.


10.25.420 Presumption in prosecutions.

In any prosecution charging the violation of any ordinance, rule, regulation, restriction or prohibition governing the parking of a vehicle in the city, proof that the particular vehicle described in the summons was parked in violation of such ordinance, rule, regulation, restriction or prohibition, together with proof that the defendant named in the summons was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked such vehicle at the place where, and at the time during which, such violation occurred. (Code 1964, § 15-174; Code 1985, § 16-149).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220.


10.25.430 Removal or immobilization of vehicles against which there are outstanding parking violation notices.

(1) Whenever any motor vehicle, against which there are three or more outstanding unpaid or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices, is found parked on the public streets or public grounds in the city, such vehicle may, by towing or otherwise, be removed or conveyed to a place in the city designated by the chief of police for the temporary storage of such vehicle, or such vehicle may be immobilized in such manner as to prevent its removal or operation except by authorized officers of the police department. Such removal, conveyance or immobilization shall be by, or under the direction of, an officer of the police department.

(2) It shall be the duty of the officer of the police department removing or immobilizing a motor vehicle under this section, or under whose direction such vehicle is removed or immobilized, to inform, as soon as practicable, the owner of the removed or immobilized vehicle of the nature and circumstances of the prior unsettled parking violation notices, for which or on account of which such vehicle was removed or immobilized. In any case involving immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this section, there shall be placed on such vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, a notice warning that such vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move such vehicle might result in damage thereto.

(3) The owner of a vehicle immobilized pursuant to this section, or other duly authorized person, shall be allowed not less than 24 hours from the time of immobilization to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle. Failure to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle within this time period may result in the removal of such vehicle to a storage area for safekeeping under the direction of an officer of the police department.

(4) The owner of a vehicle removed or immobilized pursuant to this section, or other duly authorized person, shall be permitted to repossess or to secure the release of the vehicle by payment of the outstanding parking violation notices for which the vehicle was removed or immobilized and by payment of all reasonable costs incidental to the immobilization, removal and storage of the vehicle and the efforts to locate the owner of the vehicle. Should such owner fail or refuse to pay such fines and costs, or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be unknown and unascertainable, such vehicle may be sold pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.35 SCC. (Code 1985, § 16-150).

State law reference – Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1216. 

Article IV. Residential Permit Parking Blocks and Downtown Perimeter Permit Parking Blocks


10.25.440 Purpose and intent.

The city council hereby finds and declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter should be enacted to allow imposition of on-street parking restrictions in certain designated areas of the city through the creation of residential permit parking blocks and downtown perimeter permit parking blocks, generally called restricted parking blocks. Such restrictions are needed in order to reduce or prevent congestion and hazardous traffic conditions in residential areas, to protect those areas from polluted air, excessive noise, and other adverse environmental impacts of automobile commuting, to protect the residents of these areas from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their property, and to preserve the residential character of such areas and the property values therein. (Code 1985, § 16-151).


10.25.450 Definitions.

Certain words and phrases in this chapter and its related regulations shall be defined as follows:

(1) “Downtown perimeter permit parking block” means a predominantly residential block or blocks that borders the central business district, that can be considered as adversely affected by commuter vehicles pursuant to SCC 10.25.440, and is approved as such by city council.

(2) “Residential permit parking block” means a residential block or blocks that can be considered as adversely affected by commuter vehicles pursuant to SCC 10.25.440 and is approved as such by city council.

(3) “Affected household” means a dwelling unit located in a one- or two-family structure with an address on a public street within an existing or proposed restricted parking block. It also means a dwelling unit located in a multifamily structure with an address on such a public street when that multifamily structure does not have sufficient off-street parking spaces to meet the city’s minimum off-street parking requirements for new construction.

(4) “Block” means that portion of a city street between two intersecting streets or, in the case of a dead-end street, between the street’s end and an intersecting street.

(5) “Commuter vehicles” means those vehicles registered to persons who do not live in existing or proposed restricted parking blocks.

(6) “Residential area” shall mean that portion of any city street running in front of and abutting property which has a residential use or uses.

(7) “Restricted parking block” means any residential area (a block or group of blocks) so designated pursuant to the provisions of SCC 10.25.460 thereby implementing restricted on-street parking within that block. (Code 1985, § 16-152; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


10.25.460 Parking in certain residential areas prohibited without permits.

The following areas of the city are hereby designated as permit parking blocks, within which it shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be parked in excess of two hours on a public right-of-way or street unless such vehicle shall properly display a parking permit validly issued in accordance with regulations adopted pursuant to this article:

(1) Downtown Perimeter Permit Parking Blocks.

(a) The north side of East Beverley Street from its intersection with Market Street through its intersection with North Coalter and continuing to its intersection with Berkley Place. The south side of East Beverley Street beginning at its intersection with Market Street to its intersection with North Coalter Street is hereby designated as a parking zone not subject to the perimeter permit parking requirements hereunder.

(b) Kalorama Street from its intersection with Market Street to its intersection with South Coalter Street.

(c) Church Street on its west side from its intersection with West Johnson Street to its intersection with West Beverley Street.

(d) West Frederick Street from its intersection with North Lewis Street to its intersection with North Washington Street.

(e) North Lewis Street from its intersection with West Frederick Street to its intersection with the driveway of the Holiday Court.

(f) North New Street from its intersection with East Frederick Street to its intersection with Prospect Street.

(g) South Coalter Street from its intersection with East Beverley Street to its intersection with Kalorama Street.

(h) Berkley Place from its intersection with East Beverley Street to its intersection with North Coalter Street.

(i) The east side of South Market Street from its intersection with East Beverley Street to its intersection with Kalorama Street.

(2) Residential Permit Parking Blocks.

(a) Sycamore Street from its intersection with North Coalter Street to its termination point.

(b) North Market Street from its intersection with Academy Street to its intersection with Prospect Street.

The streets designated as boundaries in this section shall be considered to be portions of such blocks. (Ord. 2008-24. Code 1985, § 16-153; Ord. 5-26-94; Ord. 3-12-98; Ord. 1-11-01; Ord. 2-14-02; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


10.25.470 Vehicle permits and the regulation of restricted parking blocks.

There is hereby established the regulatory details pertaining to the permitting of resident vehicles and their guests in the restricted parking blocks. The various regulatory measures for the residential and downtown perimeter parking blocks can be amended by city council. The establishment of these regulatory measures shall not restrict or prohibit the city manager’s authority to implement processes or procedures for implementing these requirements or the authority for the city manager to regulate traffic and parking as specified in SCC 10.05.090 and 10.25.040. (Code 1985, § 16-154).


10.25.480 Vehicle permits, number, categories, terms, eligibility criteria, and fees.

(1) Vehicle Permits.

(a) Each vehicle registered to the resident of an affected household within a restricted parking block may be assigned a permit upon application by the registered owner. Such permit shall state thereon the street or streets whereon parking is permitted.

(b) Each vehicle not registered to the resident of an affected household but which vehicle is for the exclusive use of such resident may be assigned a permit upon application by such resident who shall be required to show proof of such use.

(c) Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than five vehicle permits shall be issued to any affected household, rooming house, or other multifamily structure within a restricted parking block unless the curb frontage allocable to such household or structure shall be more than five car lengths, in which case the larger number shall be used. For the purpose of calculating the number of permits to which such household shall be entitled, curb-parking restrictions shall be disregarded, but driveways shall not be included, and a curb length of 20 feet shall be assumed for each parking space.

(2) Guest Permits.

(a) Upon application, two guest permits shall be issued for each affected household in a restricted parking block. A rental unit without a full kitchen, such as a room and bath, shall not qualify as an affected household under this subsection. The guest permits for each affected household shall be issued to the owner of the household, but the owner may assign his permit to the tenant or occupant of such residence.

(b) Notwithstanding subsection (2)(a) of this section, no more than two guest permits shall be issued to any residential address, regardless of the number of dwelling units at such address, unless such address shall be eligible for a larger number of vehicle permits as determined in above.

(3) General.

(a) All permits shall be issued for a period of 12 months beginning on April 15th for the fees established as follows:

(i) For each vehicle permit, $5.00 per year.

(ii) For each guest permit, $1.00 per year.

(iii) Except as otherwise noted, permits are nontransferable.

(b) A person who sells or otherwise disposes of a vehicle during the permit year may surrender his vehicle permit and apply for a new permit for his newly acquired vehicle. The fee is $0.50. (Ord. 2004-08. Code 1985, § 16-154.1).


10.25.490 Affected area – Hours.

(1) The city council shall designate residential permit parking blocks and downtown perimeter permit parking blocks where permit parking may be implemented as a method to control parking. There may be as many different permit blocks as council deems necessary.

(2) The department of public works and/or police department may recommend the specific residential blocks or portions thereof which will be designated as restricted parking blocks for approval by the city manager and consideration by city council.

(3) Permit parking restrictions, where and when established, shall be applicable only to residential frontage, but not to frontage allocable to commercial, public, or special uses, and parking adjacent to such uses shall be unrestricted unless otherwise restricted by the traffic regulations or by authority of the city manager. Said restrictions will be requested by the owner or operator of the commercial, public, or special use property.

(4) A valid downtown perimeter parking permit shall be displayed on each vehicle parked within the downtown perimeter parking blocks above, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. A valid residential parking permit shall be displayed on each vehicle parked within the residential permit parking blocks 24 hours a day, seven days a week, except holidays; except that the operator of a commercial vehicle may so park in both blocks while actually engaged in business at a residential address within or reasonably near to a designated restricted parking block. For the purposes of these regulations a “commercial vehicle” shall be any vehicle used in a business and clearly identified with the name of the business affixed to the vehicle. The burden of proof shall be on the operator of such commercial vehicle to show that he was actually engaged in business at a residential address within or reasonably near to a designated restricted parking block. A violation of this section shall incur a fine in an amount as specified in a schedule as promulgated from time to time by the city manager. (Ord. 2016-11; Ord. 2004-09. Code 1985, § 16-154.2; Ord. 1-11-96; Amended during the 2003 reformat).


10.25.500 Format – Display – Issuance of permits.

(1) Permits shall be issued by the office of the city treasurer. The treasurer shall maintain, open for public inspection, records showing for each permit, the permit number, the state and city license number of the vehicle for which the permit was issued, the name and address of the person to whom the vehicle is registered, and the name and address of the person for whose use the vehicle has been authorized if different from a person to whom registered. Each permit, including guest permits, shall bear a separate serial number.

(2) The city manager shall furnish the city treasurer with a list of residential blocks which have been designated for permit parking, a list of those affected households, and the addresses eligible for additional permits as provided in SCC 10.25.480(1)(c); and a list of those addresses not eligible for permits as provided in SCC 10.25.480(2)(a).

(3) Permits, except guest permits, shall be in the form of a decal to be displayed by attachment to the back of the interior rearview mirror so it is readily visible from the front of the vehicle.

(4) Guest permits shall be prominently displayed by attachment to the interior rearview mirror. Such permits shall be displayed only while the operator of the vehicle is a guest at the affected household to which the permit has been issued, or is employed and actually at work at such household; provided, however, that this subsection shall not prohibit the temporary loan of guest permits from one affected household to another for the purpose of accommodating a large gathering of guests at a particular residence.

(5) Guest permits, once lost, shall not be re-issued within the same year. Vehicle permits may be reissued upon satisfactory written explanation and payment of additional fee.

(6) Any person who knowingly allows a permit issued to a vehicle registered to him/her or authorized for use by another to be used in violation of these regulations shall have such permit revoked and shall be ineligible for a permit for any vehicle for a period of one year. (Code 1985, § 16-154.3).


10.25.510 Creation of new permit parking blocks.

The city council may from time to time delineate additional residential areas of the city as permit parking blocks. Council may create such new permit parking blocks by amending SCC 10.25.460. All permit parking blocks shall be delineated on the Official Residential Permit Parking Map. (Code 1985, § 16-155).


10.25.520 Implementation of a restricted parking block.

(1) The Petition. Upon receipt of a petition by the city manager which is signed by at least one member of at least 50 percent of the affected households of any block proposed as a permit parking block, the director of public works will schedule and convene a hearing to consider the requested establishment of a restricted parking block. The purpose of such a hearing shall be to receive facts and testimony regarding the need for the parking restrictions requested. The director of public works shall then schedule an on-street parking survey to be conducted for the proposed restricted parking block.

The petition referenced above shall be advisory in nature only and alleged defects in it, if any exist or are alleged, shall not be grounds for invalidating any restricted parking block that later may be implemented.

(2) The Parking Survey. The on-street parking survey shall be conducted on at least three separate days at some time during the hours for which the restricted parking is being sought. The survey shall seek to determine whether at the time of the survey (a) at least 75 percent of the total number of on-street parking spaces in the proposed restricted parking block are occupied, and (b) whether at least 50 percent of the total number of on-street parking spaces in that block are occupied by commuter vehicles. The survey shall be conducted by city staff under the supervision of the director of public works. The petitioner(s) shall also be present during the survey to interpret the parking patterns observed. This interpretation should attempt to differentiate between resident and commuter vehicles.

If the survey shows that the on-street parking spaces are so occupied (meeting both the 75 percent and 50 percent minimum occupancy test), the director of public works shall certify this fact to the city manager along with any recommendation the director may have as to whether the city manager should recommend the implementation of restricted parking in the proposed restricted parking block. The director’s recommendation will include a proposed method to accommodate any business or commercial enterprise located in the proposed restricted parking block. The city manager is at liberty to make a recommendation to city council or seek additional information from staff prior to rendering a decision.

(3) Notice of Affected Households. Once a date has been set for city council’s consideration of the proposed restricted parking block, a letter from the city manager shall be sent to the affected households and businesses within the proposed restricted parking block. It shall provide residents of those households and business owners information concerning the nature of the proposal and notify them of the date on which city council will consider approving the new restricted parking block. This notification letter must be mailed at least 10 days prior to the subject council meeting and shall invite comments and attendance by concerned individuals of the proposed restricted parking block.

(4) Council Action. The city council, by amendment to SCC 10.25.460, may then establish permit parking for the block or blocks in question. In establishing such a restricted parking block the council shall consider, among other things, the following:

(a) The purpose and intent of the permit parking ordinance;

(b) The adverse impact that restricting parking in such block might have on nearby neighborhoods that do not have permit parking; and 

(c) The adverse impact that such restrictions may have on the nonresidents of the restricted parking block and their ability to find available parking near their place of work.

(5) Notice After a New Restricted Parking Block Is Created. In the event that a permit parking plan is approved for a residential block, the city manager shall notify by regular mail the affected households of that fact, giving residents of those households notice of the effective date and times of the restricted parking and how to obtain permits, and also notify the representatives of all nonresidential properties within such block. Such nonresidential properties may be provided with parking meters, loading zones, or other restriction desired by the affected users and consistent with current city policies.

(6) A Moratorium for One Year. In the event that a permit parking plan is not approved for a residential block, the city manager shall not be required to resurvey this block until one year has elapsed, unless in the opinion of the city manager conditions have changed substantially.

(7) Removing Permit Parking Restrictions. The signatures representing at least 75 percent of the affected households within a restricted parking block may be presented to the city manager requesting removal of parking restrictions on an existing restricted parking block. If such restriction is eventually removed by council, no request to re-install the restriction shall be acted upon until one year has elapsed.

(8) Signs to Be Posted. The city manager shall have signs posted sufficient to give notice of the existence, effect, and limits of the restricted parking block. (Code 1985, § 16-155.1; Ord. 11-14-91; Ord. 1-11-96).


Chapter 10.30 VEHICLES USED FOR VENDING ON STREETS

Sections:

10.30.010    Definitions.

10.30.020    Exemptions from chapter.

10.30.030    Violations of chapter.

10.30.040    Operation not to interfere with traffic.

10.30.050    Signal lights required.

10.30.060    Use of noise-making devices.

10.30.070    Trash disposal facilities.

10.30.080    Manner of stopping for sales – Location of customers – Etc.

10.30.090    Sales near schools.

10.30.100    Sales on streets with speed at over 25 miles per hour.

10.30.110    Maximum number of vehicles in one block.

10.30.120    Parking or stopping when not engaged in vending.


10.30.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section:

“Vending” means the sale of food, drink, ice cream or other frozen dessert to a retail customer within the right-of-way of any public street in the city.

“Vending vehicle” means every motor vehicle used for the purpose of vending, as above defined. (Code 1964, §§ 15-278, 15-279; Code 1985, § 16-161).


10.30.020 Exemptions from chapter.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons vending farm produce grown by the vendor. (Code 1964, § 15-288; Code 1985, § 16-162).


10.30.030 Violations of chapter.

Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. (Code 1964, § 15-289; Code 1985, § 16-163).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


10.30.040 Operation not to interfere with traffic.

No vending vehicle shall be operated in such manner as to interfere with or impede the flow of traffic on any street. (Code 1964, § 15-280; Code 1985, § 16-164).


10.30.050 Signal lights required.

Each vending vehicle shall be equipped with four amber signal lights, of a minimum diameter of four inches, located on each corner of the top of the vehicle. All four lights shall flash simultaneously while such vehicle is stopped for the purpose of making sales. (Code 1964, § 15-285; Code 1985, § 16-165).


10.30.060 Use of noise-making devices.

No operator of a vending vehicle shall use any noise-making device for the purpose of attracting customers, except the sounding of bells, and such bells shall be used only while the vehicle is in motion from one regular stop to the next regular stop. (Code 1964, § 15-286; Code 1985, § 16-166).

Cross reference – Noise, Ch. 8.25 SCC.


10.30.070 Trash disposal facilities.

Each vending vehicle shall be equipped with a receptacle for the disposal of wrappers, papers, containers and other trash and the driver of such vehicle, before he leaves for his next regular stop, shall ensure that no wrappers, papers, containers or other trash have been left on the sidewalk or street. (Code 1964, § 15-287; Code 1985, § 16-167).

Cross reference – Solid waste, Ch. 8.30 SCC.


10.30.080 Manner of stopping for sales – Location of customers – Etc.

Whenever a vending vehicle is stopped for the purpose of making sales, it shall be stopped at the right-hand curb of the street, or if there is no curb, at the extreme right-hand edge of the pavement. No sales shall be made from any such vehicle to any person not standing on the sidewalk, or where no sidewalk has been installed, not standing off the paved roadway, except that sales may be made from the rear of the vehicle, if such vehicle is designed and constructed or altered to permit the same to be done. At such stops, the vehicle’s engine shall be cut off, unless its operation is essential in producing the product sold. (Code 1964, § 15-283; Code 1985, § 16-168).


10.30.090 Sales near schools.

No sales shall be made from a vending vehicle and no such vehicle shall be stopped for the purpose of making any sale within 100 feet of any public or private school property, without the annual written consent of the chief administrative official of such school permitting such activity. (Code 1964, § 15-281; Code 1985, § 16-169).


10.30.100 Sales on streets with speed at over 25 miles per hour.

No sales shall be made from a vending vehicle on any street where posted speed limits are in excess of 25 miles per hour. (Code 1964, § 15-282; Code 1985, § 16-170).


10.30.110 Maximum number of vehicles in one block.

Only one vending vehicle shall be used for making sales in any given city block at any one time. (Code 1964, § 15-284; Code 1985, § 16-171).


10.30.120 Parking or stopping when not engaged in vending.

No vending vehicle shall be parked or stopped, except for emergency stops and those required by traffic conditions or traffic-control devices, on any street, when the operator thereof is not engaged in vending. (Code 1964, § 15-280; Code 1985, § 16-172).


Chapter 10.35 ABANDONED VEHICLES*

Sections:

10.35.010    Definitions.

10.35.020    City may take into custody – Indemnity of city when vehicle removed from private property.

10.35.030    Notice of removal.

10.35.040    Sale.

10.35.050    Vehicles abandoned in garages.

10.35.060    Disposition of inoperable vehicles.

10.35.070    Chapter does not affect rights granted to private property owners by state law.

*State law reference – Authority of city to adopt ordinance similar to this chapter, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1201. See also, §§ 46.2-1213, 46.2-1217.


10.35.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section:

“Abandoned motor vehicle” means a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer or any part thereof that:

(1) Is inoperable and is left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours;

(2) Has remained illegally on public property for a period of more than 48 hours; or

(3) Has remained, without consent, on private property, including, but not limited to, any commercial parking place, motor vehicle storage facility or establishment for the service, repair, maintenance or sale of motor vehicles, whether or not such vehicle was brought onto or left at such property with or without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property, for more than 48 hours.

“Demolisher” means any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer into processed scrap or scrap metal or otherwise to wreck or dismantle such vehicles.

“Traffic hazard” means any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer found on the public streets or grounds of the city, unattended by the owner or operator and constituting a hazard to traffic, or which is parked in such a manner as to be in violation of law. (Code 1964, § 15-290; Code 1985, § 16-183).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200.


10.35.020 City may take into custody – Indemnity of city when vehicle removed from private property.

(1) The city may remove and take into custody any abandoned motor vehicle or any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which is a traffic hazard. In this connection, the city may employ its own personnel, equipment and facilities or hire persons, equipment or facilities or firms or corporations who may be independent contractors for the purpose of removing, preserving and storing such vehicles.

(2) In the event an abandoned motor vehicle is on private property, the vehicle shall not be removed under this section, without the written request of the owner, lessee or occupant of such property. The person requesting the removal of such vehicle shall indemnify the city against any loss or expense incurred by reason of the removal, storage or sale of the vehicle. (Code 1964, § 15-291; Code 1985, § 16-184).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1213, 46.2-1217, 46.2-1201.


10.35.030 Notice of removal.

(1) When the city removes and takes into custody a vehicle pursuant to this chapter, it shall notify, within 15 days thereof, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner of record of the vehicle and all persons having security interests therein of record, that the vehicle has been taken into custody. The notice shall set forth the year, make, model and serial number of the vehicle and the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held, inform the owner and any persons having security interests of their right to reclaim the vehicle within three weeks after the date of the notice, upon payment of all towing, preservation and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody, and state that the failure of the owner or persons having security interests to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner and all persons having security interests of all right, title and interest in the vehicle, and consent to the sale of the vehicle at public auction.

(2) If records of the state division of motor vehicles contain no address for the owner or no address of any person shown by such records to have a security interest, or if the identity and addresses of the owner and all persons having security interests cannot be determined with reasonable certainty, notice by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the vehicle was found shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice pursuant to this section as to any person who cannot be notified pursuant to the provisions of subsection (1) of this section. Such notice by publication may contain multiple listings of motor vehicles removed under this chapter. Any such notice shall be within the time requirements prescribed for notice by mail and shall have the same contents required for a notice by mail.

(3) The consequences and the fact of failure to reclaim a motor vehicle shall be as set forth in a notice given in accordance with and pursuant to this section. (Code 1964, § 15-292; Code 1985, § 16-185).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1202.


10.35.040 Sale.

(1) If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided for in SCC 10.35.030, the city or its authorized agent shall, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 46.2-617 of the Code of Virginia, sell the vehicle at public auction. For the purposes of this section, the term “public auction,” when conducted by the city, shall include an internet sale by auction. The purchaser of the vehicle shall take title to the vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership of others, shall receive a sales receipt from the sale and shall be entitled to, upon application therefor, pursuant to Section 46.2-603 of the Code of Virginia, a certificate of title and registration card therefor. The sales receipt at such a sale shall be sufficient title only for purposes of transferring the vehicle to a demolisher for demolition, wrecking or dismantling and, in such case, no further titling of the vehicle shall be necessary; however, such demolisher shall provide the Department of Motor Vehicles of the Commonwealth of Virginia acceptable documentation indicating that the vehicle has been demolished.

(2) From the proceeds of the sale of a vehicle under this section, the city or its authorized agent shall reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction, the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, which resulted from placing the vehicle in custody, and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to SCC 10.35.030. Any remainder from the proceeds of sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or any persons having security interests therein, as their interests may appear, for 60 days, and then shall be deposited into the treasury of the city. (Ord. 2019-03. Code 1964, § 15-293; Code 1985, § 16-186).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1203.


10.35.050 Vehicles abandoned in garages.

(1) Any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof left for more than 10 days in a garage operated for commercial purposes after notice by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner to pick up the vehicle, or for more than 10 days after the period when, pursuant to contract, the vehicle was to remain on the premises, shall be deemed an abandoned motor vehicle and may be reported by the garage keeper to the city. All abandoned motor vehicles left in garages may be taken into custody by the city in accordance with SCC 10.35.020 and shall be subject to the notice and sale provisions contained in SCC 10.35.030 and 10.35.040; provided, that if such vehicle is reclaimed in accordance with SCC 10.35.030, the person reclaiming such vehicle shall, in addition to the other charges required to be paid, pay the charges of the garage keeper, if any; and provided, further, that if such vehicle is sold pursuant to SCC 10.35.040, the garage keeper’s charges, if any, shall be paid from, and to the extent of, the excess of the proceeds of sale after paying the expenses of the auction and the costs of towing, preserving and storing such vehicle, which resulted from placing such vehicle in custody, and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to SCC 10.35.030.

(2) For the purposes of this section, “garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place, motor vehicle storage facility or establishment for the servicing, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles. (Code 1985, § 16-187).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1204.


10.35.060 Disposition of inoperable vehicles.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, or the provisions of Section 46.2-617 of the Code of Virginia, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or part thereof, which is removed by the city under this chapter and which is inoperable, and which, by virtue of its condition, cannot be feasibly restored to operable condition, may be disposed of to a demolisher, without title and without following the notification procedures prescribed by this chapter. The demolisher, upon taking custody of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, shall notify the state division of motor vehicles, on forms and in the manner prescribed by the commissioner of such division, and notwithstanding any other provision of law, no other report or notice shall be required in such instance. Such demolisher, in disposing of such vehicle, shall follow the provisions of Section 46.2-1206 of the Code of Virginia. (Code 1964, §§ 15-294, 15-295; Code 1985, § 16-188).

State law reference – Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1205.


10.35.070 Chapter does not affect rights granted to private property owners by state law.

Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to affect the rights granted by Section 46.2-1208 of the Code of Virginia to the owner or person in control of any private property upon which a motor vehicle is abandoned. (Code 1985, § 16-189).


Chapter 10.40 BICYCLES AND VARIOUS MOTORIZED DEVICES*

Sections:

Article I. In General

10.40.010    Violations of article.

10.40.020    Registration with police department.

10.40.030    Removal, alteration, etc., of serial or frame number.

10.40.040    Reports by dealers in secondhand bicycles.

10.40.050    Consent of owner prerequisite to use.

Article II. Equipment and Operation

10.40.060    Violations of article generally.

10.40.070    Removal from streets of bicycle operated in violation of article.

10.40.080    Warning device.

10.40.090    Riders and passengers to use seats.

10.40.092    Helmet requirements – Mopeds or motor-driven cycles.

10.40.100    Operator to have hands on handlebars.

10.40.110    Operator to have feet on pedals – Trick riding.

10.40.120    Reckless operation – Speed.

10.40.130    Riding on sidewalks.

10.40.140    Parking in downtown or other commercial areas.

*Cross reference – Traffic and motor vehicles, Title 10.

Article I. In General


10.40.010 Violations of article.

Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. (Code 1985, § 8-1).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


10.40.020 Registration with police department.

(1) Any person owning a bicycle in the city may register the serial number of the same with the police department.

(2) Any owner wishing to do so may go to the police department and have the serial number of his bicycle entered in a permanent register maintained by the department. In addition to the serial number, such register shall show the type, model and other identifying information concerning the bicycle and the name and address of the owner.

(3) Upon the request of an owner registering a bicycle pursuant to this section, the police department may stamp a number on the frame of the bicycle, if no serial number can be found or if such number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. (Code 1964, §§ 15-35, 15-38, 15-41; Code 1985, § 8-2).

Cross reference – Police department, SCC 2.85.020 et seq.

State law reference – Provisions similar to subsection (1) above, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-908.


10.40.030 Removal, alteration, etc., of serial or frame number.

It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the serial or frame number of any bicycle in the city. (Code 1964, § 15-41; Code 1985, § 8-3).


10.40.040 Reports by dealers in secondhand bicycles.

All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles or any parts of secondhand bicycles are hereby required to report to the police department within 48 hours after acquiring any secondhand bicycle or parts thereof, such report to include the registration number, if any, of such bicycle, a description of the bicycle and the frame or serial number thereof, together with the name and address of the person from whom the same was acquired. In case of the purchase of any parts of bicycles, the report shall describe each part and give the name and address of the person from whom the same was acquired. (Code 1964, § 15-40; Code 1985, § 8-4).


10.40.050 Consent of owner prerequisite to use.

No person shall operate or use any bicycle upon any street in the city without the consent of the owner of the bicycle. (Code 1985, § 8-5).

Article II. Equipment and Operation*

*Cross reference – Application of traffic regulations to persons riding bicycles, SCC 10.05.040.


10.40.060 Violations of article generally.

A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a traffic infraction and, unless otherwise provided, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. (Code 1985, § 8-16).


10.40.070 Removal from streets of bicycle operated in violation of article.

Any bicycle operated by the owner or other person lawfully in custody thereof in violation of any of the provisions of this article may, by any police officer of the city, be ordered removed from the streets of the city and the person so operating the same in violation of this article shall not be permitted to operate the bicycle on the streets of the city for such period of time, not exceeding 30 days, as the police officer issuing such order determines. Any person who has been so ordered not to operate a bicycle over the streets of the city may appeal the order to the district court which has appropriate jurisdiction. (Code 1964, § 15-48; Code 1985, § 8-17).


10.40.080 Warning device.

Every bicycle shall be equipped with an ordinary bicycle bell or other warning device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle. (Code 1985, § 8-18).


10.40.090 Riders and passengers to use seats.

The transporting of persons on the handlebars of bicycles is hereby prohibited. Persons shall be permitted to ride bicycles or to be transported on bicycles only on seats specifically designed for and provided for the purpose of accommodating human passengers or riders. (Code 1964, § 15-45; Code 1985, § 8-19).


10.40.092 Helmet requirements – Mopeds or motor-driven cycles.

Every person riding a moped or motor-driven cycle, either as an operator or passenger, upon any public street, road, alley or highway in the city of Staunton shall wear a protective helmet of a type approved by the superintendent of state police or as otherwise prescribed by state law. For purposes of this section, “moped” and “motor-driven cycle” shall have the meaning as defined in Virginia Code Section 46.2-100.

Any person who knowingly violates this section shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and be subject to a fine of not more than $50.00.

A violation of this section shall not constitute negligence, be considered in mitigation of damages of whatever nature, be admissible in evidence or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising out of the operation, ownership, or maintenance of a moped or motor vehicle, nor shall anything in this section change any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining to any such civil action. (Ord. 2009-07).


10.40.100 Operator to have hands on handlebars.

Operators of bicycles shall have one hand on the handlebars at all times and both hands on the handlebars, except when it becomes necessary to execute hand signals, to operate mechanical devices of the bicycle or at other times when it is necessary to remove one hand momentarily from the handlebars. (Code 1964, § 15-45; Code 1985, § 8-20).

State law reference – Operator carrying package, bundle, etc., preventing him from keeping at least one hand on handlebars, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-906.


10.40.110 Operator to have feet on pedals – Trick riding.

It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle on any street in the city to coast upon such bicycle by permitting it to proceed by inertia or momentum with his feet removed from the pedals and such person shall, at all times, keep his feet upon the pedals, so as to have the same under proper control to avoid accidents. No operator of a bicycle shall practice any trick or fancy riding on any street in the city. (Code 1985, § 8-21).


10.40.120 Reckless operation – Speed.

No person shall operate a bicycle recklessly or at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper or so as to endanger the property or life or limb of the rider or of any other person. (Code 1985, § 8-22).


10.40.130 Riding on sidewalks.

(1) No person shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk, whether paved or unpaved, in a district of the city zoned commercial.

(2) Whenever any person shall ride a bicycle on the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing any pedestrian, and shall ride in single file. (Code 1985, § 8-23).

State law reference – Authority for subsection (1) and provisions similar to subsection (2) above, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-904.


10.40.140 Parking in downtown or other commercial areas.

(1) In downtown and other commercial areas of the city, it shall be unlawful for a person operating a bicycle to park such bicycle on the streets. In moving a bicycle off the streets to a suitable parking area, operators shall dismount and proceed on foot so as not to endanger pedestrians.

(2) A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than $25.00. (Code 1964, § 1547; Code 1985, § 8-24).

 


Title 11            

(Reserved)

 


Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES*

Chapters:

12.05    In General

12.10    Excavations

12.15    Sidewalk Entrances and Openings

12.20    Driveways

12.25    Trees and Shrubbery on Public Property

12.30    Street Vending

12.35    City Market

12.40    Arts and Culture District

*Charter references – General authority of council as to streets and sidewalks, § 11(9); injunctions staying city in exercise of power over streets, § 29; street encroachments, § 30; dedication of streets, § 31.

Cross references – Street improvements to promote industrial development, SCC 2.10.060; taxicabs, Ch. 5.30 SCC; suspending advertisements over streets, SCC 8.05.020; deposit of advertisements on streets, SCC 8.05.030; noise, Ch. 8.25 SCC; littering in streets, SCC 8.30.020; transportation of garbage on streets, SCC 8.30.040; location of refuse containers at edge of street for collection of contents thereof, SCC 8.30.170; meetings, parades, etc., on streets, SCC 9.05.130; motor vehicles and traffic, Title 10; riding bicycle on sidewalks, SCC 10.40.130; erosion and sediment control, Title 13, Division I; sewers, Title 13, Division III; building regulations, Title 15; design standards for streets in subdivisions, SCC 17.15.040 – 17.15.100; required street improvements in subdivisions, SCC 17.20.030 – 17.20.070; zoning, Title 18.

State law reference – General authority of city relative to streets and sidewalks, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2000 – 15.2-2030.


Chapter 12.05 IN GENERAL

Sections:

12.05.010    Violations of title.

12.05.020    Certain ordinances relating to streets not affected by code.

12.05.030    Required acceptance by council of dedicated street, alley, etc.

12.05.040    Regulations for street work by city forces.

12.05.050    Report required prior to certain changes in elevation or grade or realignment.

12.05.060    Property owner’s waiver of damages prior to improvements.

12.05.070    Width and height of sidewalks.

12.05.080    Street numbers for buildings.

12.05.090    Water and sewer pipes to be run directly to street.

12.05.100    Running of wastewater or water from wash racks or drains upon streets or sidewalks.

12.05.110    Obstructions generally.

12.05.120    Obstructions during building operations.

12.05.130    Prohibition of roller skates, skateboards, bicycles, etc.

12.05.140    Duty of property owners or occupants to keep sidewalks clean.

12.05.150    Duty of property owners or occupants to remove snow and ice from sidewalks.

12.05.160    Deposit of snow in streets.

12.05.170    Temporary street closings.


12.05.010 Violations of title.

Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this title shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. (Code 1985, § 26-1).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


12.05.020 Certain ordinances relating to streets not affected by code.

Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any ordinance opening, relocating, closing, altering or naming any street, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code. (Code 1985, § 26-2).


12.05.030 Required acceptance by council of dedicated street, alley, etc.

The city shall not be or become responsible for the opening or maintenance of, or for any damages resulting from the use of, any street, alley or other public way or grounds laid out and dedicated to the public use by any person, until the same shall have been accepted by the council. (Code 1964, § 25-10; Code 1985, § 26-3).


12.05.040 Regulations for street work by city forces.

The city manager may prescribe regulations for work done on city streets by city forces. (Code 1964, § 25-1; Code 1985, § 26-4).


12.05.050 Report required prior to certain changes in elevation or grade or realignment.

If any street or sidewalk improvements proposed to be made in the city involve the changing of elevations or grades or the realignment of such street or sidewalk, which will have an appreciable effect upon abutting or adjacent properties, such changes or realignment shall be reported, through the city manager, to the city council, prior to commencement of the project. Such changes or alignment shall be accurately reported with reference to such abutting or adjacent properties. (Code 1964, § 25-17; Code 1985, § 26-5).


12.05.060 Property owner’s waiver of damages prior to improvements.

Whenever street or sidewalk improvements are to be undertaken, a written waiver of all damages shall be obtained from all owners of property to be affected by such improvements, before commencing the project. If the affected property owners fail or refuse to sign such waiver, such failure or refusal shall be reported to the city council by the city manager, before the project is commenced. (Code 1964, § 25-18; Code 1985, § 26-6).


12.05.070 Width and height of sidewalks.

The city manager is hereby empowered to so regulate the width and height of the sidewalks of any street as will, in his judgment, be most conducive to the convenience and interest of the city. (Code 1964, § 25-9; Code 1985, § 26-7).


12.05.080 Street numbers for buildings.

(1) It shall be the duty of the building official to see that each building in the city is numbered, making the intersection of Augusta and Beverley Streets the initial point, thence running north, south, east and west.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, deface or destroy the number affixed to any building in this city pursuant to this section. (Code 1964, §§ 25-15, 25-16; Code 1985, § 26-8).


12.05.090 Water and sewer pipes to be run directly to street.

No person shall run, or cause to be run, a water or sewer pipe through or from one lot or sublot or from any structure thereon into another separate lot or sublot or structure thereon. Every water service pipe shall be run from the public street main, directly to the building, lot or premises and all house sewers shall be run directly from the public street sewer, where it is practical so to do. (Code 1964, § 25-2; Code 1985, § 26-9).

Cross references – Water supply, Title 13, Division II; sewers, Title 13, Division III.


12.05.100 Running of wastewater or water from wash racks or drains upon streets or sidewalks.

It shall be unlawful for any person to run wastewater or water from wash racks or any drain upon the streets or sidewalks of the city. (Code 1964, § 25-6; Code 1985, § 26-10).

Cross reference – Circumstances under which above section not applicable to roof drains, downspouts or similar facilities, SCC 13.35.50(4).


12.05.110 Obstructions generally.

No person shall obstruct a public street or sidewalk or the space vertically above the same, by placing therein anything whatsoever which will hinder or obstruct the passage of persons or vehicles in any manner whatsoever, except as otherwise specifically provided. (Code 1964, § 25-12; Code 1985, § 26-11).


12.05.120 Obstructions during building operations.

It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any street or sidewalk during building operations, with building materials, ladders, scaffolds or ropes or in any other manner, regardless of the character or extent of the obstruction, unless he shall first have obtained a permit therefor from the office of the chief of police. A permit authorizing the storage of building materials of any character or description in any part of a street shall limit the amount of space to be occupied and the period of time for such storage. (Code 1964, §§ 25-13, 25-14; Code 1985, § 26-12).

Cross reference – Building regulations, Title 15.


12.05.130 Prohibition of roller skates, skateboards, bicycles, etc.

(1) The use of roller skates, skateboards, bicycles, roller blades, scooters (powered or not), is prohibited upon all sidewalks and/or crosswalks situated in the “sidewalk restriction area” (defined below), and such prohibition extends also to the use of such devices in the parking garages located in said area.

(2) The sidewalk restriction area subject hereof is defined as beginning at the intersection of Oakenwald Street and High Street, thence south along High to the intersection of High Street and Churchville Avenue, thence west with Churchville to the intersection of Churchville Avenue and North Lewis Street, thence south with North Lewis to the intersection of Lewis Street and Middlebrook Avenue, thence east along Middlebrook to the intersection of Middlebrook Avenue and South Augusta Street, thence north along South Augusta to the intersection of South Augusta Street and Johnson Street, thence east along Johnson Street to the intersection of Johnson and South New Street, thence south along South New to the intersection of South New Street and Mill Street, thence east along Mill to the intersection of Mill Street and Greenville Avenue, thence southeast along Greenville to the intersection of Greenville Avenue with South Coalter Street, thence north with Coalter to the intersection of Coalter Street and Frederick Street, thence west along Frederick to the intersection of Frederick Street and North New Street, thence north along North New to the intersection of North New Street and Augusta Street, thence north with Augusta to the intersection of Augusta Street and Oakenwald Street, thence with Oakenwald north to the intersection of Oakenwald and High Street, the point of beginning. The restriction area defined herein applies to all sidewalks within the area and on either side of the boundaries thereof.

(3) A violation of the prohibition contained herein shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not more than $50.00. (Code 1985, § 26-13; Ord. 1-9-03).


12.05.140 Duty of property owners or occupants to keep sidewalks clean.

It shall be the duty of every person occupying property abutting on a paved sidewalk to cause such sidewalk to be kept clear of dirt, filth and dangerous or obnoxious matter and substances. If any such property is unoccupied, it shall be the duty of the owner or the person having charge thereof to comply with the requirements of this section. (Code 1964, § 25-6; Code 1985, § 26-14).


12.05.150 Duty of property owners or occupants to remove snow and ice from sidewalks.

It shall be the duty of every person occupying any property abutting on a paved sidewalk to remove snow, sleet or ice from such sidewalk, within six hours after the snow or sleet ceases to fall or the ice ceases to form, unless the snow or sleet fell or the ice formed during the night, in which case it shall be removed by 12:00 noon on the following day. If any such property is unoccupied, it shall be the duty of the owner or the person having charge thereof to comply with the requirements of this section. (Code 1964, § 25-7; Code 1985, § 26-15).

State law reference – Authority of city to require removal of snow from sidewalks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115.


12.05.160 Deposit of snow in streets.

It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any snow from private premises and deposit such snow in any street. (Code 1964, § 25-8; Code 1985, § 26-16).


12.05.170 Temporary street closings.

(1) The city manager (or designee) may permit the temporary use of any city right-of-way (including any street, on-street parking space(s), or sidewalk) and other public way for other than public purposes, and may close the rights-of-way, public ways, and public spaces to public use and travel during such temporary use, for a specified period of time, when the city manager determines that such temporary closing will not be unduly injurious to the safety and convenience of the general public, that such closing is necessary because the proposed temporary use will impede traffic and/or pedestrian travel, and that adequate provision can be made to detour through traffic. Such temporary use shall be authorized by a written permit, which may be a single permit for multiple users, conditioned upon the temporary user’s or users’ compliance with the following conditions:

(a) No matter advertising any thing or business shall be displayed in or on the public rights-of-way or public way in connection with such temporary use, except that limited signage may be displayed to identify the business and any directions and conditions.

(b) The person so permitted to have the temporary use shall furnish a public liability and property damage insurance contract insuring the liability of such person, firm, association, organization or corporation for personal injury or death, and for damages to property, resulting from such temporary use, in such amounts as shall be determined by the city manager, which the city manager may waive. Unless waived by the city manager, the city shall be named as an additional insured in the insurance contract, with reasonable prior notification to the city in the event of cancellation or termination.

(c) The person so permitted to have the temporary use shall be liable for damages to persons or property arising out of or on account of such use.

(d) The specific location and the use approved for the temporarily closed right-of-way shall be described in the permit issued pursuant to this section.

(e) Temporary use of public rights-of-way, public ways, and public spaces for other than public purposes shall be limited to a period of no more than 120 days; however, when an application seeks such temporary use in connection with construction activities on property adjacent to the right-of-way, the city manager may authorize the temporary use under this section for a longer period of time.

(f) Any other applicable permit requirements imposed by the Commonwealth of Virginia or the city of Staunton.

(g) Such other reasonable conditions as are deemed necessary by the city manager to protect the public welfare, safety or convenience, as set forth in writing within an approved permit.

(2) Should a permittee fail, at any time, to comply with any conditions set forth within this section, or any applicable city rules, regulations, or conditions as the city manager may promulgate, then the city manager may revoke the permit. A single permit for multiple users may be revoked as to a single user.

(3) Application for a permit required pursuant to this section shall be made in writing to the city manager, unless the temporary use is initiated by the city or the application is waived by the city manager. A fee for the temporary occupancy of an on-street parking space, public sidewalk or city right-of-way or public way may be charged as provided in an uncodified ordinance adopted by the city council.

(4) The city manager is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations, including but not limited to reasonable time, place and manner restrictions, for and in connection with the temporary use of public rights-of-way and public ways as authorized by this section.

(5) The issuance of a permit pursuant to this section authorizing the use for a period longer than 10 days may be appealed to the city manager by a city resident or owner of a business located within the city in writing within five calendar days after issuance of the permit. The city manager shall render a final decision on such appeal within five days of receiving it, and the city manager’s decision shall be final and not be subject to any further administrative appeal(s) under this section or appeal to the city council. (Ord. 2020-10).


Chapter 12.10 EXCAVATIONS

Sections:

12.10.010    Chapter not applicable to work done by city.

12.10.020    Permit – Required.

12.10.030    Same – Filing, contents and effect of application.

12.10.040    Same – Applicant’s deposit.

12.10.050    Institution and prosecution of work and notice of completion thereof.

12.10.060    Protective barriers and lights – Responsibility for damages.

12.10.070    Replacing surface.


12.10.010 Chapter not applicable to work done by city.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to work done by city forces under the supervision of the city manager. (Code 1964, § 25-28; Code 1985, § 26-27).


12.10.020 Permit – Required.

No person shall take up or remove any portion of the surface of a sidewalk or street or excavate in any street of the city, without a permit from the city manager. (Code 1964, § 25-21; Code 1985, § 26-28).


12.10.030 Same – Filing, contents and effect of application.

(1) Any person desiring a permit required by SCC 12.10.020 shall file an application therefor with the city manager. Such application shall contain such information as may be required by the city manager.

(2) Every person who files an application under this section shall be deemed to have assented thereby to all of the provisions and terms of this chapter, including the right of the city to collect the actual cost of refilling the excavation and replacing the pavement, sidewalk or street surface in the manner required by this chapter. (Code 1964, §§ 25-22, 25-23; Code 1985, § 26-29).


12.10.040 Same – Applicant’s deposit.

As a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit required by SCC 12.10.020, the city manager may require a deposit sufficient to pay the cost of repairing and resurfacing the street or sidewalk to be disturbed, the amount of such deposit to be determined by the city manager. (Code 1964, § 25-24; Code 1985, § 26-30).


12.10.050 Institution and prosecution of work and notice of completion thereof.

It shall be the duty of every person to whom a permit required by this chapter is granted to institute at once and prosecute without delay the work for which such permit was obtained and promptly, on its completion, notify the city manager. (Code 1964, § 25-25; Code 1985, § 26-31).


12.10.060 Protective barriers and lights – Responsibility for damages.

Any person granted a permit required by this chapter shall place guards or barriers around the excavation in question and shall protect it by warning lights at night and shall be responsible for damages to persons or property caused by such excavation until taken in charge by the city manager. (Code 1964, § 25-27; Code 1985, § 26-32).


12.10.070 Replacing surface.

The repair of all cuts and excavations made in any street, sidewalk, or alley in the city by a permittee hereunder shall be done in the following manner:

All excavations and street openings shall be backfilled to full depth with 21-A stone or nonshrink concrete slurry (flowable fill, 50-100 psi). When backfilling with 21-A stone, compaction shall be by mechanical means, in lifts of not more than six inches. Any patch in a street classified as arterial, or streets in areas zoned business or industrial shall include two and one-half inches of base-mix bituminous concrete and two inches of surface-mix bituminous concrete. Any patch in a street classified as residential shall include two inches of surface-mix bituminous concrete. All repairs shall be neatly saw cut. All materials used in backfilling and repairing excavations shall be of a VDOT-approved design. The director of public works may specify flowable fill for excavations depending on the size of the excavation. Crushed limestone dust may be used to cushion and protect natural gas lines.

At the discretion of the director of public works, any excavation perpendicular to and crossing a lane of traffic shall be backfilled with concrete slurry. These repairs shall be properly plated so that the road may be open to traffic until the repair is complete.

All sidewalk and curb and gutter repairs shall have full sections replaced. All concrete shall be repaired with 3,500 psi concrete placed and cured in accordance with VDOT standards. The street superintendent must be contacted for inspection of forms prior to pouring any concrete.

In the event a person making a cut or excavation fails to accomplish the repair of such, the department of public works shall make necessary repairs. The person making such cut or excavation shall then pay charges for repairs based on standard city labor rates plus overhead.

The permittee shall not leave any paving materials, stone, earth, or other materials removed from street cuts, openings, or excavations on any city street or city public property. All streets, sidewalks, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the director of public works.

All excavations and/or street/sidewalk openings shall be restored to original conditions within 10 working days from the completion of said work. Any excavation required to be opened for longer than 10 days shall be approved by the director of public works. Any excavation in a through lane of moving traffic – other than described in this section – must be temporarily patched with a cold bituminous concrete mix until the proper finish mix can be applied.

All such work performed by a permittee hereunder shall have a warranty period of one year. At any such time during the period of warranty the repair fails or begins to exhibit signs of failure, the repair will be re-accomplished. The director of public works may direct the permittee to re-accomplish any repair not meeting the above-mentioned standards.

If the repairs and replacements required herein are not made within the time specified, the city, after written notice to the permittee, may cause such repair to be made; and the cost thereof shall be the responsibility of the permittee.

The permittee, before starting any cut or excavation hereunder, shall sign a statement that he has read this chapter, understands it, and agrees to abide by its terms. (Code 1964, § 25-26; Code 1985, § 26-33; Ord. 11-11-99).


Chapter 12.15 SIDEWALK ENTRANCES AND OPENINGS

Sections:

12.15.010    Entrances to cellars or areaways generally.

12.15.020    Fuel or coal holes generally.

12.15.030    To be kept closed except when in use – Liability for damages caused by opening.

12.15.040    Opening in dangerous manner.

12.15.050    Repair of defective covers.


12.15.010 Entrances to cellars or areaways generally.

(1) After November 25, 1949, no person shall install, in any sidewalk, an entrance to a cellar or areaway, without the approval of the city council.

(2) Every cellar or area which opens in a sidewalk shall have such opening covered with substantial metal grating, rough-surface metal or metal and glass, which shall be flush with the pavement. No such opening to any existing cellar or area shall be recovered, nor shall the covering thereof be repaired or renewed, except with such material and in such manner as above required.

(3) The entrance to every cellar which opens in a sidewalk shall be covered with two doors of equal width, without joints and so constructed that, when closed, they shall be flush with the pavement, and when open, shall each stand upright and at right angles to the pavement and be held in such position by connecting bars or chains at the end of such doors nearest the curb line. No cellar door shall be allowed to fall back or lie flat upon the street or sidewalk or to remain open any longer than necessary and while in actual use.

(4) The owner or occupant of any building, the cellar or area to which does not conform to the requirements of this section, who shall, after notification by the city manager, fail or refuse to comply with its provisions, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section. (Code 1964, § 25-29; Code 1985, § 26-44).


12.15.020 Fuel or coal holes generally.

(1) No opening in a sidewalk for fuel or coal holes shall exceed 18 inches in diameter. Such opening shall be covered with a substantial metal cover, with a rough surface placed flush with the surface of the sidewalk. Such fuel or coal holes constructed after November 25, 1949, shall be in accordance with plans first approved by the city manager and shall not be constructed until a written permit has been obtained from the city manager.

(2) The owner or occupant of any building, the fuel or coal hole to which does not conform to this section, or the owner, user or lessor of any such fuel or coal hole, who shall, after notification by the city manager, fail or refuse to comply with its provisions, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section. (Code 1964, § 25-30; Code 1985, § 26-45).


12.15.030 To be kept closed except when in use – Liability for damages caused by opening.

Every cellar, vault and fuel or coal hole opening in a sidewalk shall be kept closed and the cover thereof securely fastened, except when the same is actually in use by some person immediately attending the same. The owner or occupant of the building shall be responsible for any damage to persons or property caused by any such opening. (Code 1964, § 25-31; Code 1985, § 26-46).


12.15.040 Opening in dangerous manner.

It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously open, or cause to be opened, any cellar, vault or fuel or coal hole opening in a sidewalk, in such manner that the safety of users of the sidewalk is endangered. (Code 1964, § 25-32; Code 1985, § 26-47).


12.15.050 Repair of defective covers.

Whenever the owner or occupant of any building to which is attached any area, cellar, vault or fuel or coal hole opening in the sidewalk is notified by the city manager that the covering thereof is insecure or dangerous, it shall be his duty to repair the same within five days. If the owner or occupant fails to do so, the city manager may cause such repairs to be made and the cost thereof shall be collected from such owner or occupant in like manner as fines and assessments are collected. (Code 1964, § 25-33; Code 1985, § 26-48).


Chapter 12.20 DRIVEWAYS

Sections:

12.20.010    General permit and construction requirements.

12.20.020    Special permit for construction or operation of business or industrial structure requiring driveway from public street – Required.

12.20.030    Same – Application – Investigation.

12.20.040    Same – Issuance or denial.

12.20.050    Same – Revocation.


12.20.010 General permit and construction requirements.

No person shall construct a driveway across a sidewalk or across that portion of the street between the curb line and property line, unless a permit so to do has been issued by the office of engineering services. Application for such permit shall be made by the owner of the property, who must make his own arrangements for the construction authorized. Such construction shall be done according to the city’s specifications and under the supervision of the supervisor of facilities maintenance. (Code 1964, § 25-38; Code 1985, § 26-59).


12.20.020 Special permit for construction or operation of business or industrial structure requiring driveway from public street – Required.

No person shall construct or operate a gasoline service station, public garage, repair shop, drive-in restaurant, drive-in dairy products bar, bowling alley, skating rink, theater or other business or industrial structure, the use of which requires one or more driveways from a public street, unless he first secures a special permit therefor from the office of engineering services. (Code 1964, § 25-39; Code 1985, § 26-60).


12.20.030 Same – Application – Investigation.

(1) Any person desiring a special permit required by SCC 12.20.020 shall file a written application therefor in the office of engineering services, together with ground plans showing the proposed structure and driveways.

(2) Upon receipt of an application under this section, the supervisor of engineering services shall make an investigation to determine the effect which the proposed use will have on traffic flow, traffic or fire hazards which may be created and the supply of light and air to adjacent properties. (Code 1964, §§ 25-40, 25-41; Code 1985, § 26-61).


12.20.040 Same – Issuance or denial.

If the supervisor of engineering services finds, based upon the investigation referred to in SCC 12.20.030, that the proposed structure and use will not unreasonably increase traffic congestion in the streets or constitute a traffic or fire hazard or unreasonably impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent properties, he shall issue the special permit, and otherwise he shall deny such permit. In case of such denial, the applicant may appeal the decision to the board of building code appeals. (Code 1964, § 25-42; Code 1985, § 26-62).

Cross reference – Board of building code appeals, SCC 15.10.050.


12.20.050 Same – Revocation.

A special permit issued pursuant to SCC 12.20.040 shall be revoked and become void, unless construction or operation is begun by the person to whom such special permit is granted within six months from the date the permit is issued. (Code 1964, § 25-43; Code 1985, § 26-63).


Chapter 12.25 TREES AND SHRUBBERY ON PUBLIC PROPERTY*

Sections:

12.25.010    Purpose.

12.25.020    Definitions.

12.25.030    Landscaping advisory board and terms of members.

12.25.040    Duties and responsibilities.

12.25.050    Operation.

12.25.060    Public tree care.

12.25.070    Review by city council.

12.25.080    Violations.

*Editor’s note – An ordinance adopted June 25, 1987, amended the code by the addition of Art. V, §§ 26-64 – 26-72. However, at the discretion of the editor, the provisions of § 26-72, which repealed § 26-13, have not been set out herein.


12.25.010 Purpose.

It is recognized that trees add a great deal to property values by providing shade, erosion control, and general beauty to the city, making the latter more appealing to visitors and more pleasant for the citizenry.

It is further recognized that landscaping on public property also adds to the general beauty and appeal of the city, thereby enhancing both tourism and the quality of life for the citizenry.

It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to set forth a policy which encourages the planting, nurturing, and proper maintenance of all trees on public property. Experience has shown that trees, under some circumstances, can be hazardous to public safety; hence, this chapter also provides for tree pruning or removal when conditions warrant. (Code 1985, § 26-64; Ord. 6-25-87; Ord. 2-10-99).


12.25.020 Definitions.

“Street trees” are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city.

“Park trees” are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all other areas owned by the city to which the public has free access as a park.

“Public landscaping” is hereby defined as all horticultural and other public planting area improvements installed and maintained on public property in accordance with the comprehensive landscape master plan, as amended. (Code 1985, § 26-65; Ord. 6-25-87; Ord. 2-10-99).


12.25.030 Landscaping advisory board and terms of members.

The city advisory landscaping board is hereby established and is charged with oversight of both “street” and “park” trees, as well as charged with advisory responsibilities to the horticultural operations of the city and the comprehensive landscape master plan.

It shall consist of five members, citizens, residents, and business owners of this city, with the director of public works, the city horticulturist, and director of parks and recreation as members ex officio. Members shall be appointed by council and of the initial members, three shall be appointed for a three-year term and two shall be appointed for a two-year term. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a three-year term, and no member shall serve more than two consecutive terms.

Members shall serve without compensation. The board shall designate one of its members who shall serve as recording secretary for the board. (Code 1985, § 26-66; Ord. 2-10-99).


12.25.040 Duties and responsibilities.

The board shall:

(1) Serve to enhance the public participation in the beautification of the city through landscape improvements;

(2) Act as an advocate for both public and private landscaping, assisting in the coordination of both;

(3) Provide advisory oversight to the amendment and implementation of the comprehensive landscape master plan;

(4) Assist with the education of the public on matters of public landscaping through materials, public appearances and media exposure as appropriate;

(5) Act in an advisory and advocacy role to the city horticulturist, city manager and city council;

(6) Perform as required in SCC 12.25.060.

Upon approval of the goals, objectives and recommendations by the city council for the city of Staunton, the same shall constitute a part of the official city landscaping plan. (Code 1985, § 26-67; Ord. 6-25-87; Ord. 1-12-89; Ord. 2-10-99).


12.25.050 Operation.

The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations, with the consent of the city manager, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. (Code 1985, § 26-68; Ord. 6-25-87).


12.25.060 Public tree care.

(1) The city, in consonance with the comprehensive landscape master plan, shall plant, prune, maintain and relocate trees, plants, and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be appropriate to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 

(2) Before the removal of any street tree or park tree, or any part thereof, by the city, or before the city issues an order directing said removal, the city shall advise the landscaping advisory board in writing of its intention and the reasons therefor. The landscaping advisory board shall have 30 days after receipt of such notice to make its recommendation to the city with respect thereto, suggesting, if possible, any alternative to the proposed removal. Such alternatives are advisory only, the decision to remove hereunder being at the discretion of the city, provided the provisions of subsection (3) of this section are met. 

(3) The city shall not remove a street tree of significant size, or permit removal by others, unless notice of the intended removal or destruction is given. The notice shall consist of a durable and legible statement of the city’s intent, affixed to and easily visible on the tree for not less than five days immediately preceding the contemplated removal or destruction; and the notice shall state the reason for the intended removal or destruction of the tree and the person or persons to whom inquiries or protests thereon may be directed.

(4) In the event of an emergency situation, such as a fallen tree or some other condition or occurrence requiring an immediate removal or destruction of a tree along one of these public ways, the city may remove or destroy the tree without complying with the foregoing provisions of this section. “Emergency situation” shall include, but is not limited to, trees posing an immediate danger to public safety and trees causing stoppage of utility services such as water lines, sewer lines, electric or power lines, or other public or private improvements; all as determined by the director of public works for the city.

(5) When a tree is removed it shall be city policy to plant a replacement somewhere in the general area to include planting on private property, with the consent of the owner.

(6) This section does not prohibit the planting of “street trees” by home owners on public property in front of their lot, or by other citizens, providing that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with the comprehensive landscape master plan and approval obtained from the landscaping advisory board, the city horticulturist, and the director of public works for the city. (Code 1985, § 26-69; Ord. 2-10-99).


12.25.070 Review by city council.

Any action, conduct or decision of the city landscaping board may be reviewed by the city council for the city of Staunton. Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by such action, conduct or decision, may appeal therefrom in writing to the city council. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within 30 days of such action, conduct or decision, and the filing of such appeal shall delay the implementation of such action, conduct or decision until the city council has heard the matter and made a final decision with respect thereto. In such cases, city council shall schedule a hearing upon such matter at either the next regularly scheduled meeting of city council following the receipt of such notice of appeal, or at the regularly scheduled meeting of council immediately following thereafter. The city clerk, upon receipt of such notice of appeal and further upon the matter being scheduled for hearing by the city council, shall notify in writing the city landscaping advisory board and the appellants of the time and date for such hearing. (Code 1985, § 26-70; Ord. 6-25-87; Ord. 2-10-99).


12.25.080 Violations.

(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.

(2) The imposition of the penalty described in subsection (1) of this section shall not preclude the city attorney from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful violations or to restrain, correct or abate a violation. (Code 1985, § 26-71; Ord. 6-25-87).


Chapter 12.30 STREET VENDING

Sections:

12.30.010    Findings and intent.

12.30.020    Definitions.

12.30.030    When permitted – Location.

12.30.040    Compliance with other laws, ordinances and regulations.

12.30.050    Sales to persons in motor vehicles prohibited.

12.30.060    Control of trash.

12.30.070    Removal of stand in emergencies or to permit maintenance of public facilities.


12.30.010 Findings and intent.

The city council finds and declares that:

(1) The primary purpose of the public streets and sidewalks is for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic.

(2) Vending on certain public streets and sidewalks, under certain circumstances, may be appropriate where conditions beyond the control of a merchant seriously curtail and impede customer access to the merchant’s business establishment.

(3) Reasonable regulation of street and sidewalk vending, when allowed, is necessary to secure, preserve and promote safety, welfare, comfort, convenience, trade and commerce in the city and among its inhabitants. (Code 1985, § 26-80).


12.30.020 Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

“Stand” means any newsstand, table, showcase, bench, booth, rack, cart, pushcart, wagon, stall or any other fixture or device or wheeled vehicle which may be moved without the assistance of a motor and which is not required to be licensed and registered by the state department of motor vehicles, used for the displaying, storing or transporting of articles offered for sale by a vendor.

“Vendor” means any person, including an employee or agent of another, engaged in the selling, or offering for sale, of food, beverages or merchandise on any public street, sidewalk, or on a parcel of land abutting a public street or sidewalk, whether from a stand or from his person. (Code 1985, § 26-81).


12.30.030 When permitted – Location.

(1) The owner, or his representative, of any business situated within the downtown service district defined in SCC 3.60.030 may apply to the city manager for a permit to sell or offer for sale, food, beverages or merchandise (excluding alcoholic beverages) on any public street or sidewalk from a “stand” and as a “vendor” as defined in SCC 12.30.020.

(2) If the city manager, in his sole and absolute discretion, determines that due to reasons beyond the control of the applicant, access to said business by the public is seriously curtailed and/or impeded, and that the issuance of a permit to conduct such vending from a stand would not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare, then the manager may issue such permit subject to the conditions and requirements set forth therein by the manager with which the applicant agrees to conform. Such conditions may, among other things, relate to the design of the stand, location of the stand and hours of operation.

(3) Vending permitted hereunder is limited to the streets and sidewalks of the downtown service district as more particularly set forth in the permit issued. (Code 1985, § 26-82).


12.30.040 Compliance with other laws, ordinances and regulations.

Prior to selling, displaying or offering for sale any food, beverage or merchandise, vendors must obtain any approval which may be required by the health department or any other regulatory agency with authority over the proposed vending operation. (Code 1985, § 26-83).


12.30.050 Sales to persons in motor vehicles prohibited.

No vendor shall solicit or sell to persons in motor vehicles on the street, from a stand or otherwise. (Code 1985, § 26-84).


12.30.060 Control of trash.

Vendors must provide receptacles for trash and clean up all trash and/or debris accumulating within 20 feet of any stand permitted hereunder. (Code 1985, § 26-85).


12.30.070 Removal of stand in emergencies or to permit maintenance of public facilities.

A vendor shall comply immediately with the lawful request of any police officer, firefighter, rescue service person or city or public utility employee to move the vendor’s stand for emergency reasons or to permit maintenance of the pavement, utilities or other public facilities. (Code 1985, § 26-86; Ord. 6-28-01).


Chapter 12.35 CITY MARKET

Sections:

12.35.010    Establishment of city market – Location.

12.35.020    Purpose, etc.

12.35.030    Rules and regulations.

12.35.040    Fees.

12.35.050    Retail merchant’s license waived.

12.35.060    Certificate required.


12.35.010 Establishment of city market – Location.

There is hereby established a city market or markets, which shall be operated at a location or locations designated by the city manager. (Code 1985, § 30-1).

Charter reference – Section 11 (Third).

State law reference – Section 15.2-971, Code of Virginia.


12.35.020 Purpose, etc.

(1) The city market (or markets) shall be operated for the accommodation of any person desiring to make retail sales of farm produce and foodstuffs, grown or produced by him, members of his family or farm laborers employed by him upon property owned or leased by such person.

(2) Types of produce permitted to be sold hereunder include farm- and kitchen-produced products such as fruit, vegetables, eggs, cider, honey, cut flowers, potted plants, baked goods (not egg based), and jams, jellies and relishes. Canned fruit and vegetables or egg-based baking goods are not permitted without approval of the local department of health. All products sold must be produced by the seller, his family, or farm employees. Selling of items purchased from or provided by another market or producer is not permitted. (Ord. 2014-02. Code 1985, § 30-2).


12.35.030 Rules and regulations.

The city manager is authorized to make, promulgate and enforce the rules and regulations governing the hours of operation and conduct of business in the city market (or markets). Anyone aggrieved by such rules and regulations, or the application thereof, may seek relief by appeal to the city council for the city of Staunton, Virginia. (Code 1985, § 30-3).


12.35.040 Fees.

Reasonable fees for participation in the city market (or markets) shall be as set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager. Participants shall be required to pay the applicable state and local sales taxes as set forth in such rules and regulations. (Code 1985, § 30-4).


12.35.050 Retail merchant’s license waived.

The participant, not otherwise required under applicable state and local law to have a retail merchant’s license, shall not be required to have such license solely because of his participation in the city market (or markets). (Code 1985, § 30-5).


12.35.060 Certificate required.

No person shall be allowed to sell any produce permitted hereunder in the city market (or markets) until he has obtained a producer’s certificate from the administrator of the city market as more particularly set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder. (Code 1985, § 30-6; Ord. 1-28-93).


Chapter 12.40 ARTS AND CULTURE DISTRICT

Sections:

12.40.010    Statement of purpose.

12.40.020    Boundaries and date established.

12.40.030    Definitions.

12.40.040    Administration.

12.40.050    Validity.


12.40.010 Statement of purpose.

In accordance with Chapter 11 of Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, it is the purpose of this chapter to establish an arts and culture district, to be known as the Red Brick District, in order to increase awareness and support for the arts and culture in Staunton, especially within the area designated as the Staunton arts and culture district. The city believes that the creation of an arts and culture district will enable the arts and culture organizations within the district to partner and build synergy with which more effective promotion, cooperation, and collaboration can occur. The city further believes that the establishment of an arts and culture district will encourage the growth of arts and culture organizations as well as complementary businesses, thus increasing the overall economic activity of this geographic area and other neighboring areas of the city, which would, in turn, benefit the welfare of the citizens throughout Staunton. (Ord. 2009-24; Ord. 2009-16).


12.40.020 Boundaries and date established.

The boundaries of the Staunton arts and culture district are as set forth on the map entitled “Staunton Arts and Culture District,” dated July 23, 2009, as maintained in the Staunton office of economic development and tourism, the provisions of which map are incorporated fully herein by reference. (Ord. 2009-24; Ord. 2009-16).


12.40.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the term(s) below shall have the following meaning, unless clearly indicated to the contrary:

The term “arts and culture organization” shall mean a business or not-for-profit organization that presents live performances of theatre, dance, music, or other imaginative work and/or produces or exhibits physical works created by an artist or under an artist’s direction and intended for unique production or limited reproduction. Museums or historic sites, the primary mission of which is education or historic preservation, also qualify as arts and culture organizations. (Ord. 2009-24; Ord. 2009-16).


12.40.040 Administration.

The administrator of the Staunton arts and culture district shall be the city manager or designee. The administrator shall determine the procedures for obtaining any benefits created by this chapter and for the administration of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-24; Ord. 2009-16).


12.40.050 Validity.

If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, or provision of this chapter be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall not operate to affect the validity of any other part hereof. (Ord. 2009-24; Ord. 2009-16).


Title 13 ENVIRONMENT

Chapters:

Division I. Stormwater Utility and Management

13.05    In General

13.10    Comprehensive Drainage Plan

13.12    Riparian Buffers

13.14    Enforcement and Miscellaneous

Division II. Water Supply

13.15    In General

13.20    Use Charges

13.25    Fluoridation

13.30    Cross-Connection Control and Backflow Prevention

Division III. Sewers and Sewage Disposal

13.35    In General

13.40    Connections to City Sewer Systems

13.45    Sewer User Fee

13.50    Sewer Stoppage and Repair

13.55    Pretreatment and Discharge Requirements

Division IV. Illicit Discharges and Connections

13.60    Non-Stormwater Discharge


Chapter 13.05 IN GENERAL

Sections:

13.05.010    Purpose and authority.

13.05.020    Definitions.

13.05.030    Applicability.

13.05.040    Exceptions and special provisions.

13.05.045    VSMP and VESCP requirements.

13.05.050    Permit application procedures, review procedures and review fees.

13.05.055    Stormwater control program fee.

13.05.060    Performance bonds.


13.05.010 Purpose and authority.

The purpose of Division I of this title is to establish a stormwater utility fee, to establish minimum stormwater management (SWM) and erosion and sediment control (ESC) requirements and controls to help ensure the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city of Staunton and to help protect the quality and quantity of state and local waters from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater, including protection from a land-disturbing activity causing unreasonable degradation of properties, water quality, stream channels, and other natural resources, and to establish procedures whereby SWM and ECS requirements shall be administered and enforced. This chapter seeks to advance these purposes through the following initiatives:

(1) Continue to provide a funding mechanism to provide adequate resources for public stormwater management improvements within the city;

(2) Require the use of low-impact development (LID) on all new development or redevelopment projects;

(3) Require that land development and land conversion activities maintain the after-development runoff characteristics as the pre-development runoff characteristics in order to reduce flooding, siltation, stream bank erosion, and property damage;

(4) Establish minimum design criteria for the protection of downstream properties and aquatic resources from damages due to increases in stormwater runoff volume, velocity, and peak flow rate resulting from land development;

(5) Establish minimum design criteria for measures to minimize nonpoint source pollution from stormwater runoff;

(6) Establish provisions for the perpetual responsibility for and maintenance of stormwater management control devices and other techniques specified to manage the quality and quantity of runoff; 

(7) Establish certain administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval, and disapproval of erosion and sediment control plans, comprehensive drainage plans, and the inspection of approved projects; and

(8) Comply with the applicable provisions of the Code of Virginia. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2009-09; Ord. 2007-20. Code 1985, § 11-1).


13.05.020 Definitions.

In addition to the definitions set forth in 9 VAC 25-870-10 of the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Regulations and 9 VAC 25-840-10 of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Program (VESCP) Regulations, which are expressly adopted and incorporated herein by reference as they may be amended, the following words and terms used in Division I of this title have the following meanings unless otherwise specified herein. If definitions differ or conflict, those incorporated herein shall have precedence.

(1) “Accelerated erosion” means erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action.

(2) “Adequate channel” means a water course that will convey a chosen frequency storm event without overtopping its banks or causing erosive damage to the bed, banks, and overbank sections of the same. The adequacy of channels and pipes shall always be demonstrated by hydraulic analysis utilizing standard engineering methods.

(3) “Administrator” means the VSMP authority and the VESCP authority, including the designated city staff person or department responsible for administering the VSMP and VESCP on behalf of the locality. The administrator for the city of Staunton shall be the city engineer or designee. 

(4) “Agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan” means a contract between the VSMP authority and the owner or permittee that specifies methods that shall be implemented to comply with the requirements of a VSMP authority for the construction of a single-family residence; such contract may be executed by the VSMP authority in lieu of a stormwater management plan.

(5) “Agreement in lieu of an erosion and sediment control plan” means a contract between the VESCP authority and the owner that specifies conservation measures that must be implemented in the construction of a single-family residence; this contract may be executed by the VESCP authority in lieu of an erosion and sediment control plan.

(6) “Applicant” means any person submitting an erosion and sediment control plan, a comprehensive drainage plan or an agreement in lieu of a plan for approval or submitting an application for a permit or requesting issuance of a permit under Division I of this title authorizing land-disturbing activities to commence.

(7) “Best management practice” or “BMP” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land-disturbing activities. A list of approved BMP practices with design standards and specifications, which are incorporated by reference as they may be amended, can be found at the Virginia Stormwater Management BMP Clearinghouse website.

(8) “Building” means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area.

(9) “Certified combined administrator for ESC” means an employee or agent of a VESCP authority who holds a certificate of competence from the State Board in the combined ESC classifications of program administrator, plan reviewer, and project inspector in the area of ESC. 

(10) “Certified combined administrator for SWM” means an employee or agent of a VSMP authority who holds a certificate of competence from the State Board in the combined classifications of program administrator, plan reviewer, and project inspector in the area of SWM.

(11) “Certified plan reviewer for ESC” means an employee or agent of a VESCP authority who: (a) holds a certificate of competence from the State Board in the classification of plan reviewer in the area of ESC; (b) is licensed as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect, or land surveyor pursuant to Article 1 (Section 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia; or (c) is a professional soil scientist as defined in Chapter 22 (Section 54.1-2200 et seq.) of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia.

(12) “Certified plan reviewer for SWM” means an employee or agent of a VSMP authority who holds a certificate of competence from the State Board in the classification of plan reviewer in the area of SWM.

(13) “Certified program administrator for ESC” means an employee or agent of a VESCP authority who holds a certificate of competence from the State Board in the classification of program administrator in the area of ESC.

(14) “Certified program administrator for SWM” means an employee or agent of a VSMP authority who holds a certificate of competence from the State Board in the classification of program administrator in the area of SWM.

(15) “Certified project inspector for ESC” means an employee or agent of a VESCP authority who holds a certificate of competence from the State Board in the classification of project inspector in the area of ESC.

(16) “Certified project inspector for SWM” means an employee or agent of a VSMP authority who holds a certificate of competence from the State Board in the classification of project inspector in the area of SWM. 

(17) “Channel” means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.

(18) “City” means the city of Staunton.

(19) “Clean Water Act” or “CWA” means the federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public Law 97-117, and any subsequent revisions thereto. 

(20) “Clearing” means any activity that removes the vegetative ground cover, including, but not limited to, the removal of vegetation, root mat removal and/or topsoil removal.

(21) “Combined administrator for ESC” means anyone who is responsible for performing the combined duties of a program administrator, plan reviewer and project inspector of a VESCP authority.

(22) “Combined administrator for SWM” means anyone who is responsible for performing the combined duties of a program administrator, plan reviewer and project inspector of a VSMP authority. 

(23) “Common plan of development or sale” means a contiguous area where separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules.

(24) “Comprehensive drainage plan” means the plan submission required prior to the issuance of a VSMP permit or a VESCP permit that contains an erosion and sediment control plan, a stormwater management plan and a stormwater pollution prevention plan as separate and distinct requirements therein.

(25) “Control measure” means any best management practice or stormwater facility, or other method used to minimize the discharge of pollutants to state waters.

(26) “Dedication” means the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use.

(27) “Department” means the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality.

(28) “Developer” means a person who undertakes land-disturbance activities.

(29) “Development” means land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation or utility facilities or structures or the clearing of land for nonagricultural or nonsilvicultural purposes.

(30) “District” or “soil and water conservation district” means a political subdivision of the Commonwealth organized in accordance with the provisions of Article 3 (Section 10.1-506 et seq.) of Chapter 5 of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia.

(31) “Drainage easement” means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.

(32) “Erosion and sediment control plan” means a document containing material for the conservation of soil and water resources of a unit or group of units of land. It may include appropriate maps, an appropriate soil and water plan inventory and management information with needed interpretations, and a record of decisions contributing to conservation treatment. The plan shall contain all major conservation decisions and all information deemed necessary by the VESCP authority to assure that the entire unit or units of land will be so treated to achieve the conservation objectives.

(33) “Erosion impact area” means an area of land not associated with current land-disturbing activity but subject to persistent soil erosion resulting in the delivery of sediment onto neighboring properties or into state waters. This definition shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land of 10,000 square feet or less used for residential purposes or to shorelines where the erosion results from wave action or other coastal processes.

(34) “ESC” means erosion and sediment control.

(35) “ESC Regulations” means the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Program (VESCP) Permit Regulations, 9 VAC 25-840, as may be amended.

(36) “Flooding” means a volume of water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of the stream, water body or conveyance system and that overflows onto adjacent lands, causing or threatening damage.

(37) “General permit” means the state permit titled GENERAL PERMIT FOR DISCHARGES OF STORMWATER FROM CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES found in Part XIV (9 VAC 25-880-1 et seq.) of the SWM Regulations authorizing a category of discharges under the CWA and the Virginia Stormwater Management Act within a geographical area of the Commonwealth of Virginia.

(38) “Hotspot” means an area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.

(39) “Hydrologic soil group (HSG)” means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, with high permeability and little runoff production, to D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff.

(40) “Impervious cover” means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roofs, buildings, streets, parking areas, and any concrete, asphalt, or compacted gravel surface.

(41) “Integrated management practice” means low-impact development microscale and distributed management techniques used to maintain predevelopment site hydrology. Integrated management practices shall include bioretention facilities, dry wells, filter/buffer strips, grassed swales, rain barrels, cisterns, infiltration trenches and amended soils as specified in the low-impact development design manuals.

(42) “Karst area” means any land area predominantly underlain at the surface or shallow subsurface by limestone, dolomite, or other soluble bedrock regardless of any obvious surface karst features.

(43) “Karst features” means sinkholes, sinking and losing streams, caves, large flow springs, and other such landscape features found in karst areas.

(44) “Land disturbance” or “land-disturbing activity” means a manmade change to the land surface that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movements of sediments into state waters or onto lands of the Commonwealth or potentially changes its runoff characteristics, including clearing, grading, or excavation except that the term shall not include those exemptions specified in SCC 13.05.040. 

(45) “Landowner” means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land.

(46) “Layout” means a conceptual drawing sufficient to provide for the specified stormwater management facilities required at the time of approval.

(47) “Linear development project” means a land-disturbing activity that is linear in nature such as, but not limited to: (a) the construction of electric and telephone utility lines, and natural gas pipelines; (b) the construction of tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures of a railroad company; (c) highway construction projects; (d) construction of stormwater channels and stream restoration activities; and (e) water and sewer lines. Private subdivision roads or streets shall not be considered linear development projects.

(48) “Low-impact development (LID)” means an ecologically friendly site development and stormwater management that aims to mitigate development impacts to land, water, and air, which includes the integration of site design and planning techniques that conserve natural systems and hydrologic functions on a site.

(49) “Manmade stormwater conveyance system” means a pipe, ditch, vegetated swale or other stormwater conveyance system constructed by man except for restored stormwater conveyance systems.

(50) “Minor modification” means an amendment to an existing general permit before its expiration not requiring extensive review and evaluation including, but not limited to, changes in federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) promulgated test protocols, increasing monitoring frequency requirements, changes in sampling locations, and changes to compliance dates within the overall compliance schedules. A minor general permit modification or amendment does not substantially alter general permit conditions, substantially increase or decrease the amount of surface water impacts, increase the size of the operation, or reduce the capacity of the facility to protect human health or the environment.

(51) “Natural channel design concepts” means the utilization of engineering analysis based on fluvial geomorphic processes to create, rehabilitate, restore, or stabilize an open conveyance system for the purpose of creating or recreating a stream that conveys its bankfull storm event within its banks and allows larger flows to access its floodplain.

(52) “Natural stormwater conveyance system” means the main channel of a natural stream and the flood-prone area adjacent to the main channel.

(53) “Off-site facility” means a stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity.

(54) “On-site facility” means a stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity.

(55) “Operator” means the owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to regulation under Division I of this title.

(56) “Owner” means the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a property.

(57) “Percent impervious” means the impervious area within the site divided by the area of the site multiplied by 100.

(58) “Permittee” means the person to whom the VSMP authority permit or VESCP authority permit is issued.

(59) “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, state, municipality, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, county, city, town or other political subdivision of the Commonwealth, a state, governmental body, including federal, state, or local entity as applicable, any interstate body or any other legal entity.

(60) “Planning area” means a designated portion of the parcel on which the land development project is located. Planning areas shall be established by delineation on a master plan. Once established, planning areas shall be applied consistently for all future projects.

(61) “Pollution prevention plan” or “PPP” means a document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that details the design, installation, implementation and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants.

(62) “Post-development” refers to conditions that reasonably may be expected or anticipated to exist after completion of the land development activity on a specific site or tract of land.

(63) “Pre-development” or “pre-existing” refers to the conditions that exist at the time that plans for the land development of a tract of land are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions.

(64) “Recharge” means the replenishment of underground water reserves.

(65) “Redevelopment” means the process of developing land that is or has been previously developed.

(66) “Regional (watershed-wide) stormwater management facility” or “regional facility” means a facility or series of facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from a specific watershed, although only portions of the watershed may experience development.

(67) “Regional (watershed-wide) stormwater management plan” or “regional plan” means a document containing material describing how runoff from open space, existing development and future planned development areas within a watershed will be controlled by coordinated design and implementation of regional stormwater management facilities.

(68) “Responsible land disturber” means an individual from the project or development team, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out a land-disturbing activity covered by an approved plan or agreement in lieu of a plan, who (a) holds a responsible land disturber certificate of competence, (b) holds a current certificate of competence from the State Board in the areas of combined administration, program administration, inspection, or plan review, (c) holds a current contractor certificate of competence for erosion and sediment control, or (d) is licensed in Virginia as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Article 1 (Section 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 

(69) “Restored stormwater conveyance system” means a stormwater conveyance system that has been designed and constructed using natural channel design concepts. Restored stormwater conveyance systems include the main channel and the flood-prone area adjacent to the main channel. 

(70) “Runoff” or “stormwater runoff” means that portion of precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways.

(71) “Runoff characteristics” means the parameters of stormwater that address but are not limited to velocity, peak flow rate, volume, time of concentration, sinuosity, channel cross-sectional area, and channel slope.

(72) “Single-family residence” means a noncommercial dwelling that is occupied exclusively by one family.

(73) “Site” means land or water area where any facility or land-disturbing activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used or preserved in connection with the facility or land-disturbing activity.

(74) “Site hydrology” means the parameters that impact the movement of water on and off site, including but not limited to characteristics such as soil types, soil permeability, vegetative cover, seasonal water tables, slopes, land cover, and impervious cover.

(75) “State” means the Commonwealth of Virginia.

(76) “State Board” means the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board.

(77) “State permit” means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the State Board in the form of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued under a state general permit or an approval issued by the State Board for stormwater discharges from a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). Under these state permits, the Commonwealth imposes and enforces requirements pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act and regulations, the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and the VSMP Permit Regulations, 9 VAC 25-870, as may be amended.

(78) “State water control law” means Chapter 3.1 (Section 62.1-44.2 et seq.) of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia, as may be amended.

(79) “State waters” means all water, on the surface and under the ground, wholly or partially within or bordering the Commonwealth or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands.

(80) “Stop work order” means an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped.

(81) “Stormwater” means precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.

(82) “Stormwater conveyance system” means a combination of drainage components that are used to convey stormwater discharge, either within or downstream of the land-disturbing activity, including: (a) “Manmade stormwater conveyance system”; (b) “Natural stormwater conveyance system”; or (c) “Restored stormwater conveyance system.” 

(83) “Stormwater management plan” means a document containing material describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land-disturbing activity and the methods for complying with the requirements of Division I of this title.

(84) “Stormwater pollution prevention plan” or “SWPPP” means a document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that identifies potential sources of pollutants that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction site, and otherwise meets the requirements of this title. In addition, the document shall identify and require the implementation of control measures, and shall include, but not be limited to, the inclusion of or the incorporation by reference of, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan and a pollution prevention plan.

(85) “Stormwater retrofit” means a stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site.

(86) “Stormwater runoff” means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation.

(87) “Subdivision” means to divide a parcel of land into three or more new lots or parcels of less than five acres each for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or, if a new street is involved in such division, any division of a parcel of land. The word “subdivision” shall include resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.

(88) “SWM” means stormwater management.

(89) “SWM Regulations” means the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Permit Regulations, 9 VAC 25-870, as may be amended.

(90) “Title” means SCC Title 13. 

(91) “Total maximum daily load” or “TMDL” means the sum of the individual wasteload allocations for point sources, load allocations for nonpoint sources, natural background loading and a margin of safety. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of either mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure. The TMDL process provides for point versus nonpoint source trade-offs.

(92) “VESCP authority permit” or “VESCP permit” means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the administrator for the initiation of a land-disturbing activity, in accordance with Division I of this title.

(93) “Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Program,” or “VESCP,” means a program approved by the State Board that has been established by a VESCP authority for the effective control of soil erosion, sediment deposition, and nonagricultural runoff associated with a land-disturbing activity to prevent the unreasonable degradation of properties, stream channels, waters, and other natural resources and shall include such items when applicable as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement where authorized in the Erosion and Sediment Control Act and its attendant regulations, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of the Erosion and Sediment Control Act and its attendant regulations, as may be amended.

(94) “Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Program authority,” or “VESCP authority,” means an authority approved by the State Board to operate a Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Program. An authority may include a state entity, including the Department; a federal entity; a district, county, city, or town; or for linear projects subject to annual standards and specifications, electric, natural gas and telephone utility companies, interstate and intrastate natural gas pipeline companies, railroad companies, or authorities created pursuant to Section 15.2-5102 of the Code of Virginia, as may be amended.

(95) “Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse website” means a website that contains detailed design standards and specifications for control measures that may be used in Virginia to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and associated regulations, as may be amended.

(96) “Virginia Stormwater Management Act” means Article 2.3 (Section 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia, as may be amended.

(97) “Virginia Stormwater Management Program” or “VSMP” means a program approved by the State Board after September 13, 2011, that has been established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized in Division I of this title, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of Division I of this title and associated regulations.

(98) “Virginia Stormwater Management Program authority” or “VSMP authority” means an authority approved by the State Board after September 13, 2011, to operate a Virginia Stormwater Management Program.

(99) “VSMP authority permit” or “VSMP permit” means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the administrator for the initiation of a land-disturbing activity, in accordance with Division I of this title, and which may only be issued after evidence of general permit coverage has been provided by the Department of Environmental Quality.

(100) “Watercourse” means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water.

(101) “Watershed” means a defined land area drained by a river or stream, karst system, or system of connecting rivers, streams, or drainage ways such that all surface water within the area flows through a single outlet. In karst areas, the karst feature to which the water drains may be considered a single outlet for the watershed.

(102) “Wetlands” means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2009-09; Ord. 2007-30; Ord. 2007-20. Code 1985, § 11-2; Ord. 11-9-95).


13.05.030 Applicability.

Provisions of Division I of this title shall be applicable to all subdivisions, site plans, or land use conversion applications, unless eligible for an exception under the specifications of Division I of this title. The provisions of Division I of this title also apply to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. In addition, all plans must also be reviewed by the administrator to ensure that established water quality and quantity standards will be maintained during and after development of the site and that post-construction runoff levels are consistent with any local and regional watershed plans.

To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff and erosion and sedimentation, the city’s performance standards, as provided or referenced in Division I of this title, must be met at new development sites. ESC and SWM standards apply to all land-disturbing, land development or land use conversion (redevelopment) activity disturbing over 10,000 square feet and single-family residence construction with a total land disturbance less than 10,000 square feet. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2009-09; Ord. 2007-20. Code 1985, § 11-3).


13.05.040 Exceptions and special provisions.

(1) Except as provided herein, no person may engage in any land-disturbing activity until a VSMP permit or VESCP permit has been issued by the administrator in accordance with the provisions of Division I of this title.

(2) Notwithstanding any other provisions of Division I of this title, the following activities are exempt from obtaining a VSMP permit, unless otherwise required by federal law:

(a) Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted under the provisions of Title 45.1 of the Code of Virginia, as may be amended;

(b) Clearing of lands specifically for agricultural purposes and the management, tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, livestock feedlot operations, or as additionally set forth by the State Board in regulations, including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11 (Section 10.1-1100 et seq.) of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia, as may be amended, or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in subsection B of Section 10.1-1163 of Article 9 of Chapter 11 of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia, as may be amended;

(c) Single-family residences separately built and disturbing less than one acre of land area and not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, including additions or modifications to existing single-family detached residential structures;

(d) Land-disturbing activities that disturb less than one acre of land area that are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one acre or greater of disturbance;

(e) Discharges to a sanitary sewer or a combined sewer system;

(f) Activities under a state or federal reclamation program to return an abandoned property to an agricultural or open land use;

(g) Routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original construction of the project. The paving of an existing road with a compacted or impervious surface and reestablishment of existing associated ditches and shoulders shall be deemed routine maintenance if performed in accordance with this section; and

(h) Conducting land-disturbing activities in response to a public emergency where the related work requires immediate authorization to avoid imminent endangerment to human health or the environment. In such situations, the administrator shall be advised of the disturbance within seven days of commencing the land-disturbing activity and compliance with the administrative requirements of subsection (1) of this section is required within 30 days of commencing the land-disturbing activity.

(3) Notwithstanding any other provisions of Division I of this title, the following activities are exempt from obtaining a VESCP permit, unless otherwise required by federal law:

(a) Minor land-disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs and maintenance work;

(b) Individual service connections;

(c) Installation, maintenance, or repair of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard-surfaced road, street or sidewalk, provided the land-disturbing activity is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard-surfaced;

(d) Septic tank lines or drainage fields unless included in an overall plan for land-disturbing activity relating to construction of the building to be served by the septic tank system;

(e) Surface or deep mining;

(f) Exploration or drilling for oil and gas including the well site, roads, feeder lines and off-site disposal areas;

(g) Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, or livestock feedlot operations, including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip-cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to removal of trees or harvesting of forest crops;

(h) Repair or rebuilding of the tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of a railroad company;

(i) Agricultural engineering operations including, but not limited to, the construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the provisions of the Dam Safety Act, Chapter 8.1 (Section 62.1-115.1 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, as may be amended, ditches, strip-cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage and land irrigation;

(j) Installation of fence and sign posts or telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; and

(k) Emergency work to protect life, limb or property, and emergency repairs; however, if the land-disturbing activity would have required an approved plan if the activity were not an emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of the administrator. 

(4) Special Provisions and Standards for Specific Projects and ESC and SWM Regulations. 

(a) Electric, natural gas and telephone utility companies, interstate and intrastate natural gas pipeline companies and railroad companies shall, and authorities created pursuant to Section 15.2-5102 of the Code of Virginia may, file general erosion and sediment control standards and specifications annually with the Department for review and approval. Such standards and specifications shall be consistent with the requirements of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law and associated regulations and the Stormwater Management Act (Section 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) and associated regulations when applicable, as may be amended. The specifications shall apply to: 

(i) Construction, installation or maintenance of electric, natural gas and telephone utility lines, and pipelines; and

(ii) Construction of the tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of the railroad company.

(b) The Department shall have 60 days in which to approve the standards and specifications. If no action is taken by the Department within 60 days, the standards and specifications shall be deemed approved. Individual approval of separate projects within subsections (4)(a)(i) and (ii) of this section is not necessary when approved specifications are followed. Projects not included in subsections (4)(a)(i) and (ii) of this section shall comply with the requirements of the appropriate VESCP authority.

(c) State agency projects are exempt from the provisions of Division I of this title except as provided for in Section 62.1-44.15:56 of the Code of Virginia. 

(d) Where land-disturbing activities involve lands under the jurisdiction of more than one local control program, an erosion and sediment control plan, at the option of the applicant, may be submitted to the State Board for review and approval rather than to each jurisdiction concerned.

(5) Compatibility with Other Permit and Title Requirements. The provisions of Division I of this title are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of Division I of this title should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of Division I of this title imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2009-09; Ord. 2007-20. Code 1985, § 11-4; Ord. 11-9-95).


13.05.045 VSMP and VESCP requirements.

(1) Erosion and Sediment Control Program (VESCP) Requirements.

(a) Pursuant to Section 62.1-44.15:52 of the Code of Virginia, an erosion control plan shall not be approved until it is reviewed by a certified plan reviewer. Inspections of land-disturbing activities shall be conducted by a certified inspector. The erosion control program of the city shall contain a certified program administrator, a certified plan reviewer, and a certified inspector, who may be the same person. The city hereby designates the city engineer or designee as the administrator of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Program (VESCP). 

(b) The program and requirements provided for in Division I of this title shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the city engineer.

(2) Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Requirements.

(a) Pursuant to Section 62.1-44.15:27 of the Code of Virginia, the city hereby establishes a Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) for land-disturbing activities and adopts the applicable SWM regulations that prescribe standards and specifications for VSMPs promulgated by the State Board for the purposes set out in SCC 13.05.010. The Stormwater Management Program of the city of Staunton shall contain a certified program administrator, a certified plan reviewer, and a certified inspector, who may be the same person. The city hereby designates the city engineer or designee as the administrator of the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP). 

(b) The program and requirements provided for in Division I of this title shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the city engineer.

(3) The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information, including specifications and standards of the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook, the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, which are incorporated by reference, as may be amended, for the implementation of the stormwater management and erosion and sediment control requirements of Division I of this title. These publications include a list of acceptable stormwater treatment and best management practices, including the specific design criteria for each practice. These publications may be updated and expanded from time to time, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. Treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum performance standards.

(4) VSMP and VESCP Permit Requirements.

(a) When a land-disturbing activity meets the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section, both a VSMP permit and a VESCP permit are required.

(b) A VSMP permit is required for the following land-disturbing activities:

(i) The total land disturbance is equal to or greater than one acre;

(ii) The total land disturbance is less than one acre and the site is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one acre or greater of disturbance; or

(iii) The total land disturbance from the construction of a single-family residence is less than one acre and the site is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one acre or greater of disturbance.

(c) A VESCP permit is required for the following land-disturbing activities:

(i) The total land disturbance is equal to or greater than 10,000 square feet; or

(ii) Construction of a single-family residence.

(d) For the construction of a single-family residence, at the discretion of the administrator, an agreement in lieu of an erosion and sediment control plan and/or an agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan may be permitted.

(e) No VSMP permit shall be issued by the administrator until the following items have been submitted to and approved by the administrator as prescribed herein:

(i) A permit application that includes a VSMP general permit registration statement. A registration statement is not required for construction of a single-family residence;

(ii) An erosion and sediment control plan that meets the requirements of Chapter 13.10 SCC;

(iii) A stormwater management plan that meets the requirements of Chapter 13.10 SCC;

(iv) A stormwater pollution prevention plan that meets the requirements of Chapter 13.10 SCC; and

(v) A pollution prevention plan that meets the requirements of Chapter 13.10 SCC.

(f) No VESCP permit shall be issued by the administrator until the following items have been submitted to and approved by the administrator as prescribed herein:

(i) A VESCP permit application;

(ii) An erosion and sediment control plan that meets the requirements of Chapter 13.10 SCC; and

(iii) A stormwater management plan that meets the requirements of Chapter 13.10 SCC.

(g) No VSMP permit shall be issued until evidence of general permit coverage from DEQ is obtained.

(h) No VSMP permit or VESCP permit shall be issued until the fees required to be paid pursuant to SCC 13.05.050(2) are received and a performance bond required pursuant to SCC 13.05.060 has been submitted.

(i) No VSMP permit or VESCP permit shall be issued unless and until the permit application and attendant materials and supporting documentation demonstrate that all land clearing, construction, disturbance, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved permit.

No grading, building or other local permit shall be issued for a property unless a VSMP permit, when required, or a VESCP permit, when required, has been issued by the administrator. (Ord. 2014-09)


13.05.050 Permit application procedures, review procedures and review fees.

(1) VSMP and VESCP Permit Application Procedure. 

(a) Applications for VSMP permits and VESCP permits must be filed with the administrator on any regular business day. Permit applications shall be accompanied by the following: 

(i) Except for the construction of a single-family residence, VSMP general permit registration statement;

(ii) VESCP permit application;

(iii) Comprehensive drainage plan submittal checklist;

(iv) Seven copies of the stormwater management final plan and previously approved concept plan, if required;

(v) Seven copies of the erosion and sediment control plan;

(vi) Seven copies of the stormwater pollution prevention plan (required for VSMP permits only);

(vii) Seven copies of the pollution prevention plan (required for VSMP permits only);

(viii) Two copies of the stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement documents;

(ix) Written certification by the contractor and owner that the plan will be followed and that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan;

(x) Any required review fees in accordance with Chapter 18.220 SCC;

(xi) Any required performance bond in accordance with SCC 13.05.060; and

(xii) As a prerequisite to engaging in the land-disturbing activities shown on the approved plan, the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall provide to the VESCP authority the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence, as provided by Section 62.1-44.15:52 of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity. However, any VESCP authority may waive the certificate of competence requirement for an agreement in lieu of a plan for construction of a single-family residence. If a violation occurs during the land-disturbing activity, then the person responsible for carrying out the agreement in lieu of a plan shall correct the violation and provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence, as provided by Section 62.1-44.15:52. Failure to provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence prior to engaging in land-disturbing activities may result in revocation of the approval of the plan and the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be subject to the penalties provided in this chapter.

(b) The administrator shall determine the completeness of a permit application, including all documents as required by Division I of this title, and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of such determination within 15 calendar days. If the application is deemed to be incomplete, the written notification shall contain the reasons the application is deemed incomplete. 

(c) The administrator shall have an additional 45 calendar days from the date of the notification of completeness to review the application, except that if a determination of completeness is not made within the time prescribed in subsection (1)(b) of this section, the application shall be deemed complete and the administrator shall have 45 calendar days from the date of submission to review the application.

(d) Within the time prescribed in subsections (1)(b) and (c) of this section, the administrator shall forward a written notice to the applicant indicating whether or not the permit application, comprehensive drainage plan and/or maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved.

(e) If the permit application, comprehensive drainage plan and/or maintenance agreement are disapproved, the administrator shall notify the decision to the applicant in writing, specifying the modifications, terms and conditions that will permit the approval of the plan. The applicant may then revise the comprehensive drainage plan or agreement. If additional information is submitted, the administrator shall have 30 calendar days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved.

(f) If no action is taken by the administrator within the time specified in subsections (1)(b) and (c) of this section, the permit application shall be deemed approved and the applicant entitled to the permit required.

(g) Approved comprehensive drainage plans may be modified as follows:

(i) Modifications to an approved comprehensive drainage plan shall be allowed only after review and written approval by the administrator. The administrator shall have 45 calendar days to respond in writing either approving or disapproving such request;

(ii) The administrator may require that an approved comprehensive drainage plan be amended, within a time prescribed by the administrator, to address any deficiencies noted during inspection; or

(iii) When the person responsible for carrying out the approved plan finds that because of changed circumstances or for other reasons the approved plan cannot be effectively carried out, and proposed amendments to the plan, consistent with Division I of this title and associated regulations, are agreed to by the administrator and the person responsible for carrying out the plan.

(h) The administrator shall require the submission of a construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities.

(i) If the permit application, final comprehensive drainage plan and stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement documents are approved by the administrator, the following conditions apply:

(i) The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and Division I of this title and shall certify in writing to the administrator that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan;

(ii) The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan;

(iii) The administrator, or designee, shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project, after giving notice to the owner, occupier or operator of the land development project;

(iv) The person responsible for implementing the approved plan shall conduct monitoring and submit reports as the administrator may require to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the plan provides effective stormwater management; and 

(v) A certified inspection of all aspects of the stormwater management facilities, including surface as-built surveys, and geotechnical inspections during subsurface or backfilling and compaction activities shall be required. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the administrator.

(2) Permit Fees. Applicants seeking a permit shall pay a fee prior to the issuance of such permit. Except for the construction of a single-family residence, applicants seeking a VSMP permit shall also pay an additional fee directly to the Department of Environmental Quality. Permit fees shall be paid to the city as follows:

(a) VSMP permit and/or VESCP permit: $3,000.

(b) Agreement in lieu of an erosion and sediment control plan and/or agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan: $250.00. 

(c) At the discretion of the administrator, when an agreement in lieu of an erosion and sediment control plan and/or an agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan is permitted, the fee stated in subsection (2)(a) of this section may be waived if the administrator determines that the plan involves a single-family residence and involves only limited and controlled disturbance. 

(d) Applicants seeking a VSMP permit shall also pay a fee directly to the Department of Environmental Quality in accordance with Table 1. For the construction of a single-family residence, no DEQ fee is required. When a site has or sites have been purchased for development within a previously permitted common plan of development or sale, the applicant shall be subject to fees in accordance with the disturbed acreage of their site or sites according to Table 1.

Table 1: DEQ fees for a VSMP permit (payment shall be made directly to DEQ)  

	Type of Permit	Fee Paid to DEQ

	VSMP General/Stormwater Management – Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre)	$81 

	VSMP General/Stormwater Management – Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 1 acre and less than 5 acres)	$756 

	VSMP General/Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres)	$952 

	VSMP General/Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres)	$1,260 

	VSMP General/Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres)	$1,708 

	VSMP General/Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 100 acres)	$2,688 

(e) Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements from the general permit issued by the State Board shall be imposed in accordance with Table 2. If the general permit modifications result in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the city, such reviews shall be subject to the fees set out in Table 2. The fee assessed shall be based on the total disturbed acreage of the site. In addition to the general permit modification fee, modifications resulting in an increase in total disturbed acreage shall pay the difference in the initial permit fee paid and the permit fee that would have applied for the total disturbed acreage in Table 1.

Table 2: Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements for the general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities  

	Type of Permit	Fee Amount Paid to City

	VSMP General/Stormwater Management – Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre)	$20 

	VSMP General/Stormwater Management – Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 1 acre and less than 5 acres)	$200 

	VSMP General/Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres)	$250 

	VSMP General/Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres)	$300 

	VSMP General/Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres)	$450 

	VSMP General/Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 100 acres)	$700 

(f) The fees set forth in subsections (2)(d) and (e) of this section shall apply to:

(i) All persons seeking coverage under the general permit (VSMP permit).

(ii) All permittees who request modifications to or transfers of their existing registration statement for coverage under a general permit.

(iii) Persons whose coverage under the general permit has been revoked shall apply to DEQ for an individual permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities.

(g) No general permit application (VSMP permit) fees will be assessed as to the following:

(i) Permittees who request minor modifications to general permits as defined in SCC 13.05.020. Permit modifications at the request of the permittee resulting in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the administrator shall not be exempt pursuant to this section.

(ii) Permittees whose general permits are modified or amended at the initiative of DEQ, excluding errors in the registration statement identified by the administrator or errors related to the acreage of the site.

(h) All incomplete payments will be deemed as nonpayments, and the applicant shall be notified of any incomplete payments. Interest may be charged for late payments at the underpayment rate set forth in Section 58.1-15 of the Code of Virginia and is calculated on a monthly basis at the applicable periodic rate. A 10 percent late payment fee shall be charged to any delinquent (over 90 days past due) account. The city shall be entitled to all remedies available under the Code of Virginia in collecting any past due amount.

(i) Projects on property owned and operated by the city of Staunton, Virginia, or the school board of the city of Staunton, Virginia, shall be exempt from such city of Staunton, Virginia, Stormwater Management Program fees and Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Program fees. (Ord. 2018-24; Ord. 2016-17; Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2008-17; Ord. 2007-30; Ord. 2007-20. Code 1985, § 11-5).


13.05.055 Stormwater control program fee. 

(1) Each owner of property, including but not limited to condominium or unit owners’ associations, homeowners’ associations and townhouse associations, or condominium unit owners or leaseholders, within the corporate limits of the city shall be charged a monthly stormwater control program fee as provided in this section, and such funds derived shall be used only to pay or recover costs as authorized by law for the city’s stormwater control program, including but not limited to:

(a) The cost of administration of such programs;

(b) Acquisition of real and personal property, and interest therein, necessary to construct, operate and maintain stormwater control facilities;

(c) Engineering and design;

(d) Debt retirement;

(e) Construction costs for new facilities and enlargement or improvement of existing facilities;

(f) Facility maintenance, enlargement or improvement of existing facilities;

(g) Monitoring of stormwater control devices;

(h) Pollution control and abatement, consistent with state and federal regulations for water pollution control and abatement; and

(i) Planning, design, land acquisition, construction, operation and maintenance activities.

(2) Each owner of property, except as provided otherwise, within the corporate limits of the city shall be charged a monthly stormwater control program fee based on an equivalent residential unit (ERU) equal to $3.20 per ERU and square footage (sq. ft.) of impervious area deemed attributable to the property as follows for each applicable tier:

	Tier	Impervious Area (sq. ft.)	Charge

	1	<	3,400	$3.20

	2	3,401	6,800	$6.28

	3	6,801	10,000	$10.34

	4	10,001	20,000	$18.46

	5	20,001	30,000	$30.77

	6	30,001	40,000	$43.08

	7	40,001	50,000	$55.38

	8	50,001	60,000	$67.69

	9	60,001	70,000	$80.00

	10	70,001	80,000	$92.31

	11	80,001	90,000	$104.62

	12	90,001	100,000	$116.92

	13	100,001	200,000	$184.62

	14	200,001	300,000	$307.69

	15	300,001	400,000	$430.77

	16	400,001	500,000	$553.85

	17	500,001	1,000,000	$923.08

	18	>	1,000,000	$1,230.77

(3) To encourage the proper maintenance of private storm drainage and stormwater control facilities that would reduce the polluting and other adverse effects of stormwater, the stormwater control program fee tier credit specified in subsection (3)(f) of this section shall apply to qualifying property as follows: 

(a) The owner shall apply for and demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city engineer or designee that a credit is warranted.

(b) The total fee, after credits, shall not be less than the applicable fee for Tier 1.

(c) The storm drainage and stormwater control facilities must be privately constructed, owned, operated and maintained.

(d) The storm drainage and stormwater control facilities shall be continuously operated in strict accordance with a documented private inspection and maintenance program approved by the city engineer or designee.

(e) The storm drainage and stormwater control facilities shall have been designed to meet or exceed the minimum written criteria established by the city engineer or designee, including a requirement to treat all stormwater from all impervious surfaces on the parcel.

(f) The following tier credit reduction, not to exceed six tier credits as a reduction to the stormwater utility fee otherwise applicable, shall apply annually upon approval by the city engineer or designee:

	Facility	Annual Tier Reduction Credit

	Storm drainage and stormwater quantity controls (detention with controlled outfall)	Three tiers

	Storm drainage and stormwater quality controls (low impact development and bioretention)	Three tiers

(g) Such credit is subject to annual review by the city engineer or designee to ensure that the facility is in continuous operation, and that it is being properly operated and maintained consistent with the intent of the stormwater control program.

(4) Should any owner of property dispute the impervious area deemed attributable to a parcel, such owner may appeal by filing a written appeal in the office of the city engineer no later than 10 calendar days after the date of the first billing of the stormwater control program fee. If the city engineer or designee denies the appeal, at the owner’s sole expense, the owner may retain a Virginia-licensed land surveyor or professional engineer to perform and render an on-site, certified field measurement of the impervious area, and such certified descriptive and platted measurement filed with the office of the city engineer shall constitute the deemed impervious area for purposes of the stormwater control program fee and shall remain in effect until other physical changes occur as to any impervious area on the property.

(5) Exceptions – Waivers – Contiguous Lots.

(a) Exceptions. Solely for the purpose of this section, “property” shall include only property which has been altered from its natural state by the addition of impervious area in a manner reducing the rate of infiltration of stormwater into the earth.

(b) Waivers. The stormwater control program fee shall be waived for the following:

(i) Federal, state, or local government agencies when the agency owns and provides for maintenance of storm drainage and stormwater control facilities or is a unit of the locality administering the program; 

(ii) Roads and public street rights-of-way that are owned and maintained by state or local agencies; and

(iii) Cemeteries, which shall solely include any land or structure used or intended to be used for the interment of human remains.

(c) Contiguous Lots. As to any two contiguous lots over which a single-family residential structure is erected as of June 1, 2010, such lots shall be deemed one property and only one stormwater control program fee shall be charged and collected.

(6) To the fullest extent permitted by law, the stormwater control program fee shall be charged to owners of property including those as defined and as referenced in subsection (1) of this section and collected as part of the bimonthly city user fees billing for water, sewer, and refuse, or charged and collected not less than every six months, with interest to accrue for any amounts remaining unpaid for 30 days after the date of the bill, or the final date on which it becomes payable, to equal to an annual rate of 10 percent, or such other maximum rate allowed by law, of the outstanding amounts, including accrued interest, or $1.50, whichever is greater, and with discontinuance and/or denial of city water and/or sewer service at any location of property of the owner after such charges and accrued interest have been delinquent after two months, with the charges and interest to constitute a lien against the property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2010-15; Ord. 2009-14; Ord. 2007-20; Ord. 2005-27; Ord. 2005-17).


13.05.060 Performance bonds.

(1) The city requires the submittal of a performance security or bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit or such other acceptable legal arrangement (performance security), in a form satisfactory to the administrator, prior to issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the stormwater management and erosion and sediment control practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management and/or erosion and sediment control plan. The stormwater management facilities to be included by reference in this performance bond are any structural facilities, including but not limited to landscaping, piping, and other materials, required for the adequate performance of the facility. Storm sewers or structures within public rights-of-way are not included in this bond; however, any portion of the storm system from the rights-of-way to the structural facility necessary for the function of the facility shall be included by reference in the bond.

(2) The amount of the performance security shall be $2,500 per acre of total land disturbance or fraction thereof. Where the land-disturbing activity results from the construction of a single-family residence with less than 10,000 square feet of total land disturbance, a performance bond of $2,500 must be provided.

(3) The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure, after proper notice, to complete work within the time specified, or to initiate or maintain appropriate actions that may be required of the applicant in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan.

(4) If the applicant fails to repair the failure, the city may enter the property and complete the repairs to the stormwater management facility and collect from the applicant for the difference should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of the security held.

(5) Within 60 days or such other reasonable time after the completion of the requirements of the approved erosion and sediment control plan and stormwater management plan in the form of a certified as-built report and survey, such bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated.

(6) The landscaping portion of the comprehensive drainage plan shall be inspected one year after installation with replacement in accordance with the final plans and specifications prior to final release.

(7) These requirements are in addition to all other provisions of city ordinances relating to the issuance of such plans and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirements for such plans.

(8) Projects on property owned and operated by the city of Staunton, Virginia, or the school board of the city of Staunton, Virginia, shall be exempt from such performance bond requirements. (Ord. 2018-24; Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2007-20. Code 1985, § 11-6; Ord. 11-9-95).


Chapter 13.10 COMPREHENSIVE DRAINAGE PLAN

Sections:

13.10.010    Comprehensive drainage plan permit procedures and requirements.

13.10.020    Exceptions to on-site stormwater management requirements – Exceptions for providing stormwater management.

13.10.030    General and technical criteria for stormwater management.

13.10.040    General and technical criteria for erosion and sediment control.

13.10.050    Construction inspection provisions.

13.10.060    Maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities.


13.10.010 Comprehensive drainage plan permit procedures and requirements.

(1) For the purposes of this section, when land-disturbing activity will be required of a contractor performing work pursuant to a construction contract, the preparation, submission and approval of a comprehensive drainage plan and/or an erosion and sediment control plan shall be the responsibility of the owner of the land upon which activity takes place.

(2) Except as provided in Section 62.1-44.15:56 and Section 62.1-44.15:31 of the Code of Virginia, as may be amended (state agency projects), no person may engage in any land-disturbing activity (except as provided under SCC 13.05.040) until submitting to the administrator a comprehensive drainage plan for the land-disturbing activity and such plan having been approved by the administrator and a VSMP permit or VESCP permit issued therefor. 

(3) Where the land-disturbing activity results from the construction of a single-family residence, at the discretion of the administrator, an agreement in lieu of an erosion and sediment control plan and/or an agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan may be permitted. 

(4) No land owner shall receive any of the building, grading or other land development permits required for land-disturbance activities without first meeting the requirements of Division I of this title prior to commencing the proposed activity. 

(5) Other city agencies authorized under any other law to issue grading, building or other permits for activities involving land-disturbing activities may not issue any such permit unless the applicant submits with the application an approved comprehensive drainage plan and certification that the plan will be followed.

(6) Should a land-disturbing activity associated with an approved plan in accordance with this section not begin within 180 days following approval or cease for more than 180 days, the administrator may evaluate the approved comprehensive drainage plan to determine whether the plan still satisfies the requirements of Division I of this title and to verify that all design factors are still valid. If the administrator finds the previously filed plan to be inadequate, a modified plan must be submitted and approved prior to the resumption of land-disturbing activities. 

(7) Application Requirements. Unless specifically excluded or exempted by Division I of this title, any landowner desiring a VSMP permit or a VESCP permit for a land-disturbance activity shall submit a comprehensive drainage plan to the administrator for review and approval. Applications shall be accompanied by the following: 

(a) VSMP general permit registration statement;

(b) VESCP permit application;

(c) Comprehensive drainage plan submittal checklist;

(d) Seven copies of the stormwater management final plan and previously approved concept plan, if required, in accordance with subsections (11) through (13) of this section and SCC 13.10.030;

(e) Seven copies of the erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with subsection (15) of this section and SCC 13.10.040;

(f) Seven copies of the stormwater pollution prevention plan in accordance with subsection (10) of this section (required for VSMP permits only);

(g) Seven copies of the pollution prevention plan in accordance with subsection (14) of this section (required for VSMP permits only); and

(h) Two copies of the stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement documents in accordance with this section and SCC 13.10.060.

(8) No application for land development, land use conversion, land disturbance, or redevelopment will be approved unless it includes a comprehensive drainage plan, as required by Division I of this title, detailing how runoff and associated water quality and quantity impacts resulting from the activity will be controlled or managed.

(9) No building, grading, VSMP or VESCP permit shall be issued until a satisfactory comprehensive drainage plan, or a waiver thereof, has undergone a review and is approved by the administrator after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the requirements of Division I of this title.

(10) Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) Required.

(a) The stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall include the content specified in 9 VAC 25-870-54 of the VSMP Permit Regulations and must also comply with the requirements and general information set forth in 9 VAC 25-880-70, Section II (stormwater pollution prevention plan) of the general permit. Such requirements shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(i) An approved erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with subsection (15) of this section and SCC 13.10.040; 

(ii) An approved stormwater management plan in accordance with subsections (11) through (13) of this section and SCC 13.10.030;

(iii) An approved pollution prevention plan for regulated land-disturbing activities in accordance with subsection (14) of this section; and

(iv) A description of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL in accordance with subsection (16) of this section.

(b) The SWPPP shall be amended by the operator whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance that has a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants to state waters which is not addressed by the existing SWPPP.

(c) The SWPPP must be maintained by the operator at a central location on site. If an on-site location is unavailable, notice of the SWPPP’s location must be posted near the main entrance at the construction site. Operators shall make the SWPPP available for public review in accordance with Section II of the general permit, either electronically or in hard copy.

(11) Stormwater Management Concept and Final Plan Required. For newly developed projects which are being or will be developed in more than one phase, including all major subdivisions, a stormwater management plan shall consist of a concept plan for all phases of development and a final plan for the phase(s) submitted for permitting to ensure adequate planning for the management of stormwater runoff. All developments, except those exempted by Division I of this title, shall provide a final stormwater management plan. Both plans shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and SCC 13.10.030.

(12) Stormwater Management Concept Plan Required. A stormwater management concept plan shall include all information as required by this chapter in order to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the planning area, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site.

(a) The concept plan should be prepared at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process to identify the type of stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project. The intent of this conceptual planning process is to ensure adequate planning for management of stormwater runoff from future development. To accomplish this goal, the following information shall be included in the concept plan:

(i) A map or maps indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, riparian buffers, integrated management practices, structural stormwater management and existing two-foot contours. The map(s) shall also clearly show proposed land use, drainage patterns and boundaries and the limits of clearing and grading. The map(s) shall be at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet.

(ii) A written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions.

(iii) A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project and a description of the watershed and its relation to the project site.

(iv) Existing Tree and Vegetation Plan. The plan shall include the following for the entire project area:

(A) The outline of existing masses of vegetation. Forested areas shall be separately identified.

(B) Description of Existing Conditions. A narrative shall describe the quality of the existing vegetation and the impacts of the development on the vegetation.

(C) Description of Preservation Strategies. A narrative shall be provided to describe strategies for preservation and protection of existing vegetation to remain.

(b) The city requires a concept plan to consider the maximum development potential of a site under existing zoning, regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to develop the site to its maximum potential.

(c) The applicant may be required to include within the stormwater concept plan measures for controlling existing stormwater runoff discharges from development or redevelopment occurring on a previously developed site in accordance with the standards of Division I of this title to the maximum extent practicable.

(13) Final Stormwater Management Plan Required. After review of the stormwater management concept plan, if required, and modifications to the concept plan as deemed necessary by the administrator, a final stormwater management plan must be submitted for approval.

(a) Final stormwater management plans must apply the stormwater management general and technical criteria set forth in subsections (11) through (13) of this section and in SCC 13.10.030 to the entire land-disturbing activity. Individual lots in new residential, commercial or industrial developments shall not be considered separate land-disturbing activities.

(b) The stormwater management plan shall consider all sources of surface runoff and all sources of subsurface and groundwater flows converted to subsurface runoff. 

(c) The final stormwater management plan, in addition to the information from the concept plan, shall include the following:

(i) Information on the type and location of stormwater discharges; information on the features to which stormwater is being discharged including surface waters or karst features, if present, and the pre-development and post-development drainage areas;

(ii) Contact information including the name, address, and telephone number of all persons having a legal interest in the property and the tax reference number, zoning, use and parcel number of the project property or properties, adjacent properties and other properties affected by the project, including reference to any immediately prior source deed for title to the property;

(iii) A narrative that includes a description of current site conditions and final site conditions;

(iv) A general description of the proposed stormwater management facilities and the mechanism through which the facilities will be operated and maintained after construction is complete;

(v) Information on the proposed stormwater management facilities, including:

(A) The type of facilities;

(B) Location, including geographic coordinates;

(C) Acres treated; and

(D) The surface waters or karst features, if present, into which the facility will discharge;

(vi) Hydrologic and hydraulic computations, including runoff characteristics and the following information:

(A) Description of the design storm frequency, including intensity and duration;

(B) Time of concentration path shown on pre- and post-development drainage maps, to a common design point and labeled with type of flow, length and slope; 

(C) Soil curve numbers or runoff co-efficients;

(D) Pre-development and post-development peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each drainage area;

(E) Infiltration rates, where applicable;

(F) Culvert capacities;

(G) Flow velocities;

(H) Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the specified design storms;

(I) Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results;

(J) A table summarizing the calculations for each structural stormwater management and erosion control facility; and

(K) A summary table showing the pre-development and post-development drainage areas, peak runoff rates, and velocities for all required storm frequencies at each discharge point shall be provided on the final stormwater management plan;

(vii) Documentation and calculations verifying compliance with the water quality and quantity requirements of SCC 13.10.030;

(viii) A map or maps of the site that depicts the topography of the site and includes:

(A) All contributing drainage areas;

(B) Existing streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, wetlands, other water bodies, and floodplains;

(C) Soil types, geologic formations if karst features are present in the area, forest cover, and other vegetative areas;

(D) Current land use including existing structures, roads, and locations of known utilities and easements;

(E) Sufficient information on adjoining parcels to assess the impacts of stormwater from the site on these parcels;

(F) The limits of clearing and grading, and the proposed drainage patterns on the site;

(G) Proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, riparian buffers, integrated management practices, stormwater management facilities and sediment control facilities;

(H) Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses, including but not limited to planned locations of utilities, roads, and easements;

(I) Topographic base map of the site shall be at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet and extend a minimum of 100 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development; and

(J) Existing and proposed two-foot contours with spot elevations at critical locations, including corners of pavement edges;

(ix) Soils Information. Geotechnical properties for the hydrologic and structural properties of soils, especially for dam embankments, shall be described in a soils report. The submitted report shall include boring depth, sampling frequency and types and associated laboratory testing with results and conclusions and follow the criteria in the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook. Soil properties for infiltration facilities shall also conform to the guidance and specifications outlined in the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook and the Virginia Stormwater Management BMP Clearinghouse website;

(x) Stormwater Planting Plan. The landscape plans shall be prepared and stamped by a registered professional engineer or landscape architect licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 

(A) This plan must be prepared by a qualified individual familiar with the selection of emergent and upland vegetation appropriate for the selected BMP.

(B) The city encourages the use of a vegetation strategy that can produce an aesthetically pleasing, compatible with its surroundings, facility while simultaneously augmenting pollutant removal capabilities and wildlife habitat. The Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook provides guidance in the plant selection and planting zone location for both within and surrounding the stormwater management facility;

(xi) Other Environmental Permits. The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental permits have been applied for prior to issuance of the site construction permit.

(d) If an operator intends to meet the water quality and/or quantity requirements set forth in SCC 13.10.030 through the use of off-site compliance options, where applicable, then a letter of availability from the off-site provider must be included. Approved off-site options must achieve the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the applicant’s land-disturbing activity except as otherwise allowed by Section 62.1-44.15:35 of the Code of Virginia.

(e) Elements of the final stormwater management plan that include activities regulated under Chapter 4 (Section 54.1-400 et seq.) of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Article 1 (Section 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia.

(f) A construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities shall be submitted to the administrator. The construction record drawing shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia, certifying that the stormwater management facilities have been constructed in accordance with the approved plan. 

(14) Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (PPP) Required.

(a) Pollution Prevention Plan, required by 9 VAC 25-870-56 of the VSMP Permit Regulations, shall be developed, implemented, and updated as necessary and must detail the design, installation, implementation, and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a minimum, such measures must be designed, installed, implemented, and maintained to:

(i) Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters. Wash waters must be treated in a sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent or better treatment prior to discharge;

(ii) Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste, and other materials present on the site to precipitation and to stormwater; and

(iii) Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement chemical spill and leak prevention and response procedures.

(b) The pollution prevention plan shall include effective best management practices to prohibit the following discharges:

(i) Wastewater from washout of concrete, unless managed by an appropriate control;

(ii) Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, and other construction materials;

(iii) Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance; and

(iv) Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing.

(c) Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from dewatering of trenches and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by appropriate controls.

(15) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Required. All erosion and sediment control plans and reports shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional engineer licensed in Virginia, in adherence to all minimum standards and requirements pertaining to the practice of that profession in accordance with Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations, certifying that the plan meets all submittal requirements outlined in Division I of this title and is consistent with good engineering practice. 

(a) The erosion and sediment control plan(s) and narrative shall include all of the information required in the Checklist for Erosion and Sediment Control Plans and Narrative and the Minimum Standards Checklist found in the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook. Both checklists shall be submitted with the erosion and sediment control plan.

(b) The documentation shall follow the format and conform to the approved standards and specifications for control techniques as set forth in the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, which by reference is adopted as a part of Division I of this title. The plan shall be consistent with the criteria, techniques and methods as set forth in the Minimum Standards (9 VAC 25-840-40) of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations adopted by the State Board. 

(16) Additional Control Measures to Address a TMDL Required. In addition to the requirements of SCC 13.10.010 through 13.10.040, if a specific WLA for a pollutant has been established in a TMDL and is assigned to stormwater discharges from a construction activity, additional control measures must be identified and implemented by the operator so that discharges are consistent with the assumptions and requirements of the WLA in a State Water Control Board-approved TMDL.

(17) Stormwater Management Inspection and Maintenance Agreements. 

(a) The administrator shall require the provision of long-term responsibility for and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and other techniques specified to manage the quality and quantity of runoff. Such requirements shall be set forth in an instrument recorded in the local land records prior to general permit termination, VESCP authority permit termination or earlier as required by the administrator and shall at a minimum:

(i) Be submitted to the administrator for review and approval prior to the approval of the stormwater management plan;

(ii) Be stated to run with the land;

(iii) Provide for all necessary access to the property for purposes of maintenance and regulatory inspections;

(iv) Provide for inspections and maintenance and the submission of inspection and maintenance reports to the administrator; and

(v) Be enforceable by all appropriate governmental parties. 

(b) A copy of the recorded agreement shall be submitted to the administrator.

(c) The inspection and maintenance agreement shall be prepared, executed and submitted to the city in the form currently provided by the city engineering department, as revised from time to time. 

(d) At the discretion of the administrator, such recorded instruments need not be required for stormwater management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff primarily from an individual residential lot on which they are located, provided it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the administrator that future maintenance of such facilities will be addressed through an enforceable mechanism at the discretion of the administrator.

(e) If a recorded instrument is not required pursuant to subsection (17)(d) of this section, the applicant shall develop a strategy for addressing maintenance of stormwater management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff primarily from an individual residential lot on which they are located. Such a strategy may include periodic inspections, homeowner outreach and education, or other method targeted at promoting the long-term maintenance of such facilities. Such facilities shall not be subject to the requirement for an inspection to be conducted by the administrator. This strategy shall be submitted to the administrator for review and approval prior to issuance of a VSMP permit or VESCP permit. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2009-09; Ord. 2007-30; Ord. 2007-20. Code 1985, § 11-20).


13.10.020 Exceptions to on-site stormwater management requirements – Exceptions for providing stormwater management. 

(1) The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived, in whole or in part, upon written request of the applicant; provided, that at least one of the following conditions applies:

(a) It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of Division I of this title; 

(b) Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges are established in a stormwater management plan that was previously approved by the administrator; 

(c) Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. Off-site facilities shall be in accordance with 9 VAC 25-870-69 of the VSMP Permit Regulations. The off-site facility is required to be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and to be constructed prior to the on-site land development activity. The owner shall designate a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice; or

(d) The administrator finds that meeting the minimum on-site management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical characteristics of a site.

(e) Economic hardship is not sufficient reason to grant an exception from the requirements of Division I of this title.

(2) The administrator grants a waiver from strict compliance with stormwater management provisions that are not achievable, only if acceptable mitigation measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a waiver, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the administrator that the immediately downstream waterways will not be subject to:

(a) Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures;

(b) Deterioration of biological functions or habitat;

(c) Accelerated stream bank or stream bed erosion or siltation; or

(d) Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life and property. 

(3) If the waiver request meets all of the above conditions and is acceptable to the administrator, the administrator shall approve the waiver.

(4) Off-Site Stormwater Management Facilities. In lieu of providing on-site stormwater management, an applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management by entering into an agreement with the city for the granting of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant to be used for the construction of an off-site stormwater management facility. Off-site stormwater management facilities shall be in accordance with 9 VAC 25-870-69 of the VSMP Permit Regulations. The applicant must provide calculations to the administrator showing that an adequate stormwater conveyance system exists or will be provided to convey the stormwater runoff from the development to an off-site facility. The agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and the city prior to the recording of plats or, if no record plat is required, prior to the issuance of the building permit. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2009-09; Ord. 2007-20. Code 1985, § 11-21).


13.10.030 General and technical criteria for stormwater management.

The following general and technical criteria shall apply to land development and land-disturbance activities which require a VSMP permit and/or a VESCP permit. In the event of conflict between any of these criteria, the most stringent shall govern.

(1) To protect the quality and quantity of state water from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities, the city hereby adopts the technical criteria for regulated land-disturbing activities set forth in this section and Part II B of the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Permit Regulations, as may be amended, expressly to include:

(a) 9 VAC 25-870-62 (applicability);

(b) 9 VAC 25-870-63 (water quality design criteria requirements);

(c) 9 VAC 25-870-65 (water quality compliance);

(d) 9 VAC 25-870-66 (water quantity); 

(e) 9 VAC 25-870-69 (off-site compliance options); 

(f) 9 VAC 25-870-72 (design storms and hydrologic methods); 

(g) 9 VAC 25-870-74 (stormwater harvesting); 

(h) 9 VAC 25-870-76 (linear development project); 

(i) 9 VAC 25-870-85 (stormwater management impoundment structures or facilities); and

(j) 9 VAC 25-870-92 (comprehensive stormwater management plans);

which shall apply to all land-disturbing activities regulated pursuant to this title, except as expressly set forth in subsection (2) of this section. 

(2) Any land-disturbing activity shall be considered grandfathered by the VSMP authority and shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP Permit Regulations provided:

(a) A proffered or conditional zoning plan, zoning with a plan of development, preliminary or final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan or any document determined by the locality to be equivalent thereto:

(i) Was approved by a locality prior to July 1, 2012;

(ii) Provided a layout as defined in 9 VAC 25-870-10;

(iii) Will comply with the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP Permit Regulations; and

(iv) Has not been subsequently modified or amended in a manner resulting in an increase in the amount of phosphorus leaving each point of discharge, and such that there is no increase in the volume or rate of runoff;

(b) A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and

(c) Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014.

(3) Locality, state and federal projects shall be considered grandfathered by the VSMP authority and shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP Permit Regulations provided:

(a) There has been an obligation of locality, state or federal funding, in whole or in part, prior to July 1, 2012, or the department has approved a stormwater management plan prior to July 1, 2012;

(b) A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and 

(c) Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014.

(4) Land-disturbing activities grandfathered under subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall remain subject to the requirements set forth in this section and the Part II C technical criteria of the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Permit Regulations, 9 VAC 25-870-93 through 9 VAC 25-870-99, for one additional state permit cycle. After that time, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to any new technical criteria adopted by the State Board.

(5) In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued for a project prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall be subject to the technical criteria of Part II C of the VSMP Permit Regulations.

(6) The administrator may grant exceptions to the technical requirements of Part II B or Part II C of the VSMP Permit Regulations; provided, that (a) the exception is the minimum necessary to afford relief, (b) reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed so that the intent of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act, the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Permit Regulations, and this title are preserved, (c) granting the exception will not confer any special privileges that are denied in other similar circumstances, and (d) exception requests are not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-imposed or self-created. Economic hardship alone is not sufficient reason to grant an exception from the requirements of this title.

(a) Exceptions to the requirement that the land-disturbing activity obtain required VSMP authority permit shall not be given by the administrator, nor shall the administrator approve the use of a BMP not found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse website, or any other control measure duly approved by the director.

(b) Exceptions to requirements for phosphorus reductions shall not be allowed unless off-site options otherwise permitted pursuant to 9 VAC 25-870-69 of the VSMP Permit Regulations have been considered and found not available.

(7) Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at their discretion.

(8) General Criteria. 

(a) Proposed residential, commercial, or industrial subdivisions shall apply the stormwater management criteria provided in this section to the land development as a whole, including submission, review and approval of a stormwater management concept plan reflecting all proposed lots in the ultimate developed condition. 

(b) Use of nonstructural stormwater practices (low-impact development) as part of the site layout and design for all developments and redevelopments is required in order to reduce the amount of stormwater runoff that must be managed. This will help to minimize the reliance on structural practices which require ongoing maintenance in order to be effective. 

(c) On-site stormwater conveyance systems shall be designed for the 10-year storm event. Closed storm sewer systems shall be designed such that the hydraulic grade line for the 10-year storm event is a maximum elevation of one foot below the throat of the inlet.

(d) Determination of flooding and channel erosion impacts to receiving streams due to land development projects shall be measured at each point of discharge from the development project and such determination shall include any runoff from the balance of the watershed that also contributes to that point of discharge. 

(e) Stormwater runoff shall be calculated by the following methods unless an alternative method for a specific project has been approved by the administrator:

(i) U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) synthetic 24-hour rainfall distribution and models, including, but not limited to, TR-55 and TR-20; hydrologic and hydraulic methods developed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; or other standard hydrologic and hydraulic methods. 

(ii) The rational method may be used for evaluating peak discharges to stormwater conveyances where the contributing drainage area is 20 acres or less.

(iii) The modified rational (critical storm duration) method may be used for evaluating volumetric flows to stormwater conveyances where the contributing drainage area is 20 acres or less. 

(f) The rainfall rates for all calculations shall be as provided in the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) publication “Atlas 14: Rainfall Precipitation Frequency Data,” latest edition.

(g) For purposes of computing predevelopment runoff, all pervious lands on the site shall be assumed to be in good hydrologic condition in accordance with the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) standards, regardless of conditions existing at the time of computation. Predevelopment runoff calculations utilizing other hydrologic conditions may be utilized; provided, that it is demonstrated to and approved by the VSMP authority that actual site conditions warrant such considerations.

(h) Pre-development and post-development runoff characteristics and site hydrology shall be verified by site inspections, topographic surveys, available soil mapping or studies, and calculations consistent with good engineering practices. Guidance provided in the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook and by the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse shall be considered appropriate practices.

(i) Stormwater management facilities and best management practices shall be designed and sited to capture, to the maximum extent practicable, the runoff from the entire land development project area and, in particular, areas of impervious cover within the development project area. If the entire land development cannot be captured by the stormwater management facilities, the facilities shall be sized so that the addition of the peak release rate from the facility(ies) individually and the undetained areas within the same watershed do not exceed the requirements of Division I of this title. 

(j) The number, type, and siting of stormwater management facilities shall be designed so as to preserve natural channel characteristics, existing vegetation, and natural groundwater recharge on a site to the extent practical.

(k) Outflows from a stormwater management facility shall be discharged to a stormwater conveyance system, and velocity dissipaters shall be placed at the outfall of all stormwater management facilities and along the length of any outfall channel as necessary to provide a nonerosive velocity of flow from the basin to a channel. A karst feature, whether on site or downstream and off site, may only be considered an adequate receiving channel if design criteria are in compliance with the criteria in subsections (8)(m) and (n) of this section.

(l) Construction of stormwater management facilities or modifications to channels shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations. Evidence of approval of all necessary permits, such as U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and VA DEQ Wetland Permits, VA DEQ VPDES Permits, etc., shall be provided prior to beginning construction.

(m) Construction of stormwater management impoundment structures or facilities may occur in karst areas only after a geological study of the area is conducted supporting the compatibility of such structures. A karst feature may only be filled or “improved” in accordance with proper geotechnical design (see VDOT IIM-228).

(n) No adverse environmental impacts shall occur to any identified karst features. Discharge of stormwater into a karst feature shall not occur unless the pretreatment and water quality criteria are met. Increased volumes of stormwater runoff to a karst feature shall not occur.

(o) Impounding structures that are not covered by the Virginia Impounding Structures Regulations (Dam Safety) shall be designed and checked for structural integrity and for floodplain impacts for a minimum of the 100-year storm event. 

(p) Construction of stormwater management impoundment structures within a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) designated 100-year floodplain shall be avoided to the extent possible. When this is unavoidable, all stormwater management facility construction shall be in compliance with all applicable regulations under the National Flood Insurance Program, 44 CFR Part 59, and Chapter 18.170 SCC, Floodplain Districts and Regulations, and the Staunton City Code. These SWM facilities shall be designed and located, to the extent practical, to: (i) provide an unrestricted release up to at least the 10-year flood elevation of the receiving state water; and (ii) maintain their water quantity and/or water quality control value during the 100-year flood condition.

(9) Stormwater Management Facilities.

(a) Minimum Control Requirements.

(i) All stormwater management practices shall be designed so that the specific storm frequency storage volumes as identified in Division I of this title and the current Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook, whichever is more stringent, are met, unless the administrator grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements.

(ii) In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the administrator reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to protect downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, velocity, and rate of stormwater runoff. 

(b) Site Design Feasibility.

(i) Stormwater management practices for a site shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. Among the factors that should be considered are as follows:

(A) Topography.

(B) Existing vegetation.

(C) Maximum drainage area.

(D) Depth to water table.

(E) Soils.

(F) Slopes.

(G) Terrain.

(H) Hydraulic head.

(I) Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features.

(J) Intended or proposed land use.

(K) Karst features.

(L) Depth to rock.

(ii) Applicants shall consult the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting a stormwater management practice.

(c) Conveyance Issues.

(i) All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to:

(A) Maximizing of flowpaths from inflow points to outflow points;

(B) Protecting of inlet and outfall structures;

(C) Eliminating of erosive flow velocities;

(D) Providing of under-drain systems, where applicable and appropriate;

(E) Incorporating appropriate BMPs in consideration of site-specific conditions.

(ii) The Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook and the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse provides detailed references on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved stormwater management practices.

(d) Pretreatment Requirements. Every stormwater treatment practice shall have an acceptable form of water quality pretreatment, in accordance with the pretreatment requirements found in the current Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook. Stormwater infiltration practices or practices having an infiltration component, as specified in the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook, are prohibited, even with pretreatment, in the following circumstances:

(i) Where stormwater is generated from highly contaminated source areas known as “hotspots”;

(ii) Where stormwater is carried in a conveyance system that also carries contaminated, nonstormwater discharges;

(iii) Where stormwater is being managed in a designated groundwater recharge area; or

(iv) Under certain geologic conditions (e.g., karst) that prohibit the proper pretreatment of stormwater.

(e) Treatment/Geometry Conditions.

(i) All stormwater management practices shall be designed to capture and treat stormwater runoff according to the specifications outlined in the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook. These specifications will designate the water quality treatment and water quantity criteria that apply to an approved stormwater management practice as required by Division I of this title.

(ii) Stormwater management facilities shall be designed to conform to the natural topography where practical.

(iii) Any detention facilities that are designed to have a permanent pool of water constructed in or adjacent to residential and commercial zoning areas shall be constructed with an aquatic bench or have a minimum of a six-foot fence installed around the perimeter of the facility.

(10) Nonstructural Stormwater Quantity and Quality Control (Low-Impact Development – LID).

(a) The use of LID site planning and integrated management practices is required by the city for all developments and redevelopments to control stormwater runoff at the source and more closely approximate pre-development runoff conditions. 

(b) LID stormwater management design plans developed consistent with the requirements of this subsection shall satisfy the water quality and quantity performance criteria of Division I of this title.

(c) The design criteria, hydrologic analysis and computational procedures for LID stormwater management design plans shall be in accordance with the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook and the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse.

(d) LID stormwater management design plans shall not conflict with existing federal, state or local laws, ordinances, regulations or policies.

(e) Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement documentation, as provided by SCC 13.10.010(17), shall be recorded to identify the locations of integrated management practices on lots or parcels. The owner shall not remove or structurally alter integrated management practices without prior written approval from the city.

(f) Developments shall, to the extent practicable, incorporate LID practices in accordance with the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook and the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse into the site layout and design to minimize increases in runoff rates, volumes, and pollutant loads.

(g) In addition, the following LID practices are required to be incorporated into each project:

(i) Disconnect Impervious Areas/Downspout Disconnection. All runoff from rooftops shall be directed onto vegetated swales or filter strips prior to entering a closed storm sewer system.

(ii) Disconnected impervious areas shall be treated as close as practical to their source, and not at the low point of the site just prior to entering the public drainage system, unless that is the only possible location for treatment.

(iii) Site Minimization/Impervious Areas Reduction.

(A) Minimal ground disturbance shall be achieved by identifying the smallest possible land area that can practically be impacted during site development. 

(B) Development should be placed away from environmentally sensitive areas, future open space, tree preservation areas, future restoration areas, and temporary and permanent buffer zones, as required in Chapter 13.12 SCC. Existing vegetated or open space may be preserved instead of clearing a portion of the site in order to create lawn areas. Impervious surface area shall be limited by site designs that minimize the area of streets, parking lots, and rooftops and/or utilize permeable paving material. For residential areas, cluster development shall be provided where appropriate.

(iv) Other best management practices such as individual rain gardens, infiltration basins and trenches (where permeable soils are present) and filtration basins and sand filters (on highly impervious or industrial developments) shall be utilized where appropriate.

(11) Stormwater Water Quality Control. Unless determined by the administrator for a project to be exempt, the following criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites:

(a) All stormwater runoff generated from land development and land use conversion activities shall not discharge stormwater runoff directly into a wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functions shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the administrator. In no case shall the impact on functions be any more than allowed by the Army Corps of Engineers (ACE) or the Department of Environmental Quality. 

(b) Land development projects shall comply with the water quality criteria in accordance with Article 2.3 of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia; 9 VAC 25-870-63 and 9 VAC 25-870-65 of the VSMP Permit Regulations; and the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook, latest edition; and the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse.

(c) Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e., cold water fisheries, impaired streams and tributaries, recreational waters, recharge areas, karst features, water supply reservoirs) may be subject to additional criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices at the discretion of the administrator.

(d) Industrial sites which are listed under the Standard Industrial Code are required to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan, and shall file a notice of intent (NOI) under the provisions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit. The stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement applies to both existing and new industrial sites. 

(e) Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant loadings, known as “hotspots,” may require the use of specific structural BMPs and pollution prevention practices.

(12) Stormwater Quantity and Velocity Control (Stream Channel Erosion and Flooding).

(a) Calculations for determining peak flows and specific channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook and Virginia Sediment and Erosion Control Regulations.

(b) Properties and receiving waterways downstream of any land development project shall be protected from erosion and localized flood damage due to increases in volume, velocity and frequency of peak flow rate of stormwater runoff in accordance with the minimum design standards set out in this section.

(c) Channel protection and flood protection shall be addressed in accordance with the minimum standards set out in 9 VAC 25-870-66 of the VSMP Permit Regulations, which are established pursuant to the requirements of subdivision 7 of Section 62.1-44.15:28 of the Code of Virginia. Compliance with the minimum standards set out in 9 VAC 25-870-66 of the VSMP Permit Regulations shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of subdivision 19 of 9 VAC 25-840-40 (Minimum Standard 19 of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations). The administrator shall require compliance with 9 VAC 25-870-66 of the VSMP Permit Regulations and as modified in this section (whichever is more stringent).

(d) Concentrated stormwater flow leaving a property or stormwater management facility shall be released directly into a stormwater conveyance system and shall meet the criteria in 9 VAC 25-870-66 of the VSMP Permit Regulations. Channel protection requirements for stormwater conveyance systems shall be in compliance with 9 VAC 25-870-66(B) of the VSMP Permit Regulations. Flood protection requirements for stormwater conveyance systems, except where noted below, shall be in accordance with 9 VAC 25-870-66(C) of the VSMP Permit Regulations. 

(e) A “level spreader” design shall not be used to exempt a stormwater management facility from subsection (12)(b) of this section.

(f) The 10-year 24-hour post-developed peak rate of runoff from the development site shall not exceed the two-year 24-hour pre-developed peak rate of runoff.

(g) The two-year 24-hour post-development peak rate and velocity of runoff from the development site shall not exceed the one-year 24-hour pre-development peak rate and velocity of runoff.

(h) All emergency spillways shall be designed to accommodate the 100-year 24-hour post-developed peak rate.

(i) If existing natural receiving channels or previously constructed manmade channels or pipes are not adequate, the applicant shall: 

(i) Improve the channel to a condition where the channel protection and flood protection requirements of this section are satisfied; or

(ii) Improve the pipe or pipe system to a condition where the post-developed 10-year storm is contained within the appurtenances in accordance with subsection (8)(c) of this section; or

(iii) Provide a combination of channel or pipe improvement, stormwater detention or other measures that is satisfactory to the administrator to comply with the channel protection and flood protection requirements of this section. 

(13) Regional Stormwater Management Plans. Applicants shall contact the administrator prior to submitting an application for stormwater management plan approval to determine if a regional stormwater management plan was developed for the applicable watershed in accordance with 9 VAC 25-870-92 of the VSMP Permit Regulations. If such a plan is in existence, the applicant must meet all stormwater management requirements on site in accordance with the provisions of the regional plan and other management provisions as specified by the administrator. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2009-09; Ord. 2007-30; Ord. 2007-20. Code 1964, § 9A-2; Ord. 2-25-82; Code 1985, § 11-22; Ord. 6-25-92).


13.10.040 General and technical criteria for erosion and sediment control.

The following general and technical criteria shall be applied on all single-family residential construction, applicable land development, and land conversion activities:

(1) Soil Stabilization. Permanent or temporary soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas within seven days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site. 

(a) Temporary soil stabilization shall be applied within seven days to denuded areas that may not be at final grade but will remain dormant for longer than 14 days.

(b) Permanent stabilization shall be applied to areas that are to be left dormant for more than one year.

(2) Soil Stockpile Stabilization. During construction, soil stockpiles and borrow areas shall be stabilized as noted in subsection (1) of this section or protected with sediment trapping measures. The applicant is responsible for the temporary protection and permanent stabilization of all soil stockpiles on site as well as borrow areas and soil intentionally transported from the project site.

(3) Permanent Stabilization. Permanent vegetative cover shall be established on denuded areas not otherwise permanently stabilized. Permanent vegetation shall not be considered established until a ground cover is achieved that is uniform, mature enough to survive, and will inhibit erosion.

(4) Sediment Basins and Traps. Sediment basins, sediment traps, perimeter dikes, sediment barriers, and other measures intended to trap sediment shall be constructed as a first step in any land-disturbing activity and shall be made functional before upslope land disturbance takes place.

(5) Stabilization of Earthen Structures. Stabilization measures shall be applied to earthen structures such as dams, dikes, and diversions immediately after installation.

(6) Sediment Traps and Sediment Basins. Sediment traps and basins shall be designed and constructed based upon the total drainage area to be served by the trap or basin as follows:

(a) Sediment Traps.

(i) Only control drainage areas less than three acres.

(ii) Minimum storage capacity of 134 cubic yards per acre of drainage area.

(b) Sediment Basins.

(i) Control drainage areas greater than or equal to three acres.

(ii) Minimum storage capacity of 134 cubic yards per acre of drainage area.

(iii) The outfall system shall, at a minimum, maintain the structural integrity of the basin during a 25-year, 24-hour storm.

(7) Cut and Fill Slopes Design and Construction. Cut and fill slopes shall be designed and constructed in a manner that will minimize erosion. Slopes found to be eroding excessively within one year of permanent stabilization shall be provided with additional slope stabilizing measures until the problem is corrected.

(8) Concentrated Runoff Down Slopes. Concentrated runoff shall not flow down cut or fill slopes unless contained within an adequate temporary or permanent channel, flume, or slope drain structure. 

(9) Slope Maintenance. Whenever water seeps from a slope face, adequate drainage or other protection shall be provided.

(10) Storm Sewer Inlet Protection. All storm sewer inlets made operable during construction shall be protected so that sediment-laden water cannot enter the stormwater conveyance system without first being filtered/treated to remove sediment.

(11) Stormwater Conveyance Protection. Before newly constructed stormwater conveyance channels or pipes are made operational, adequate outlet protection and any required temporary or permanent channel lining shall be installed in both the conveyance channel and the receiving channel.

(12) Work in Live Watercourse. When work in a live watercourse is performed:

(a) Precautions shall be taken to minimize encroachment, control sediment transport, and stabilize the work area to the greatest extent possible during construction.

(b) Nonerodible material shall be used for the construction of causeways and cofferdams.

(c) Earthen fill may be used for these structures if armored by nonerodible cover materials. 

(13) Crossing Live Watercourse. When a live watercourse must be crossed by construction vehicles more than twice in any six-month period, a temporary vehicular stream crossing constructed of nonerodible material shall be provided.

(14) Regulation of Watercourse Crossing. All applicable federal, state and local regulations pertaining to working in or crossing live watercourses shall be met.

(15) Stabilization of Watercourse. The bed and banks of a watercourse shall be stabilized immediately after work in the watercourse is completed.

(16) Underground Utility Line Installation. Underground utility lines shall be installed in accordance with the following standards in addition to other applicable criteria:

(a) No more than 500 linear feet of trench may be opened at one time.

(b) Excavated material shall be placed on the uphill side of trenches.

(c) Effluent from dewatering operations shall be filtered or passed through an approved sediment trapping device, or both, and discharged in a manner that does not adversely affect flowing streams or off-site property.

(d) Material used for backfilling trenches shall be properly compacted in order to minimize erosion and promote stabilization.

(e) Restabilization shall be accomplished in accordance with these regulations.

(f) Comply with applicable safety regulations.

(17) Vehicular Sediment Tracking. Where construction vehicle access routes intersect paved or public roads:

(a) Provisions shall be made to minimize the transport of sediment by vehicular tracking onto the paved surface.

(b) Where sediment is transported onto a paved or public road surface, the road surface shall be cleaned thoroughly at the end of each day.

(c) Sediment shall be removed from the roads by shoveling or sweeping and transported to a sediment control disposal area. Street washing shall be allowed only after sediment is removed in this manner.

(18) Removal of Temporary Measures. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be removed within 30 days after final site stabilization or after the temporary measures are no longer needed, unless otherwise authorized by the administrator. Trapped sediment and the disturbed soil areas resulting from the disposition of temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation.

(19) Stormwater Management. Refer to SCC 13.10.010(11) through (13) and 13.10.030. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2007-20). 


13.10.050 Construction inspection provisions.

(1) The administrator, or designee, shall inspect the land-disturbing activity during construction for:

(a) Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan;

(b) Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan;

(c) Development, updating, and implementation of a pollution prevention plan; and

(d) Development and implementation of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL.

(2) The administrator, or designee, may, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this title.

(3) In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement or instrument, the administrator may also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land-disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified.

(4) Pursuant to Section 62.1-44.15:40 of the Code of Virginia, the administrator may require every VSMP permit or VESCP permit applicant or permittee, or any such person subject to VSMP permit or VESCP permit requirements under this title, to furnish when requested such application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the effect of his discharge on the quality of state waters, or such other information as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this title.

(5) Post-construction inspections of stormwater management facilities required by the provisions of this title shall be conducted by the administrator, or designee, pursuant to the city’s adopted and State Board approved inspection program, and shall occur, at minimum, at least once every five years except as may otherwise be provided for in SCC 13.10.010(17).

(6) Stormwater management and erosion and sediment control construction inspection shall utilize the final approved plans and specifications for compliance. In addition, the inspection shall comply with the latest version of the Virginia Stormwater Management Law and Regulations, Erosion and Sediment Control Law and Regulations, promulgated pursuant to Article 2.4 (Section 62.1-44.15:58) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia.

(a) Pre-Construction Meeting. Prior to any land-disturbing activity and upon receipt of the VSMP permit or VESCP permit from the administrator, the owner shall schedule a pre-construction meeting. The owner shall provide a minimum of 48 hours’ notice to the administrator for this meeting. 

(b) Notice of Construction Commencement. The applicant must notify the administrator in advance before the commencement of construction. In addition, the applicant must notify the administrator in advance of construction of critical components of the SWM facility(ies) and erosion and sediment control measures. 

(c) Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system and erosion and sediment control construction shall be conducted by the administrator or designee, a DEQ-certified inspector. Upon completion, the applicant and owner are responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and shall provide regular inspections sufficient to adequately document compliance. The inspector shall be a DEQ-certified inspector. All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information:

(i) The date and location of the inspection;

(ii) Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan, erosion control plan, stormwater pollution prevention plan, and pollution prevention plan;

(iii) Variations from the approved construction specifications; and

(iv) Any violations that exist.

(d) If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No additional work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the administrator.

(e) In addition, the person responsible for carrying out the plan may be required to provide inspection monitoring and reports to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan provide effective stormwater management.

(f) If the administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the plan, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan in accordance with Chapter 13.14 SCC.

(7) Post-Construction Final Inspection and As-Built Plans.

(a) All applicants are required to submit a construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities to the administrator. The construction record drawing shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia, certifying that the stormwater management facilities have been constructed in accordance with the approved plan. 

(b) A final inspection by the administrator is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 

(c) Prior to release of any performance securities, the applicant is required to provide a certification statement from a licensed engineer that all stormwater management facilities were properly installed and/or constructed per the approved plan and per any manufacturer’s recommendations. The engineer is expected to provide the on-site observation needed to provide such certification. The certification statement shall cover all aspects of the stormwater management facility construction, including surface as-built surveys, geotechnical inspections during subsurface or backfilling, riser and principal spillway installation, bioretention soil placement and compaction activities. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2007-30; Ord. 2007-20).


13.10.060 Maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities.

(1) Maintenance Inspection of Stormwater Facilities. 

(a) All stormwater management facilities must undergo inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of Division I of this title and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes; grass cutting and vegetation removal; and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation and any repair or replacement of structural features. 

(b) In compliance with the maintenance covenant included in the approved comprehensive drainage plan, the owner, or any successor owner, unless such responsibility is lawfully transferred to the city, shall inspect, maintain and repair all structural and nonstructural stormwater management measures required by the plan.

(2) Records of Maintenance and Repair Activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least five years. These records shall be made available to the administrator during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2007-20). 


Chapter 13.12 RIPARIAN BUFFERS

Sections:

13.12.010    Definitions.

13.12.020    Duty to retain or establish a riparian buffer.

13.12.030    Management of a riparian buffer.

13.12.040    Development exempt from riparian buffer requirements.

13.12.050    Development authorized in a riparian buffer.

13.12.060    Mitigation plan.

13.12.070    Inspections.


13.12.010 Definitions.

(1) “Nonpoint source pollution” means pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 

(2) “State waters” means and refers to the public waters and waterways of the United States and of the commonwealth of Virginia. 

(3) “Riparian buffer” means an area of trees, shrubs, grasses, or a combination thereof, that is: (a) at least 50 feet in width, (b) adjacent to wetlands and/or state waters, (c) managed to maintain the integrity of stream channels and shorelines, and (d) reduces the effects of upland sources of pollution through the infiltration of runoff and filtering of pollutants. A managed lawn adjacent to state waters does not constitute a riparian buffer.

(4) “Wetlands” means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act. (Ord. 2007-20).


13.12.020 Duty to retain or establish a riparian buffer.

(1) Except as otherwise provided in Division I of this title, any land adjacent to state waters, wetlands adjacent to these state waters, and/or isolated wetlands shall provide buffers for the purposes of retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution from runoff into these waters. 

(2) A required riparian buffer shall be no less than 50 feet wide on each side of the public waterway. In the case of a stream, the buffer shall be measured horizontally from and perpendicular to the top of the stream bank on each side. 

(3) Existing riparian buffers shall be retained, except as allowed in SCC 13.12.040.

(4) Each required riparian buffer shall be incorporated into the design of the land development and included and maintained as part of the stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement for the project. 

(5) Within a required riparian buffer, no indigenous vegetation shall be disturbed or removed, except as follows: 

(a) Activities pertaining to the management of the riparian buffer, identified in SCC 13.12.030; 

(b) Development activities authorized in a riparian buffer, identified in SCC 13.12.050; 

(c) Other activities authorized in SCC 13.12.050; and 

(d) Tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural crops. 

(6) With respect to developments that are required to have an approved site plan, and involving land containing existing and/or required riparian buffers, contour lines shall be shown at two-foot intervals. Where any proposed development requires an approved plan other than a site plan, the location of existing and required riparian buffers shall be shown on such plan. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2007-20).


13.12.030 Management of a riparian buffer.

Each riparian buffer required to be established or maintained pursuant to Division I of this title shall be managed as part of the stormwater facility management agreement and as provided herein: 

(1) The target vegetative cover in a riparian buffer area shall be an indigenous riparian forest with ground cover, shrub and tree canopy layers. 

(2) Within 25 feet of the top of the state waters bank and land classified as wetlands: 

(a) Indigenous riparian vegetation shall be preserved, or, where it does not exist, it shall be restored or allowed to evolve by natural succession; 

(b) Dead, diseased, and dying trees may be removed; 

(c) Fallen trees that are blocking stream channels, or trees with undermined root systems in imminent danger of falling, may be removed where stream bank erosion is a current or potential problem that outweighs any positive effects the fallen tree or trees may have on the stream ecosystem; 

(d) Removal or pruning of invasive shrub and vine species is allowed; provided, that such removal or pruning is done in a manner that prevents erosion; 

(e) Unpaved pathways and trails may be constructed and maintained in a manner that will effectively control erosion and minimize adverse impacts to the buffer, subject to applicable provisions of SCC 13.12.050; and 

(f) Stormwater channels may be constructed and maintained in a manner that will prevent erosion and minimize adverse impacts to the buffer. 

(3) Beyond 25 feet from the top of the public waterway bank to the limits of the required buffer: 

(a) Dead, diseased and dying trees may be removed;

(b) Trees six inches in diameter or greater, measured 48 inches from the ground, shall be preserved; 

(c) Removal or pruning of invasive shrub and vine species shall be allowed; provided, that such removal or pruning is done in a manner that prevents erosion;

(d) Unpaved pathways and trails may be constructed and maintained in a manner that will effectively control erosion and minimize adverse impacts to the buffer, subject to applicable provisions of SCC 13.12.050; and

(e) Stormwater channels may be constructed and maintained in a manner that will prevent erosion and minimize adverse impacts to the buffer. 

(4) Where an existing structure (i.e., building, street, road, bridge, etc.) is located within the buffer, vegetation, not including the ground cover, can be removed within 15 feet of the structure. Removal of additional vegetation can be allowed if required by state or federal requirements or if necessary for the health, safety or welfare of the city’s citizens and approved by the administrator. (Ord. 2009-09; Ord. 2007-30; Ord. 2007-20).


13.12.040 Development exempt from riparian buffer requirements.

The following types of development shall not be required to retain, establish or manage a riparian buffer; provided, that the requirements of this section are satisfied: 

(1) The construction, installation, operation and maintenance of electric, gas and telephone transmission lines, railroads, and activities of the Virginia Department of Transportation, and their appurtenant structures, which are accomplished in compliance with the Code of Virginia, including Section 62.1-44.15:51 et seq., or an erosion and sediment control plan approved by the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board. 

(2) The construction, installation and maintenance by public agencies of water, sewer, electric and gas lines, including lines constructed by private entities for dedication to public agencies; provided, that: 

(a) To the extent practical, the location of such lines shall be outside required riparian buffer areas; 

(b) No more land shall be disturbed than is necessary to construct, install and maintain the water or sewer lines; and 

(c) Construction, installation and maintenance of such lines shall comply with applicable federal, state and local requirements and permits and be conducted in a manner that protects water quality. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2007-20).


13.12.050 Development authorized in a riparian buffer.

If otherwise authorized by applicable provisions of SCC Title 18, the following land development activities shall be allowed in a riparian buffer area; provided, that the requirements of this section are satisfied and performance standards established by the administrator are met: 

(1) A building or structure which existed on the date of adoption of Division I of this title may continue at such location. However, nothing in this section authorizes the continuance, repair, replacement, expansion or enlargement of such building or structure except as authorized by SCC Title 18.

(2) On-site or regional stormwater management facilities, and temporary erosion and sediment control measures; provided, that: 

(a) To the extent practical, the location of such facilities shall be outside the riparian buffer; 

(b) No more land shall be disturbed than is necessary to provide for construction and maintenance of the facility; 

(c) The facilities are designed and constructed so as to minimize impacts to the functional value of the riparian buffer and to protect water quality; and 

(d) Facilities located within a floodplain must adhere to floodplain regulations and be designed and located, to the extent practical, to maintain their water quantity and/or water quality control value during flood conditions. 

(3) Water-dependent facilities, passive recreation access (such as unpaved pathways and trails), historic preservation, and archaeological activities; provided, that all applicable federal, state, and local permits are obtained. 

(4) Development in a riparian buffer, where authorized by the administrator in the circumstances described below, may be allowed if a mitigation plan is submitted to and approved by the administrator, in compliance with Division I of this title, as follows: 

(a) On a lot which was of record prior to the date of adoption of Division I of this title, if:

(i) Establishment or preservation of the riparian buffer would result in the loss of a building site, and there are no other available building sites outside the riparian buffer on the lot; or 

(ii) The proposed development consists of redevelopment not exceeding the current level of encroachment resulting from existing improvements; or 

(iii) The proposed development is for construction of an accessory building or structure permitted by SCC Title 18; provided, that such accessory building or structure must be located within the first 25 landward feet of the buffer; and provided further, that the footprint of any such accessory building or structure shall not exceed 200 square feet;

(b) On a lot on which development within the riparian buffer will consist of an ecological/wetland restoration project; 

(c) On a lot on which the development in the riparian buffer will consist of the construction and maintenance of a driveway or roadway, and the administrator determines that the riparian buffer would prohibit reasonable access to a portion of the lot which is necessary for reasonable use of the lot; 

(d) On a lot on which the development in the riparian buffer will consist of the construction and maintenance of a paved pathway or trail not exceeding five feet in width; 

(e) On a lot which was of record prior to the date of adoption of Division I of this title, on which development within the riparian buffer will consist of the construction, installation and maintenance of water and sewer facilities or sewage disposal systems, and the administrator determines that the riparian buffer would prohibit the practicable development of such facilities or systems. (Ord. 2009-09; Ord. 2007-20).


13.12.060 Mitigation plan.

Each owner seeking to develop in a riparian buffer pursuant to Division I of this title shall submit to the administrator for review and approval a mitigation plan as follows: 

(1) The owner shall submit a mitigation plan that satisfies the applicable requirements of Division I of this title; the required fee, as set forth within the most recent fee schedule approved by city council; and a certification stating that all requirements of the approved plan will be complied with. 

(2) The mitigation plan shall be reviewed by the administrator to determine whether it complies with the requirements of this section and all other requirements of Division I of this title. The administrator shall approve or disapprove a mitigation plan within 30 days of the date that a complete plan was accepted for review. The decision shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the owner. If the plan is disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in the decision. 

(3) Each mitigation plan shall: 

(a) Identify the impacts of proposed development on water quality and lands within the riparian buffer; 

(b) Identify the alternatives to development in the riparian buffer that have been explored by the applicant; 

(c) Ensure that, where development does take place within a riparian buffer, it will be located on those portions of a site and in a manner that will be least disruptive to the natural functions of the riparian buffer; 

(d) Demonstrate and assure that development will be conducted using best management practices; 

(e) Specify mitigation which will address water quality and riparian buffer impacts; and 

(f) Contain other information requested by the administrator. 

(4) Each mitigation plan shall be evaluated by the administrator based on the following criteria: 

(a) Whether all reasonable alternatives to development in the riparian buffer have been explored and exhausted; 

(b) Whether the development in the riparian buffer is the minimum necessary and is to be conducted in a manner that will be least disruptive to the natural function of the riparian buffer; and 

(c) Whether best management practices will effectively mitigate adverse impacts from the encroachment on the riparian buffer and its natural functions. (Ord. 2007-20).


13.12.070 Inspections. 

The administrator shall inspect any land subject to establishing a riparian buffer to ensure that the buffers are installed in accordance with the provisions of Division I of this title. (Ord. 2007-20).


Chapter 13.14 ENFORCEMENT AND MISCELLANEOUS

Sections:

13.14.010    Violations and enforcement.

13.14.020    Stop work orders.

13.14.030    Civil and criminal penalties.

13.14.040    Restoration of lands.

13.14.050    Holds on occupation permits.

13.14.060    Local hearing and procedures – Appeals.

13.14.070    Severability.


13.14.010 Violations and enforcement.

(1) If the administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the VSMP permit conditions or VESCP permit conditions or determines there is an unauthorized discharge, a violation notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the permit conditions as outlined in this chapter and the Code of Virginia. Violation notices shall be in writing and shall be served: 

(a) By registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application; 

(b) At the site of the development activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities;

(c) By delivery to the agent of the applicant otherwise; or 

(d) By posting the notice at a conspicuous location at the site of the development activities.

(2) A violation notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the permit conditions and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, a stop work order may be issued in accordance with subsection (5) of this section and SCC 13.14.020 or the permit may be revoked by the administrator. Violation notices shall contain at least the following information:

(a) The name and address of the applicant;

(b) The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;

(c) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;

(d) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development activity into compliance with Division I of this title and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;

(e) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and

(f) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the administrator not later than 30 days of service of the notice of violation. 

(3) If a permittee fails to comply with a notice issued in accordance with this section within the time specified, the administrator may issue an order requiring the owner, permittee, person responsible for carrying out an approved plan, or the person conducting the land-disturbing activities without an approved plan or required permit to cease all land-disturbing activities until the violation of the permit has ceased, or an approved plan and required permits are obtained, and specified corrective measures have been completed.

(4) Such orders shall be issued in accordance with SCC 13.14.020. Such orders shall become effective upon service on the person by: registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application; at the site of the development activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities; by delivery to the agent of the applicant otherwise; or by posting the notice at a conspicuous location at the site of the development activities. However, if the administrator finds that any such violation is grossly affecting or presents an imminent and substantial danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the Commonwealth or otherwise substantially impacting water quality, it may issue, without advance notice or hearing, an emergency order directing such person to cease immediately all land-disturbing activities on the site and shall provide an opportunity for a hearing, after reasonable notice as to the time and place thereof, to such person, to affirm, modify, amend, or cancel such emergency order. If a person who has been issued an order is not complying with the terms thereof, the administrator may institute a proceeding for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy in accordance with subsection (6) of this section.

(5) In addition to any other remedy provided by this title, if the administrator or designee determines that there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this title, the administrator may initiate such informal and/or formal administrative enforcement procedures in a manner that is consistent with this chapter.

(6) Any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any rule, regulation, ordinance, order, approved standard or specification, or any permit condition issued by the administrator may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in circuit court by the locality to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2007-20).


13.14.020 Stop work orders. 

Persons receiving a “stop work order” will be required to halt immediately all construction activities. This “stop work order” will be in effect until the administrator confirms in writing that the development activity is in compliance and the violation is satisfactorily addressed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the permit may be revoked and the applicant shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and thereupon shall be subject to the penalties provided by Division I of this title and otherwise permitted by law. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2007-20).


13.14.030 Civil and criminal penalties. 

(1) VESCP Authority Civil and Criminal Penalties. Any person who violates any VESCP authority provision of Division I of this title shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or up to 30 days’ imprisonment for each violation or both. In addition, without limitation, the administrator may:

(a) Apply to the circuit court to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of the VESCP authority provisions of Division I of this title without the necessity of showing that an adequate remedy at law does not exist.

(b) Bring a civil action against any person for violation of any VESCP authority provisions of Division I of this title or any condition of a VESCP permit. The action may seek the imposition of a civil penalty of not more than $2,000 against the person for each violation.

(c) Provide, with the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any VESCP authority provisions of Division I of this title or any condition of a VESCP permit, an order issued by the administrator against such person, for the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sums, not to exceed the limit specified by the provisions of this section. Such civil charges shall be instead of any civil penalty which could be imposed. 

(2) VSMP Authority Civil and Criminal Penalties. Any person who violates any VSMP authority provision of Division 1 of this title or who fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with any order of the administrator shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $32,500 for each violation, within the discretion of the court. Each day of violation of each requirement shall constitute a separate offense.

(a) Violations for which a penalty may be imposed under this subsection shall include but not be limited to the following: 

(i) No state permit registration;

(ii) No stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP);

(iii) Incomplete stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP);

(iv) Stormwater pollution plan (SWPPP) not available for review;

(v) No approved erosion and sediment control plan;

(vi) Failure to install stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls;

(vii) Stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls improperly installed or maintained;

(viii) Operational deficiencies;

(ix) Failure to conduct required inspections;

(x) Incomplete, improper, or missed inspections; and

(xi) Discharges not in compliance with the requirements of 9 VAC 25-880-70 of the general permit.

(b) The administrator may issue a summons for collection of the civil penalty and the action may be prosecuted in the appropriate court.

(c) In imposing a civil penalty pursuant to this subsection, the court may consider the degree of harm caused by the violation and also the economic benefit to the violator from noncompliance.

(d) Any civil penalties assessed by a court as a result of a summons issued by the city shall be paid into the city treasury to be used for the purpose of minimizing, preventing, managing, or mitigating pollution of the waters of the city and abating environmental pollution therein in such manner as the court may, by order, direct.

(e) Notwithstanding any other civil or equitable remedy provided by this section or by law, any person who willfully or negligently violates any VSMP provision of Division 1 of this title, any order of the administrator, any condition of a VSMP permit, or any order of a court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not more than 12 months or a fine of not less than $2,500 nor more than $32,500, or both. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2007-20).


13.14.040 Restoration of lands. 

Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition or in accordance with a notice of violation, a notice of stop work, or permit requirements. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the administrator may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall be recovered under the performance bond, or become a lien upon the property until paid, or both. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2007-20).


13.14.050 Holds on occupation permits. 

A certificate of occupancy and/or inspections by the city’s building inspection department shall not be granted until all assessed civil penalties are paid and corrections to all erosion and sediment control and stormwater management practices have been made in accordance with the approved plans, notice of violation, notice of stop work, or permit requirements, and accepted by the administrator. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2007-20).


13.14.060 Local hearing and procedures – Appeals. 

(1) The establishment of the Staunton board of environment appeals, hereafter referred to as the “appeals board,” is hereby established. The appeals board shall be composed of three members: the city’s assistant city manager, the building official and the director of public works. The appeals board shall meet at the call of the assistant city manager or designee, and such other times as the appeals board may determine, at a fixed time and place.

(2) Any permit applicant or permittee, or person subject to the requirements of Division I of this title, aggrieved by any action of the administrator or designee taken without a formal hearing, or by inaction of the city, may demand in writing a formal hearing by the appeals board, provided a petition requesting such hearing is filed with the administrator not later than 30 days after notice of such action is given by the administrator.

(3) The hearings held under this section shall be conducted by the appeals board at a regular or special meeting of the appeals board, or by at least one member of the appeals board designated by the appeals board to conduct such hearings on behalf of the appeals board at any other time and place authorized by the appeals board.

(4) An audio record of the proceedings of such hearings shall be made by the appeals board and shall be a public record. Any party may have the audio recording transcribed at its expense. The party challenging the decision or action or inaction of the administrator shall have the burden of going forward and the burden of proof. An opening statement and a closing argument may be presented by the parties. The appeals board shall determine the procedures otherwise to be used for the proceedings and may allow hearsay evidence, recognizing that the proceedings should be of an administrative nature and conducted less formally than a court proceeding so as to promote a reasonably accessible process and to foster prompt decision-making.

(5) The appeals board or its designated member, as the case may be, shall have power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, and at the request of any party shall issue such subpoenas. The failure of a witness without legal excuse to appear or to testify or to produce documents shall be acted upon by the local governing body, or its designated member, whose action may include the procurement of an order of enforcement from the circuit court. Witnesses who are subpoenaed shall receive the same fees and reimbursement for mileage as in civil actions.

(6) Final decisions of the administrator or the appeals board under this chapter shall ultimately be subject to review by the circuit court for the city of Staunton, Virginia, by a party who is aggrieved by the decision; provided, that a petition for appeal is filed in the clerk’s office of such circuit court not later than 30 days from the date of the final written decision adversely affecting the rights and duties or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land-disturbing activities. Such review shall proceed upon the petition and the administrative record before the appeals board. The decision of the appeals board shall be sustained unless the appeals board exceeded its authority, acted arbitrarily or capriciously, or abused its discretion. The decision of the circuit court shall be subject to review by the Court of Appeals of Virginia.

(7) Final decisions of the State Board, Department, or district shall be subject to judicial review in accordance with the provisions of the Administrative Process Act (Section 2.2-4000 et seq.). (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2007-20).


13.14.070 Severability. 

If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this division shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this division. (Ord. 2014-09; Ord. 2007-20).


Chapter 13.15 IN GENERAL

Sections:

13.15.010    Violations of division.

13.15.020    Record of materials and map of water system.

13.15.030    Classification of premises for supply purposes – Consumers generally.

13.15.038    Required water connection and well restrictions.

13.15.040    Application for service generally.

13.15.050    Application for service outside city limits.

13.15.060    Water connection charges – Connection fees.

13.15.070    Line extensions to facilitate connections.

13.15.080    Annual review of facilities fees and connection charges.

13.15.090    Service installation.

13.15.100    Size of service pipes to private residences.

13.15.110    Furnishing service through private lines.

13.15.120    Requirements and charges for fire suppression systems.

13.15.130    Unlawful connections or use of water.

13.15.140    Discontinuance of service at request of consumer.

13.15.150    Discontinuance or curtailment of service or water usage in event of drought or other water supply shortage or other emergency.

13.15.160    Damaging, obstructing, etc., waterworks property.

13.15.170    Protection of creeks and reservoirs.

13.15.180    City agents’ right of entry to consumer’s premises.


13.15.010 Violations of division.

Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this division shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. (Code 1985, § 29-1).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100.


13.15.020 Record of materials and map of water system.

The director of public works shall keep a record of the quantity and description of all the materials used by him in erecting fire hydrants or in making extensions of water mains or services and cutoffs therein, and the location thereof, measured in feet and inches from some fixed and definite point, and shall furnish the city manager a complete report of all such work done by him or under his supervision. This data shall, from time to time, be entered upon a map of the city, to be furnished by the council, copies of which shall be preserved in the office of the director of public works and the city manager. (Code 1964, § 29-20; Code 1985, § 29-2).


13.15.030 Classification of premises for supply purposes – Consumers generally.

For the purpose of supplying city water all premises shall be placed in one or more of the following classes:

(1) A building under one roof and occupied as one residence, business or place of manufacture.

(2) A combination of buildings in one common enclosure and occupied by a family, business or place of manufacture.

(3) Every division of a double or tenement house having a partition wall and using a separate hall or entrance.

(4) A building of one or more apartments using in common one hall or entrance. Every apartment may be metered separately, if desired and if approved by the city manager.

(5) A building of one or more apartments or offices or both, using a common hall or entrance. Each apartment or suite of offices may be metered separately, if desired and if approved by the city manager.

(6) A vacant lot or tract of land. The owner or tenant of premises within each such class shall constitute a water consumer for which a minimum charge will be made. One connection and one meter will be allowed for one consumer as described above and only one water consumer shall be supplied through one connection or meter. (Code 1964, § 29-1; Code 1985, § 29-3).


13.15.038 Required water connection and well restrictions. 

(1) Whenever city water service is available to any property in the city, the owner of the property shall be required to cause any and all facilities on the premises to be connected with such water service, the connection to be made as determined by the director of public works. 

(2) If any owner of property in the city fails or refuses to connect to available city water service, the city may, at its option, cause the necessary work to be done to make the connection and the amount so expended, including any such fees and charges, shall be recoverable against such property owners. 

(3) In the case where city water service is not available to a particular property, and city water service later becomes available to such property, the owner of the property shall be required to either have such connection made or elect to have such connection made within five years of the date city water service becomes available to the property. 

(4) No water well shall be permitted when city water service is available to the property. 

(5) For the purpose of this section, city water service shall be deemed available to any single-family housing structure whenever the city water main is either situated on the particular property or the distance from a 90-degree lateral connection to the city water service to the nearest property line of the parcel does not exceed 100 feet. For any property used for multifamily dwellings or for any business, commercial or industrial use, city water service is deemed available where the city water main is either located on the particular property, or the distance from a 90-degree lateral connection from the city main to the nearest property line of a parcel would not exceed 300 feet. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, if the straight line distance from the point of connection to the water main to the nearest part of the structure to be served exceeds 200 feet in the case of a single-family structure, or 600 feet in the case of a multifamily, business, commercial, or industrial structure, the property owner may connect with such water service but is not required to do so. (Ord. 2010-16).


13.15.040 Application for service generally.

(1) Whenever any person owning property along the line of any water main desires the introduction of water into his premises, he shall make written application therefor to the chief finance officer, on forms prescribed by him and approved by the city manager. Such application shall set forth the name of the applicant, the location and description of the property into which the water is to be introduced, the purpose for which the water is to be used and the agreement of the property owner to pay, promptly upon presentation of bills for water consumed, at the rates prescribed by the city council by ordinance, all costs which may accrue on account of water service.

(2) The owner or occupant of any premises or lot previously connected to the city water system, but from which the meter has been removed, may apply for water service, on a form prescribed by the chief finance officer and approved by the city manager. Such application shall set forth the name of the applicant, the location and description of the property into which the water is to be reintroduced and the agreement of the applicant to pay, promptly upon presentation of bills for water consumed, at the rates prescribed by the city council by ordinance, all costs which may accrue on account of water service. Such applicant shall pay in advance the sum of $10.00 for cut-on service or for transfer of service.

(3) The owner of any lot or premises may also apply for water service for the exclusive use of construction, lawn irrigation, and plant watering. The installation of a meter to measure such separate service shall be at the owner’s expense. Such water service will not be extended into any dwelling, structure, or used in any manner which would lead to metered water from this service entering into the city’s sanitary sewer system. In turn, there will be no sewer user fee assessed against the metered water flowing through this service. Refer to SCC 13.45.030(4). (Code 1964, §§ 29-2, 29-3; Code 1985, § 29-4; Ord. 10-23-86, § II; Ord. 4-13-89).


13.15.050 Application for service outside city limits.

If the owner or occupant of property located outside the city limits, which property is along the line of a water main conveying potable water, desires to have city water introduced into his premises, he shall make written application to the city council, on forms prescribed for that purpose, except that an application requesting either a five-eighths-inch or three-fourths-inch meter serving one residence only shall be made to the city manager. Such application shall contain the applicant’s agreement or acknowledgment.

(1) That he will pay all water bills against such property.

(2) That the rates for water used outside the city shall be not less than 50 percent over the rates charged for the use of water for the same purpose within the city limits.

(3) That he will observe, and perform according to, all the rules, regulations and ordinances now in force or that may be hereafter passed or enacted by the city council in reference to the use of city water.

(4) That the city reserves the right to discontinue the service of water, at any time, to any person using same outside the corporate limits and without notice to such user.

Upon approval of the application, the procedure for the introduction of water shall be the same as provided for inside the city limits, unless otherwise required by the city council or the responsible administrative city officials. (Code 1964, § 29-24; Code 1985, § 29-5).


13.15.060 Water connection charges – Connection fees.

(1) Connection Fees.

(a) The fees charged for all connections, including connections made to provide fire suppression systems, shall be $2,100 each, except as otherwise provided herein. This charge includes, but is not limited to, the service connection, the corporation stop (where required), the meter box, and the meter. Such fees shall be paid to the city prior to such connection. The foregoing notwithstanding, the director of public works may require that a higher deposit be made, prior to connection, if, in his opinion, the actual cost of such particular connection is likely to exceed $2,100. Such deposit may be made in cash, by bond with corporate surety, or by a letter of credit payable to the city approved by the director of public works. If such higher deposit is made and the actual cost exceeds the deposit, the person requesting the deposit shall owe the difference to the city which shall be due and payable within 30 days of billing; or, if the actual cost is less than the deposit, the city shall refund the difference to such person within 30 days of completion of work. Such actual cost may include, but is not limited to, labor, equipment, materials and other costs, but in no event shall the fees charged be less than $2,100 for each connection.

(b) Where the service connection and the meter box are installed by the developer, the city will install the required meter. The cost for the meter shall be based on actual cost, plus 30 percent of the actual cost to cover overhead and indirect cost. The developer shall be responsible for the inspection provided by the city. This cost includes all direct cost, plus 30 percent to cover overhead and indirect cost.

(c) Projects on property owned and operated by the city of Staunton, Virginia, or the school board of the city of Staunton, Virginia, shall be exempt from water connection fees.

(d) Single-family residential projects in the city of Staunton that meet all of the following criteria may also be considered for exemption from water connection fees; however, organizations must submit a request for exemption from water connection fees which will then be considered by Staunton city council on a case-by-case basis using these criteria:

(i) The project is on property in the city of Staunton, is owned by the organization, and the organization has a 501(c)(3) exemption recognized by the Internal Revenue Service;

(ii) The project provides home ownership to residents within the city of Staunton, classified as low- and moderate-income individuals, as defined by current HUD Section 8 income standards; and

(iii) The organization administering the program requires the homeowner(s) to contribute a minimum of 200 hours in the construction of the subject single-family residence or being constructed by the organization for others.

(2) Water Off-Site Facilities Fee.

(a) The off-site facilities fee for all applicants is to cover the cost of present and future capital facilities constructed. Capital expenditures include, but are not limited to, water source, raw water storage, treatment facilities, transmission lines, pump stations and major finished water storage facilities. The off-site facilities fee shall be assessed all connectors to an existing or proposed establishment of a water system as set forth in the schedule of facilities fees under subsection (2)(g) of this section. All monies collected as “off-site facilities fees” under this section shall be deposited in a special account of the water enterprise fund to be known as the “water facilities fees account.” Funds unexpended and remaining in this special account, at the end of each fiscal year, shall carry forward to succeeding fiscal years. Monies shall be disbursed from this special account to pay the costs of such present and future capital facilities, and related existing and future debt service with respect thereto.

(b) Off-Site and Oversize Main Credit Policy. Credits will be allowed against the off-site facilities fee for off-site extension in excess of 300 feet and/or line size in excess of minimum size required for the development. No credit will be allowed where a main size greater than minimum size in diameter is required to adequately serve the owner. Credits will be computed based on public bids for the subject construction, or the schedule of rates determined for construction of water systems established annually by the city engineer.

(c) The city council may by separate agreement with a developer enter into a reimbursement agreement for off-site facilities which may be required by the city and which would not be covered by the off-site and oversized main credit policy above.

(d) The total connection fee(s) and facilities fees for affected lots as shown on the final plat as approved by the planning commission will be submitted to the city no later than the date of consideration of said final plat by city council. The connection fee(s) and facilities fee(s) shall be paid by certified or cashier’s check. In the event final plat approval is not obtained by the applicant, such connection fee(s) and facilities fee(s) shall be returned to the applicant without interest within five business days of the final plat consideration unless the applicant requests the aforementioned fees to remain in the city’s possession pending modifications and resubmission of the final plat for approval by city council.

The total connection fee(s) and facilities fee(s) for development requiring final plan approval by the building official shall be submitted to the city prior to said final plan approval. The connection fee(s) and facilities fee(s) shall be paid by certified or cashier’s check.

The total connection fee(s) and facilities fee(s) in cases of increased water services that do not require any form of plan approval shall be paid at the time when service is requested. The connection fee(s) and facilities fee(s) shall be paid by certified or cashier’s check.

(e) The city council may, by resolution, waive a portion of the facilities fees for water facilities installed under federal- or state-funded water projects. The portion of the fee that is waived shall be indicated as city financial participation in the water project.

(f) The city council may, by resolution, authorize the off-site facilities fee to be waived entirely or to be paid from the general fund for those commercial or industrial owners which the city council determines would be in the best interest of the city’s economic development and which would generate significant employment.

(g) Projects on property owned and operated by the city of Staunton, Virginia, or the school board of the city of Staunton, Virginia, shall be exempt from water facility fees.

(h) Single-family residential projects which meet all of the following criteria may also be considered for exemption from water facility fees; however, organizations must submit a request for exemption from water facility fees which will then be considered by Staunton city council on a case-by-case basis using these criteria:

(i) The project is on property in the city of Staunton, is owned by the organization, and the organization has a 501(c)(3) exemption recognized by the Internal Revenue Service;

(ii) The project provides home ownership to residents within the city of Staunton, classified as low- and moderate-income individuals, as defined by current HUD Section 8 income standards; and

(iii) The organization administering the program requires the homeowner(s) to contribute a minimum of 200 hours in the construction of the subject single-family residence or being constructed by the organization for others.

(i) Schedule of Water Facilities Fees.

	Water Meter Size (Inches)	EDU*	Off-Site Facilities Fee

	5/8"	1	$3,500

	3/4"	1.5	$5,250

	1"	2.5	$8,750

	1 1/2"	4.375	$15,310

	2"	8	$28,000

	3"	16	$56,000

	4"	25	$87,500

	6"	50	$175,000

	*Equivalent Dwelling Unit.

(j) Total Connection and Facilities Fee.

(i) The total fee due by the owner to the city shall be the appropriate facilities fee based on meter size and the connection fee. A connection fee shall be due for new connections only. Facilities fees shall be due for both new structures and additions to existing structures which add one-half equivalent dwelling units (EDU) or more to an existing structure.

The EDU, as set forth herein, shall be considered the same as the equivalent dwelling connection (EDC) as defined and derived in the latest Virginia Health Department Waterworks Regulations.

The facilities fee due shall be determined, first, by establishing the EDU demand on the system, and second, by the meter size set forth in subsection (2)(i) of this section, which will accommodate such demand. Such fee is due regardless of need for change to an existing water meter.

(ii) The minimum fee for any connection shall be that established for a five-eighths-inch meter.

(iii) If connections are made to water lines outside the city limits, or if the connecting lines come from outside the city limits, the total fee for connecting the applicant’s water line to the city’s water system shall be 50 percent more than the rate for a resident of the city for services within the city. (Ord. 2018-22; Ord. 2016-13; Ord. 2014-08; Ord. 2011-10; Ord. 2008-08; Ord. 2007-05; Ord. 2006-06; Ord. 2004-19. Code 1964, §§ 29-2, 29-2.1; Code 1985, § 29-6; Ord. 1-24-85; Ord. 2-27-86; Ord. 2-29-89, § 1; Ord. 3-22-90, § 1; Ord. 2-28-91; Ord. 4-11-91; Ord. 6-25-91; Ord. 2-27-92; Ord. 9-10-92; Ord. 12-16-93; Ord. 4-27-95; Ord. 3-14-96; Ord. 4-12-01; Ord. 10-25-01; Ord. 4-11-02).


13.15.070 Line extensions to facilitate connections.

(1) On any request for a water connection with the city’s water system, where a line is available in the street, a regular connection fee and facilities fee will be charged and the service line will be extended to the edge of the street right-of-way or property line. The applicant will be responsible for the construction and maintenance of the water line beyond the right-of-way line or the easement line.

(2) On any request for a water connection with the city’s water system, where the end of the water line must be extended along a city street prior to the service pipe leaving the main water line to extend to the right-of-way line, the cost of the main line extension will be charged to the applicant for the actual direct cost, plus 30 percent to cover overhead and indirect expenses. The regular connection fee and facilities fee shall be added to this charge.

(3) On any request for a water connection with the city’s water system, where a line is not in the street but available in the vicinity, a regular connection fee and facilities fee will be charged for the connection. The applicant will be responsible for easement costs and the cost of the construction of the water line beyond this point or the city will install the water line to the applicant’s property line for the actual cost, plus 30 percent to cover overhead and indirect expenses. The extended water line, if on private land, must be installed with a permanent easement between the main water line and the applicant’s boundary line.

(4) All water lines and connections which connect the city’s water system must be inspected and approved by the city. The developers shall be responsible for all direct cost related to inspection, plus 30 percent of the actual cost to cover overhead and indirect cost. This subsection does not apply to installations made by the city.

(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city shall not be required to extend any water line along a street which is not part of the street system maintained by the city, until satisfactory bond has been furnished, conditioned upon the satisfactory improvement of the street in accordance with specifications for similar improvement set forth in SCC Title 17.

(6) Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the city council may, by resolution, authorize the off-site water line extension to be wholly or in part paid by the city from the general fund and/or water utility fund for those commercial or industrial owners which the city council determines would be in the best interest of the city’s economic development and would generate significant employment. The city manager is authorized to approve such cost share arrangement, without such council resolution, provided the city’s cost or share meets the guidelines and parameters set forth by city council for dealing with developers, if the particular project, in the opinion of the city manager, proves to be in the best interest of the city as set forth above and is in accordance with the comprehensive plan and zoning requirements. (Code 1964, §§ 29-27, 29-28; Code 1985, § 29-7; Ord. 1-10-91; Ord. 2-28-91).


13.15.080 Annual review of facilities fees and connection charges.

Connection charges and facilities fees for the city water system shall be reviewed by the director of public works during the first quarter of each calendar year and presented to the city council for updating. (Code 1964, § 29-28.1; Code 1985, § 29-8; Ord. 12-13-90; Ord. 2-28-91; Ord. 2-23-95).


13.15.090 Service installation.

(1) Upon the receipt of an application for introduction of water into premises pursuant to SCC 13.15.040(1), the city manager shall cause to be constructed, by the department of public works, at the expense of the city, a water service pipe, including valve, leading from the water main to the curb nearest the main where the tap is to be introduced, and install a water meter thereon.

(2) Upon the receipt of an application for reintroduction of water into premises pursuant to SCC 13.15.040(2), the city manager shall cause the water meter to be reinstalled and the water cut on. (Code 1964, § 29-4; Code 1985, § 29-9).


13.15.100 Size of service pipes to private residences.

In tapping water mains for service pipes to private residences, no pipe of greater diameter than three-fourths inch shall be used, unless the owner of the property to be served has agreed, in writing, to pay the difference between the entire cost of the connection, including the meter, and the cost of a three-fourths-inch service pipe and a standard five-eighths-inch meter. (Code 1964, § 29-15; Code 1985, § 29-10).


13.15.110 Furnishing service through private lines.

Before the city furnishes water through pipe lines laid by property owners, such private lines, including the size, location and construction, shall be inspected and approved by the city manager or his authorized representative. Whenever the city furnishes water through any privately laid pipe lines, the city shall maintain such lines, so long as it furnishes water through them. In consideration of such maintenance, the city shall have the right to connect with and furnish water to such additional consumers through such lines as the city may determine, without any charge being made by the owners of such lines to the city or to the owners of any property connected therewith. (Code 1964, § 29-26; Code 1985, § 29-11).


13.15.120 Requirements and charges for fire suppression systems.

All fire suppression systems to be connected to the city’s water supply for fire protection purposes shall be installed in a manner and be of such types as are approved by the director of engineering and utilities and the fire chief. Such system shall be maintained in such manner as to conserve water and the city reserves the right to discontinue water service if they are not so maintained. (Code 1964, § 29-15.1; Code 1985, § 29-12; Ord. 4-11-91).


13.15.130 Unlawful connections or use of water.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to introduce water from the city waterworks upon any premises, except as provided in this chapter, or for any person, other than the authorized agents of the city, to introduce into any lot or tenement water from the city pipes, or introduce any ferrule or other fixture into such pipes, or construct or lay down, or have constructed or laid down, any pipes or other works for the purpose of introducing water into a lot or tenement, or break up any street for the purpose of constructing or laying down any such pipes or works.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person not acting under the authority of the director of public works to turn the water on for any premises or for any person to take, receive or use city water, other than as provided in this chapter. (Code 1964, § 29-17; Code 1985, § 29-13).


13.15.140 Discontinuance of service at request of consumer.

An owner or tenant of property supplied with water may discontinue the use thereof by giving the chief finance officer notice in writing, one week prior to such discontinuance, of his desire to have water service discontinued and the meter removed. In such case, the meter will be removed and a final bill rendered. The minimum charge prescribed by SCC 13.20.020 will be made, however, as long as the meter remains connected, whether any water is consumed at the premises or not. (Code 1964, § 29-5; Code 1985, § 29-14).


13.15.150 Discontinuance or curtailment of service or water usage in event of drought or other water supply shortage or other emergency.

(1) Purpose. The city reserves the right to discontinue or curtail the service of water or water usage to any user at any time, in the event of a drought or other shortage of water or any likely or existing water supply emergency necessitating the discontinuance or curtailment of the local supply or usage. The enforcement of this section shall apply to all persons, including residential, business, commercial and wholesale water customers served by the city of Staunton water system.

(2) Drought or Water Supply Source Indicators. The following sources will be used to indicate drought severity or an existing or likely water supply emergency: reservoir levels at Elkhorn Dam and Staunton Dam, and the Gardner Springs/Middle River pump station wet well level. Upon determination that these sources exceed the threshold of a drought stage as set forth in Appendices A and B of the upper Shenandoah River Basin Drought Preparedness and Response Plan, which entire plan is incorporated by reference, city council may declare a specific drought stage or the existence or reasonable likelihood of a water supply emergency based on the recommendations of the director of public works and city manager. 

(3) Drought Stages. The following drought stages will be used: drought watch, drought warning, and drought emergency, as recommended by the director of public works and city manager, consistent with the Upper Shenandoah River Basin Drought Preparedness and Response Plan, and State Water Control Board Regulation 9 VAC 25-120.

(4) Declaration. Upon notification to the city manager by the director of public works that a drought stage or water supply emergency exists or is likely to occur, city council may issue a drought or water supply emergency declaration by ordinance. The city may declare a drought stage or water supply emergency in the absence of a declaration by the Commonwealth of Virginia; however, the city shall declare a drought stage upon declaration by the Commonwealth of Virginia.

(5) Drought Stage or Water Supply Emergency Responses. 

(a) Upon declaration by ordinance by city council of a drought watch or warning, or water supply emergency, the director of public works may recommend all water customers (residential, business, commercial and wholesale customers) to institute voluntary water conservation measures as set forth in the Upper Shenandoah River Basin Water Supply Plan, Appendices C and D, which are incorporated by reference. 

(b) Upon declaration by ordinance by city council that a drought or water supply emergency exists or is reasonably likely to occur if water conservation measures are not taken, mandatory restrictions shall apply consistent with the Upper Shenandoah River Basin Water Supply Plan, Appendix E.

(c) As shall be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, city council may, by ordinance, also require the installation of water conservation devices in the case of the retrofitting of buildings constructed prior to July 1, 1978; and restrict the nonessential use of ground water during declared water shortages or water emergencies. For purposes of this provision “nonessential use” shall not include agricultural use. 

(6) Waiver of Restrictions. Upon prior written request by an individual, business, or other water user, city council may permit less than full compliance with any drought or water supply restrictions if good cause is shown, including evidence that the applicant is affected in a substantial manner not common to other businesses or persons generally. No waiver shall be granted by the city council unless the city council determines that the public health, safety and welfare will not be adversely affected by the waiver. All waivers granted by city council shall be presented at the council’s regular meeting.

(7) Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $500.00, nor more than $1,000. Each act or each day’s continuation of the violation shall be considered a separate offense. The person shall be warned of the violation and officially notified of the need for immediate corrective action. Should the violation continue, the person shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. In addition, the director of public works is authorized to discontinue water service to any such person and assess the usual fee for reconnection. (Ord. 2011-22. Code 1964, § 29-6; Code 1985, § 29-15).


13.15.160 Damaging, obstructing, etc., waterworks property.

No person shall deface or injure any house, wall, cock, wheel, fire hydrant or other fixture connected with or pertaining to the waterworks, or remove or injure any pipe, fire hydrant or cock, or open any of them so as to wastewater, or place any building material, rubbish or other matter upon the stopcock of a street main or service pipe or obstruct access to any meter or other fixture connected with the waterworks. (Code 1964, §§ 29-22, 29-23; Code 1985, § 29-16).

Cross reference – Damaging city property generally, SCC 9.05.060.


13.15.170 Protection of creeks and reservoirs.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, into any creek within the corporate limits of the city or into any reservoir, the carcass of any animal, filth or nuisance of any kind. Every such nuisance shall be removed by the police, at the expense of the person responsible therefor, if he is known, otherwise at the expense of the city.

(2) No person shall bathe in the reservoirs or deposit any offensive matter or any stick, mud or rubbish in the reservoirs, or place the carcass of any animal or other deleterious substance on the watersheds or in any stream of the reservoirs or, without lawful authority, climb over or get through the enclosures of, or hunt or fish in, the reservoirs. (Code 1964, § 13-11; Code 1985, § 29-17).


13.15.180 City agents’ right of entry to consumer’s premises.

Every person occupying any premises into which water is conveyed under this chapter shall permit any authorized agent of the city to enter such premises, at reasonable hours, to inspect the works therein or to see if the provisions of this chapter have been violated. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with this section. (Code 1964, § 29-16; Code 1985, § 29-18).


Chapter 13.20 USE CHARGES*

Sections:

13.20.010    Deposit to ensure payment.

13.20.020    Rates generally.

13.20.030    Charge for temporary connections and rate for water consumed through such connections.

13.20.040    Charge when meter fails to register.

13.20.050    Bills generally.

13.20.060    Procedure for handling customer complaints with regard to disputed bills.

13.20.070    When and where payable.

13.20.080    Penalty on and notice and collection of delinquencies.

13.20.090    Discontinuance of service for failure to pay.

*Cross reference – Tax on purchasers of water service, SCC 3.30.110.

State law reference – Authority of city to charge and collect compensation for water furnished, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2143. See also § 15.2-5136.


13.20.010 Deposit to ensure payment.

(1) Any occupant not owning the premises to be served by the city water system shall, at the time of applying for service, pay to the chief finance officer the sum of $150.00, to be held as a deposit to ensure the final settlement of his account for water furnished. Such deposit will be refunded, without interest, when the account is closed and the final bill paid.

(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) of this section, the director of finance for the city may waive the requirement of a deposit if the applicant has been a city water customer within the 12 months preceding the application and has established a record of timely payments for such service. (Ord. 2019-16. Code 1964, § 29-3; Code 1985, § 29-29; Ord. 4-13-89; Ord. 5-24-01; Ord. 7-10-03).


13.20.020 Rates generally.

(1) Except as hereinafter set forth, for the use of water through a connection with meter attachment, the rate and method of assessment shall be according to meter measurement, as follows:

The user fee shall be $3.86 per 100 cubic feet of metered water entering the premises.

(2) There shall be paid each two months, as prescribed, by each regular user of city water a minimum charge per two months of $19.30.

(3) For a fractional part of a two-month period, a bill will be rendered for the actual consumption of water, as indicated by the meter. Where deemed necessary by the chief finance officer, rates may be computed on a monthly basis equal to one-half of the above rates.

(4) The rate at which water will be sold outside the corporate limits of the city shall be one and one-half times the rate at which water is sold inside the corporate limits, with the exception of any contracts in effect specifying a different rate.

(5) The bulk water rate to miscellaneous water customers will be $10.00 per 750 gallons of water purchased.

(6) There shall be paid a minimum charge of $19.30 for bulk water purchases during the month of less than 1,500 gallons for the month. (Ord. 2020-06; Ord. 2019-16; Ord. 2016-08; Ord. 2010-11; Ord. 2007-18; Ord. 2007-07; Ord. 2005-16. Code 1964, § 29-7; Ord. 7-23-81; Ord. 6-23-83; Code 1985, § 29-30; Ord. 5-22-86; Ord. 4-27-89; Ord. 2-28-91; Ord. 4-27-00; Ord. 11-14-02).


13.20.030 Charge for temporary connections and rate for water consumed through such connections.

There shall be a charge of $10.00, payable in advance, for all temporary connections to the water system and the rate for all water consumed shall be the same amount as prescribed for the normal use of city water. (Code 1964, § 29-9; Code 1985, § 29-31; Ord. 4-13-89; Ord. 4-27-00).


13.20.040 Charge when meter fails to register.

If any water meter fails to register or is temporarily out of order or inoperable for any reason, the charge for water each two-month period shall be the average reading for the preceding three two-month periods. (Code 1964, § 29-8; Code 1985, § 29-32).


13.20.050 Bills generally.

The chief finance officer shall bill and receive payment from each user of city water in accordance with the prescribed rates. Each bill shall include a notice as to when the same is due and payable. (Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, §§ 10-37, 29-10; Code 1985, § 29-33).

Cross reference – Duties of chief finance officer with respect to billing of utility customers, SCC 2.45.070. 


13.20.060 Procedure for handling customer complaints with regard to disputed bills.

(1) Any consumer of city water who disputes the amount of a water bill may contact the director of public works within two weeks of the receipt of the disputed water bill and state the grounds upon which such dispute is made. The director of public works shall document and promptly investigate the complaint and make a written recommendation to the chief finance officer. The chief finance officer shall consider the recommendation of the director of public works and shall make a decision whether or not the subject bill should be adjusted and shall notify the complainant in writing of the decision. The notification by the chief finance officer shall advise the complainant that, if the complainant is still aggrieved by the decision so made, the complainant has the right to request in writing a hearing before the chief finance officer and the director of public works, provided such request is made within 10 days of the date of the notice.

(2) Upon receipt by the chief finance officer of a written request by the complainant timely delivered as set forth in subsection (1) of this section, the chief finance officer shall set a time, date, and place for the hearing and so advise the complainant in writing.

(3) After conducting any hearing so requested and scheduled, the chief finance officer and the director of public works shall determine whether or not the disputed bill or any portion thereof is due to the city of Staunton and shall promptly so notify the complainant in writing.

(4) If upon the initial complaint or subsequent hearing of a complaint, the chief finance officer and/or the director of public works finds that the bill is excessive due to an underground leak and is more than double the average bill, as rendered for the 12 months preceding, the excess over double the average bill as rendered will be refunded or credited by the chief finance officer.

(5) For purposes of SCC 13.20.080 and 13.20.090, the date of such disputed bill shall be the date of the notice to the customer of the decision of the chief finance officer as set forth in subsections (1) or (3) of this section or his decision, whichever is later.

(6) All city water bills shall contain the following statement:

Customer complaints with regard to this bill may be made by contacting the Director of Public Works for the City of Staunton, P.O. Box 58, Staunton, Virginia 24402, or by calling the Director of Public Works at 332-3860, who shall handle such complaints pursuant to Section 13.20.060 of the Code of the City of Staunton.

(Code 1964, § 29-14; Code 1985, § 29-34; Ord. 11-13-86; Ord. 5-25-01).

Cross reference – Refund of sewer user fee when refund granted under above section, SCC 13.45.060.


13.20.070 When and where payable.

Water bills shall be due and payable to the city of Staunton within 30 days from the date of the bill. (Code 1964, §§ 10-37, 29-10; Code 1985, § 29-35; Ord. 8-22-02).


13.20.080 Penalty on and notice and collection of delinquencies.

If a bill for water shall remain unpaid for 30 days after the date of the bill, or the final date on which it becomes payable, a penalty of 10 percent of the water charge or $1.50, whichever is greater, shall be added to the bill. The chief finance officer shall then notify the consumer of his delinquent bill, by telephone, written notice or otherwise, after which the city treasurer shall proceed immediately to collect such bill in the same manner that other claims and obligations are or may be collected. (Code 1964, §§ 10-37, 29-11; Code 1985, § 29-36; Ord. 4-13-89).


13.20.090 Discontinuance of service for failure to pay.

(1) If any water bill remains unpaid for 40 days after the date of the bill, it shall be the duty of the chief finance officer to notify the director of public works, immediately after expiration of such period of 40 days, to at once cause the water to be cut off from the premises of the consumer who is so delinquent and not allow the water to be turned on again at any place for such defaulting consumer until the water bill and the reconnection charge prescribed by this section are paid.

(2) When the chief finance officer notifies the director of public works to cut off the water from the premises as required by subsection (1) of this section and the consumer has paid his delinquent bill in full, there shall be a charge of $30.00 payable in advance to prevent the cut-off or to reinstate water supply to the customer in the event the supply has been cut off. In the event water has been cut off hereunder, the consumer must pay all past-due charges (including penalty and interest, if any) and the reconnection charge at the office of public works in order to schedule the reconnection of water supply, unless special arrangements have been made. If the unpaid water bill and reconnection charge are paid by 3:00 p.m. on the day of disconnection, the disconnected customer’s water service shall be reinstated the same day. If payment is received after 3:00 p.m. on the day of disconnection, the disconnected customer’s water service shall be reinstated the following day.

(3) It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the director of public works or his agents, to turn on the water into or upon the premises from which it has been cut off for nonpayment of the water bill. Each day the water so unlawfully turned on remains on and the fact of its so remaining shall be regarded as a distinct offense under this section, the same as if there were fresh turning on each day. 

(4) In the event the water and/or sewer bill for a particular consumer becomes delinquent and remains unpaid, as set forth in subsection (1) of this section, more than one time in any 12-month period, the water service, or sewer service (if the consumer is a sewer-service-only consumer) shall not be resumed until the requirements of this section are met and the consumer makes a security deposit in an amount equal to the sum determined by the chief financial officer to be an average two-month bill for the consumer so delinquent (based upon the previous 12-month period or such portion thereof if the customer has not been a consumer for 12 consecutive months). Such security deposit shall be held by the city to ensure the final settlement of the consumer’s account when closed. Such deposit shall be applied to the consumer’s final account when closed, with any excess refunded (without interest) to the consumer. In the event the deposit is insufficient to cover the final account, the consumer shall be held accountable for the balance. (Code 1964, §§ 10-37, 29-11 – 29-13; Code 1985, § 29-37; Ord. 4-23-87; Ord. 4-13-89; Ord. 5-24-01; Ord. 5-8-03).

Cross reference – Discontinuance of water service for failure to pay sewer user fee, SCC 13.45.070.


Chapter 13.25 FLUORIDATION

Sections:

13.25.010    Authorized and directed – Required strength.

13.25.020    Records generally.

13.25.030    Supervision by health officer – Copies of records to be furnished to health officer.

13.25.040    Reports to council.

13.25.050    Surveys and research as to beneficial effect.


13.25.010 Authorized and directed – Required strength.

Upon receiving the requisite permit from the State Department of Health and until further direction of the council, the department of public works is hereby authorized and directed to provide the means and to proceed with the introduction of sodium fluoride or other suitable salt or acid of fluorine into the water supply, in such quantities as are required to maintain throughout the pipe distribution system a fluoride ion concentration of approximately one part per million. (Code 1964, § 29-29; Code 1985, § 29-48).


13.25.020 Records generally.

In connection with the duties imposed by SCC 13.25.010, the department of public works shall keep an accurate daily record showing, for each supply, the number of gallons treated and the fluoride ion concentration in the distribution system at such points and at such intervals as may be directed by the health officer. (Code 1964, § 29-30; Code 1985, § 29-49).


13.25.030 Supervision by health officer – Copies of records to be furnished to health officer.

The health officer shall have general supervision over treatment of the public water supply with fluoride and the department of public works shall furnish to the health department copies of the records specified in SCC 13.25.020, at daily, weekly and monthly intervals, as required by the health officer. (Code 1964, § 29-31; Code 1985, § 29-50).


13.25.040 Reports to council.

The health officer shall make periodic reports to the city council of the fluoridation of the public water supply. (Code 1964, § 29-32; Code 1985, § 29-51).


13.25.050 Surveys and research as to beneficial effect.

The health officer shall seek the cooperation of educational and scientific institutions to conduct surveys and research as to the beneficial effect, if any, of the water fluoridation program and project on the citizens of the city. (Code 1964, § 29-33; Code 1985, § 29-52).


Chapter 13.30 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION

Sections:

13.30.010    Definitions.

13.30.020    Purpose of chapter – Establishment of control program.

13.30.030    Appeals from decisions under chapter.

13.30.040    Protection of potable water supply generally – Labeling of certain outlets.

13.30.050    Adoption of state regulations.

13.30.060    Inspections for cross-connections.

13.30.070    Duties of property owners as to inspection and testing of backflow prevention devices.

13.30.080    Denial or discontinuance of service for lack of backflow prevention device, existence of cross-connection, etc.


13.30.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Backflow” means the flow of contaminants, pollutants, process fluids, untreated waters, chemicals, gases or nonpotable waters into any part of a waterworks.

“Backflow prevention device” means any approved device, method or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a waterworks.

“Consumer” means the owner or person in control of any premises supplied by, or in any manner connected to, a waterworks.

“Consumer’s water system” means any water system located on the consumer’s premises, supplied by or in any manner connected to, a waterworks.

“Contamination” means any introduction into pure water of microorganisms, wastes, wastewater, undesirable chemicals or gases.

“Cross-connection” means any connection or structural arrangement, direct or indirect, to the waterworks whereby backflow can occur.

“Degree of hazard” is a term derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to health and the adverse effect upon the waterworks.

“Health hazard” means any condition, device or practice in a waterworks or its operation that creates or may create a danger to the health, safety or well-being of the water consumer.

“Pollution” means the presence of any foreign substance (chemical, physical, radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute an unnecessary risk or impair the usefulness of the water.

“Pollution hazard” means a condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material may enter the waterworks or a consumer’s water system.

“Process fluids” means any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted which would constitute a health, pollutant or system hazard, if introduced into the waterworks. This includes, but is not limited to:

(1) Polluted or contaminated waters.

(2) Process waters.

(3) Cooling waters.

(4) Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or irrigation systems.

(5) Chemicals in solution or suspension.

(6) Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes or for firefighting purposes.

“Pure water” or “potable water” means water fit for human consumption and use which is sanitary and normally free of minerals, organic substances and toxic agents in excess of reasonable amounts for domestic usage in the area served and normally adequate in supply for the minimum health requirement of the person served.

“Service connection” means the terminal end of a service line from the waterworks. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter.

“System hazard” means a condition posing an actual, or threat of, damage to the physical properties of the waterworks or a consumer’s water system.

“Water purveyor” means an individual, group of individuals, partnership, firm, association, institution, corporation, municipal corporation, city or authority which supplies water to any person within this city from or by means of any waterworks.

“Waterworks” means all structures and appliances used in connection with the collection, storage, purification and treatment of water for drinking or domestic use and the distribution thereof to the public or residential consumers as set forth in Section 32.1-167 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. (Code 1964, § 19-26; Code 1985, § 29-63).


13.30.020 Purpose of chapter – Establishment of control program.

(1) The purpose of this chapter is:

(a) To protect the public potable water supply of the city and the city’s complete water system, including the system of the Augusta County Service Authority, from the possibility of contamination or pollution, by isolating within its customers’ internal distribution systems contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water supply system; and

(b) To eliminate or control existing cross-connections, actual or potential, at each water outlet from the consumer’s service line; and

(c) To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of the potable water system.

(2) There is hereby established a cross-connection control program which shall be in the charge of the building official. (Code 1964, § 19-28; Code 1985, § 29-64).


13.30.030 Appeals from decisions under chapter.

The board of building code appeals shall act as the appeal board to review decisions of the building official or any inspector made pursuant to this chapter. The owner, or his designated agent, may submit, in writing, to the chairman of such board his desire to appeal a decision concerning an alleged violation found during an inspection of his property pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Code 1964, § 19-32; Code 1985, § 29-65).


13.30.040 Protection of potable water supply generally – Labeling of certain outlets.

The potable water made available on the properties served by the waterworks shall be protected from possible contamination or pollution by enforcement of this chapter and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled as “Water Unsafe for Drinking” in a conspicuous manner. (Code 1964, § 19-29; Code 1985, § 29-66).


13.30.050 Adoption of state regulations.

In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the city council hereby adopts by reference Section 6.00, Cross-Connection and Backflow Prevention Control in Waterworks, of the Commonwealth of Virginia Waterworks Regulations. For the purposes of this section, lawn sprinkler systems and irrigation systems, as referred to in paragraph 6.03.03, line k, of such Section 6.00, are defined as permanent underground systems. (Code 1964, § 19-26; Code 1985, § 29-67).


13.30.060 Inspections for cross-connections.

(1) It shall be the duty of the building official to cause inspections to be made of properties served by the waterworks where cross-connection with the waterworks is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections, based on the potential health hazards involved, shall be established by the building official in the cross-connection control and backflow prevention program, as approved by the state Department of Health.

(2) The building official or his designated agent shall inspect the plumbing in every building or premises in the city, as frequently as, in his judgment, may be necessary, to ensure that such plumbing has been installed and is maintained in such a manner as to prevent the possibility of pollution or contamination of the public water supply. The building official shall notify or cause to be notified, in writing, the owner, or his designated agent, of any such building or premises to correct, within a reasonable time set by the building official, any plumbing installed or existing contrary to or in violation of this chapter and which, in his judgment, may permit the pollution of the city water supply or otherwise adversely affect the public health.

(3) The building official or his authorized representative shall have the right to enter, at any reasonable time, properties served by a connection to the waterworks of the city, for the purpose of inspecting the piping system for cross-connections. Upon request, the owner or occupant of the property served shall furnish to the building official pertinent information regarding the piping system on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connections. (Code 1964, § 19-27; Code 1985, § 29-68).


13.30.070 Duties of property owners as to inspection and testing of backflow prevention devices.

It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises where backflow prevention devices are installed to have a competent inspection made of such devices at least once a year. The inspection must be made at the expense of the owner on or before January 31st of each year following the initial installation. Records of the tests and necessary repairs, if any, shall be kept by the owner, and a copy must be filed with the office of the building official within 10 days after completion of the tests and necessary repairs. It shall also be the duty of the owner to provide sufficient information to the office of the building official to ensure that all required tests are conducted by persons duly certified by an examining agent approved by the building official. (Code 1964, § 19-31; Code 1985, § 29-69).


13.30.080 Denial or discontinuance of service for lack of backflow prevention device, existence of cross-connection, etc.

The water purveyor may deny or discontinue water service to a consumer, if any required backflow prevention device is not installed. If it is found that any such device has been removed or bypassed, or if a cross-connection exists on the premises, or if the pressure in the waterworks is lowered by the consumer below 10 psi, the purveyor shall take positive action to ensure that the waterworks is adequately protected at all times. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the deficiencies have been corrected or eliminated in accordance with Commonwealth of Virginia Waterworks Regulations and to the satisfaction of the purveyor. (Code 1964, § 19-29; Code 1985, § 29-70).


Chapter 13.35 IN GENERAL

Sections:

13.35.010    Violations of division.

13.35.020    General requirement for sewage disposal facilities.

13.35.030    When septic tank required.

13.35.040    Prohibited sewer deposits generally.

13.35.050    Discharge of rain or surface water into sewers.


13.35.010 Violations of division.

Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. (Code 1985, § 22-1).

Cross reference – Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, SCC 1.05.100. 


13.35.020 General requirement for sewage disposal facilities.

It shall be unlawful for any owner of property used for human habitation in the city to fail to provide and maintain sanitary facilities for the disposal of sewage, either through connections with the city system of sewers or through the use of septic tanks. (Code 1964, § 19-3; Code 1985, § 22-2).


13.35.030 When septic tank required.

The owner of any property referred to in SCC 13.35.020, which property is not required to be connected to a public sewer by Chapter 13.40 SCC and which property is not so connected, shall connect the sanitary facilities on such property to a septic tank constructed and maintained in accordance with the directions of the health officer and applicable provisions of state laws and regulations. (Code 1964, § 19-25; Code 1985, § 22-3).

State law reference – Septic tank permits, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-164.1.


13.35.040 Prohibited sewer deposits generally.

No person shall discharge into the main or lateral sanitary sewers, or any household sewer or drain through which substances are discharged, any cinders, vegetables, fruits, fruit peelings, ashes, rags, cotton, hair or any refuse matter or garbage or anything other than the ordinary discharge of water closets, such as liquid house slops and closet paper. (Code 1964, § 19-4; Code 1985, § 22-4).


13.35.050 Discharge of rain or surface water into sewers.

(1) No rainwater from roofs or houses, surface water or drainage from yards shall be permitted to flow into a public sanitary sewer.

(2) The connection of any roof drain, downspout or other drainage facility used to remove rain or surface water from any building, structure or premises to the sanitary sewerage system of the city is hereby prohibited.

(3) Whenever the director of public works determines that roof drains, downspouts or similar drainage facilities from structures or buildings create an overloading or flooding condition in the city’s sanitary sewerage system, the owner, agent or person responsible for such buildings or structures shall take the necessary corrective action to eliminate the discharging of such drainage facilities to the sanitary sewerage system within 90 days from the date of the notification by the director.

(4) In situations where:

(a) The provisions of subsection (3) of this section apply and have been invoked by the director of public works;

(b) The only reasonable means of disposition of surface water carried in such roof drains, downspouts or similar facilities is to deposit the same in the gutter on the abutting street carrying street surface runoff; and

(c) There is an existing sidewalk or curb; the provisions of SCC 12.05.100 shall not apply as to such roof drains, downspouts or similar facilities and the city shall, at its expense, provide for the conduct of the water through or under the existing sidewalk or curb, it being the responsibility of the property owner to provide for the conduct of the surface water carried in such roof drain, downspout or similar facility to the point of the sidewalk or curb and at a grade or elevation approved by the director of public works. (Code 1964, §§ 19-5, 19-5.1; Code 1985, § 22-5).


Chapter 13.40 CONNECTIONS TO CITY SEWER SYSTEMS

Sections:

13.40.010    When required.

13.40.020    Permit.

13.40.030    Sewer connection and facilities fees.

13.40.040    Line extensions to facilitate connections.

13.40.050    Installation of connecting lines along street or alley.

13.40.060    Connection with sewer not in street upon which property located.

13.40.070    Inspection of lines prior to connection.

13.40.080    Compliance with building code, etc.

13.40.090    Annual review of facilities fees and connection charge prescribed by chapter.

13.40.100    Discontinuance of service at request of consumer.

13.40.110    Policy when sewer user fees paid when no connection to sewer systems exists.


13.40.010 When required.

(1) Whenever a sewer is available to any property in the city, the owner of the property shall be required to cause the buildings on his premises to be connected with such sewer, either directly or through some private sewer, the connection to be made as determined by the city manager and within one month after notice to connect has been given to the property owner by the city manager.

(2) If any property owner fails or refuses to comply with this section, the city may, at its option, cause the necessary work to be done to make the connection and the amount so expended, including the fees and charges prescribed by this chapter, shall be recoverable against such property owner.

(3) For the purposes of this section, a sewer is deemed available to any single-family housing structure in the case where the city sewer main is either (a) situated on the particular property, or (b) a 90-degree lateral connection from the city sewer main to the nearest property line of a parcel would not exceed 100 feet. For any property used for multifamily dwellings or for any business, commercial or industrial use, a sewer is deemed available where the city sewer main is either (a) located on the particular property, or (b) a 90-degree lateral connection from the city main to the nearest property line of a parcel would not exceed 300 feet. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, if the straight line distance from the point of connection to the sewer main to the nearest part of the structure to be served exceeds (a) 200 feet in the case of a single-family structure or (b) 600 feet in the case of a multifamily, business, commercial, or industrial structure, the property owner may connect with such sewer, but is not required to do so. 

(4) In the case where sewer is not available to a particular property as defined in subsection (3) of this section, and sewer later becomes available to said property and provided that the property has a connection to an approved septic tank as set forth in SCC 13.35.030, the owner of the property shall have the option to either (a) have such connection made in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, or (b) elect to have such connection made within five years of the date such sewer becomes available to said property (the “delayed connection”). If the property owner elects to delay the connection, the property owner shall execute a document on a form approved by the city (the “delayed connection form”) indicating the election and agree to connect within such period at the prevailing connection and facilities fees existing at the time such connection is made plus five percent if said connection is made within 12 months of the date sewer is available, or plus 10 percent if said connection is made more than 12 months of the date sewer is available but less than 24 months of said date, or plus 15 percent if said connection is made after 24 months of the date sewer is available but less than 36 months of said date, or plus 20 percent if said connection is made more than 36 months of the date sewer is available but less than 48 months of said date, or plus 25 percent if said connection is made after 48 months of the date sewer is available. If the property owner elects to delay the connection as provided herein, the property owner shall agree that the “delayed connection form” will be recorded in the deed books in the clerk’s office of the circuit court of the city of Staunton, Virginia, at the property owner’s expense in such fashion as to constitute notice to any subsequent owner of said property and to establish a lien for such fees against the said owner and property.

(5) Application for such “delayed connection” shall be made to the director of public works for the city of Staunton on the form set forth in subsection (4) of this section.

(6) Exception for Certain Property. The city recognizes that certain properties in the city are presently not connected to a sewer that is presently available to said property. As long as these properties have a working septic system, installed prior to January 1, 1995, pursuant to SCC 13.35.030, such property shall not be required to connect to the existing sewer now available to said property. Upon the failure of such septic system, however, as determined by the health department of the city, such property shall be connected to the sewer system of the city if sewer is available to said property, as set forth in subsection (1) of this section, and no new septic system shall be authorized for such properties. This exception shall not apply to a property where sewer was previously not available prior to January 1, 1995, but has become available since that date by a new sewer line installed. In such case, the provisions of subsection (4) of this section shall apply. (Code 1964, §§ 19-6, 19-13; Code 1985, § 22-16; Ord. 12-08-94; Ord. 7-26-95).

State law reference – Authority of city to require sewer connections, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2122.


13.40.020 Permit.

No connection shall be made in any manner to the city’s sanitary sewerage system, unless the owner of the property first secures a permit from the city manager for each building, including accessory buildings, to be so connected. The city manager shall, for such purpose, use a suitable bound book containing blank permits, with duplicate stubs, in which all permits shall be recorded by him. (Code 1964, §§ 19-9, 19-19; Code 1985, § 22-17).


13.40.030 Sewer connection and facilities fees.

(1) Connection Fees. (Effective July 1, 2019.)

(a) The charge for all connections shall be $2,600. This cost includes the service connection from the main to the right-of-way line, to be paid in advance of such connection. The foregoing notwithstanding, the director of public works may require that a higher deposit be made, prior to connection, if, in his opinion, the cost of such particular connection is likely to exceed $2,600. Such deposit may be made in cash, by bond with corporate surety, or by a letter of credit payable to the city approved by the director of public works. If such higher deposit is made and the actual cost exceeds the deposit, the individual requesting the deposit shall owe the difference to the city which shall be due and payable within 30 days of billing; or, if the actual cost is less than the deposit, the city shall refund the difference to such individual within 30 days of completion of work.

(1) Connection Fees. (Effective July 1, 2020.)

(a) The charge for all connections shall be $3,100. This cost includes the service connection from the main to the right-of-way line, to be paid in advance of such connection. The foregoing notwithstanding, the director of public works may require that a higher deposit be made, prior to connection, if, in his opinion, the cost of such particular connection is likely to exceed $3,100. Such deposit may be made in cash, by bond with corporate surety, or by a letter of credit payable to the city approved by the director of public works. If such higher deposit is made and the actual cost exceeds the deposit, the individual requesting the deposit shall owe the difference to the city which shall be due and payable within 30 days of billing; or, if the actual cost is less than the deposit, the city shall refund the difference to such individual within 30 days of completion of work.

(b) Where the service connection is installed by the developer, the city will inspect the installation of the service. The developer shall be responsible for all direct costs related to inspection, plus 30 percent of actual cost to cover overhead and indirect cost. 

(c) Projects on property owned and operated by the city of Staunton, Virginia, or the school board of the city of Staunton, Virginia, shall be exempt from sewer connection fees.

(d) Single-family residential projects which meet all of the following criteria may also be considered for exemption from sewer connection fees; however, organizations must submit a request for exemption from sewer connection fees which will then be considered by Staunton city council on a case-by-case basis using these criteria:

(i) The project is on property in the city of Staunton, is owned by the organization, and the organization has a 501(c)(3) exemption recognized by the Internal Revenue Service;

(ii) The project provides home ownership to residents within the city of Staunton, classified as low- and moderate-income individuals, as defined by current HUD Section 8 income standards; and

(iii) The organization administering the program requires the homeowner(s) to contribute a minimum of 200 hours in the construction of the subject single-family residence or being constructed by the organization for others.

(2) Sewer Off-Site Facilities Fee.

(a) The off-site facilities fee for all applicants is to cover the cost of present and future capital facilities constructed. Capital expenditures include, but are not limited to, treatment facilities, sewer mains, and pump stations. The off-site facilities fee shall be assessed all connectors to an existing or proposed establishment of a sewer system as set forth in the schedule of facilities fees under subsection (2)(g) of this section. All monies collected as “off-site facilities fees” under this section shall be deposited in a special account of the sewer enterprise fund to be known as the “sewer facilities fees account.” Funds unexpended and remaining in this special account, at the end of each fiscal year, shall carry forward to succeeding fiscal years. Monies shall be disbursed from this special account to pay the costs of such present and future capital facilities, and related existing and future debt service with respect thereto.

(b) Off-Site and Oversize Main Credit Policy. Credits will be allowed against the off-site facilities fee for off-site extension in excess of 300 feet and/or line size in excess of minimum size required to serve the development. No credit will be allowed where a main size greater than minimum size in diameter is required to adequately serve the owner. Credits will be computed based on public bids for the subject construction or a schedule of rates determined for the construction of sewerage systems established annually by the director of engineering and utilities.

(c) The city council may by separate agreement with a developer enter into a reimbursement agreement for off-site facilities which may be required by the city and which would not be covered by the off-site and oversize main credit policy in subsection (2)(b) of this section.

(d) The total connection fee(s) and facilities fee(s) for affected lots as shown on the final plat as approved by the planning commission shall be submitted to the city no later than the date of consideration of said final plat by city council. The connection fee(s) and facilities fee(s) shall be paid by certified or cashier’s check. In the event final plat approval is not obtained by the applicant, such connection fee(s) and facilities fee(s) shall be returned to the applicant without interest within five business days of the final plat consideration, unless the applicant requests the aforementioned fees to remain in the city’s possession pending modifications and resubmission of the final plat for approval by city council.

The total connection fee(s) and facilities fee(s) for development requiring final plan approval by the building official shall be submitted to the city prior to said final plan approval. The connection fee(s) and facilities fee(s) shall be paid by certified or cashier’s check.

The total connection fee(s) and facilities fee(s) in cases of increased sewer services that do not require any form of plan approval shall be paid at the time when service is requested. The connection fee(s) and facilities fee(s) shall be paid by certified or cashier’s check.

(e) The city council may, by resolution, waive a portion of the facilities fees for sewer facilities installed under federal- or state-funded sewer projects. The portion of the fee that is waived shall be indicated as city financial participation in the sewer project.

(f) The city council may, by resolution, authorize the off-site facilities fee to be waived entirely or to be paid from the general fund for those commercial or industrial owners which the city council determines would be in the best interest of the city’s economic development and which would generate significant employment.

(g) Projects on property owned and operated by the city of Staunton, Virginia, or the school board of the city of Staunton, Virginia, shall be exempt from sewer facility fees.

(h) Single-family residential projects which meet all of the following criteria may also be considered for exemption from sewer facility fees; however, organizations must submit a request for exemption from sewer facility fees which will then be considered by Staunton city council on a case-by-case basis using these criteria:

(i) The project is on property in the city of Staunton, is owned by the organization, and the organization has a 501(c)(3) exemption recognized by the Internal Revenue Service;

(ii) The project provides home ownership to residents within the city of Staunton, classified as low-and-moderate income individuals, as defined by current HUD Section 8 income standards; and

(iii) The organization administering the program requires the homeowner(s) to contribute a minimum of 200 hours in the construction of the subject single-family residence or being constructed by the organization for others.

(i) Schedule of Sewer Facilities Fees.

	Water Meter Size (Inches)	EDU*	Facilities Fee

	5/8"	1	$6,850

	3/4"	1.5	$10,280

	1"	2.5	$17,130

	1 1/2"	4.375	$29,970

	2"	8	$54,800

	3"	16	$109,600

	4"	25	$171,250

	6"	50	$342,500

	*Equivalent Dwelling Unit.

(j) Total Connection and Facilities Fee.

(i) The total fee due by the owner to the city shall be the appropriate facilities fee and the connection fee. A connection fee shall be due for new connections only. Facilities fees shall be due for both new structures and additions to existing structures which add one-half equivalent dwelling units (EDU) or more to an existing structure.

The EDU, as set forth herein, shall be considered the same as the equivalent dwelling connection (EDC) as defined and derived in the latest Virginia Health Department Waterworks Regulations.

The facilities fee due shall be determined, first, by establishing the EDU demand on the system, and second, by the meter size set forth in subsection (i) of this section, which will accommodate such demand. Such fee is due regardless of need for change to an existing water meter.

(ii) The minimum fee for any connection shall be that established for a standard residential connection with a five-eighths-inch meter.

(iii) If connections are made to sewer lines outside the city limits, or if the connecting lines come from outside the city limits, the total fee for such connections shall be 50 percent more than the fee for a resident of the city for service within the city and such shall be paid before any permit is issued authorizing the connection. The applicant shall sign an agreement to the effect that he will guarantee payment of an annual sewage rental fee. (Ord. 2019-18; Ord. 2018-22; Ord. 2016-14; Ord. 2011-11; Ord. 2007-04; Ord. 2006-07; Ord. 2004-18; Code 1964, §§ 19-10, 19-20; Code 1985, § 22-18; Ord. 1-24-85; Ord. 2-11-88; Ord. 2-9-89, § 1; Ord. 3-22-90, § 1; Ord. 2-28-91; Ord. 6-25-91; Ord. 2-27-92; Ord. 9-10-92; Ord. 12-16-93; Ord. 4-27-95; Ord. 3-14-96; Ord. 4-13-00; Ord. 4-12-01; Ord. 4-11-02).


13.40.040 Line extensions to facilitate connections.

(1) On any request for a sanitary sewer connection with the city’s sewerage system, where a line is available in the street, a regular connection fee and facilities fee will be charged and the sewer line will be extended to the edge of the property line or easement line. The applicant will be responsible for the initial construction on private property beyond the property line or easement line. The maintenance of the sewer service line, once the connection is complete all the way to the main, will be the responsibility of the property owner.

(2) On any request for a sanitary sewer connection with the city’s sewerage system, where the end of the sewer line must be extended along the city street prior to the lateral leaving the main sewer line to extend to the right-of-way line, the actual direct cost of the main line extension, plus 30 percent to cover overhead and indirect expenses, plus the connection fee and facilities fee shall be charged to the applicant.

(3) On any request for a sanitary sewer connection with the city’s sewerage system, where a line is not in the street but available in the vicinity, a regular connection fee and facilities fee will be charged for the connection. The applicant will be responsible for easement costs and the cost of the construction of the sewer line beyond its termination point, or the city will install the sewer to the applicant’s property line for the actual cost, plus 30 percent to cover overhead and indirect expenses. The extended sewer line, if on private land, must be installed with a permanent easement between the main sewer line and the applicant’s boundary line.

(4) All sewer lines and connections which connect to the city’s sanitary sewerage system must be inspected and approved by the city. The developer shall be responsible for all direct costs related to inspection, plus 30 percent of the actual cost to cover overhead and indirect cost. This subsection does not apply to installation made by the city.

(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city shall not be required to extend any sewer line along a street which is not a part of the street system maintained by the city until satisfactory bond has been furnished, conditioned upon the satisfactory improvement of the street in accordance with specifications for similar improvements set forth in SCC Title 17.

(6) Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the city council may, by resolution, authorize the off-site sewer extension to be wholly or in part paid by the city from the general fund and/or sewer utility fund for those commercial or industrial owners which the city council determines would be in the best interest of the city’s economic development and would generate significant employment. The city manager is authorized to approve such cost share arrangement, without such council resolution, provided the city’s cost or share meets the guidelines and parameters set forth by city council for dealing with developers, if the particular project, in the opinion of the city manager, proves to be in the best interest of the city as set forth above and is in accordance with the comprehensive plan and zoning requirements. (Code 1964, §§ 19-7, 19-16; Code 1985, § 22-19; Ord. 1-10-91; Ord. 2-28-91).


13.40.050 Installation of connecting lines along street or alley.

No lines to be connected with a public sewer shall be installed along any public street or alley of the city by any person, except the city’s employees, under the direction of the city manager, who shall in all cases prescribe the size of such lines and the depth that they shall be laid. These lines, when installed, shall become the property of the city. (Code 1964, § 19-15; Code 1985, § 22-20).


13.40.060 Connection with sewer not in street upon which property located.

The owner of a lot on a street or public alley along which there is no public sewer may, with the permission of the city manager, connect his sewer with some other accessible public sewer, either along the streets and alleys of the city or through private property and, if desirable and convenient, through a private sewer already in existence; provided, however, that no such connection shall be made over or through private property or by means of a private sewer already in existence, without the consent of the owner of such private property or private sewer. (Code 1964, §§ 19-8, 19-19; Code 1985, § 22-21).


13.40.070 Inspection of lines prior to connection.

Before a sewer connection is made by the city pursuant to a permit issued under SCC 13.40.020, it shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to inspect all outside sewer lines to the street, to ascertain if all requirements have been met. If the plumbing inspector shall ascertain that all requirements have been met, he shall approve the permit and turn it over to the proper authority who will make the requisite connection. (Code 1964, § 19-11; Code 1985, § 22-22).


13.40.080 Compliance with building code, etc.

If connection is made to the city sewer system by any person, either inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, such person shall comply strictly with the technical requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and the applicable provisions of this code, and have all sewer and water piping inspected and approved by the plumbing inspector and secure all required permits. (Code 1964, § 19-12; Code 1985, § 22-23).

Cross reference – Building code, Chapter 15.10 SCC.


13.40.090 Annual review of facilities fees and connection charge prescribed by chapter.

Facilities fees and connection charges prescribed by this chapter shall be reviewed by the director of public works during the first quarter of each calendar year and presented to the city council for updating. (Code 1964, § 19-10.1; Code 1985, § 22-24; Ord. 12-13-90; Ord. 2-28-91; Ord. 2-23-95).


13.40.100 Discontinuance of service at request of consumer.

An owner or tenant of property supplied with sewer may discontinue the use thereof by giving the director of public works notice in writing, one week prior to such discontinuance, of his desire to have sewer service discontinued and the water meter removed. In such case, the water meter will be removed, the finance department shall be notified by public works, and a final bill rendered. The minimum charge prescribed by SCC 13.45.030 will be made, however, as long as the water meter remains connected, whether any sewer is provided to the premises or not. (Code 1985, § 22-25; Ord. 4-27-89; Ord. 5-24-01).


13.40.110 Policy when sewer user fees paid when no connection to sewer systems exists. 

(1) It is the responsibility of the property owner (or tenant upon the premises) to determine whether or not the property is connected to the city sewer system. If such person is not certain their property is so connected, the city will, upon written request to the director of public works, without charge, determine if said property is so connected.

(2) In any case where the property owner (or tenant upon the premises) has paid sewer “user fees” as defined and set forth in SCC 13.45.010 through 13.45.070, and where such property was not connected to the city systems, the city will refund to said person the sewer user fees so paid by said person, but such refund shall be limited to the actual amounts paid in error by such person during the immediately preceding 36 months, without interest.

(3) If the case set forth in subsection (2) of this section is discovered, and where sewer connection is otherwise required under SCC 13.40.010, the property owner shall have such connection made pursuant thereto, and pay the connection fee and facilities fees required by SCC 13.40.030. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, in any case where the property owner (or tenant), including their predecessors in title, have erroneously paid sewer user fees continuously since prior to November, 1990, the date of the Draper Aden Associates Water and Sewer Systems Study, the facilities fee shall be waived, if the property owner (or tenant) presents evidence of such situation prior to October 13, 1995. (Code 1985, § 22-26; Ord. 4-13-95).


Chapter 13.45 SEWER USER FEE

Sections:

13.45.010    Definition.

13.45.020    Imposed – Basis.

13.45.030    Amount.

13.45.040    Computation when meter fails to register.

13.45.050    Billing and records.

13.45.060    Adjustment or refund when bill excessive.

13.45.070    Terms and conditions of payment.


13.45.010 Definition.

As used in this chapter, the term “user fee” shall mean the fee imposed by this chapter for the use of the city’s sanitary sewer system. (Code 1985, § 22-35).


13.45.020 Imposed – Basis.

There is hereby imposed upon the owner or occupant of any premises or lot connected to the city system of sanitary sewers a user fee designed to cover the cost to the city for providing wastewater disposal services. The basis for such fee shall be determined by the amount of metered water which shall enter the premises through the city’s water distribution system or by the amount of sewerage disposed of through a separate wastewater meter. (Code 1964, § 19-10.2; Code 1985, § 22-36; Ord. 4-13-89).


13.45.030 Amount.

(1) The user fee shall be $4.88 per each 100 cubic feet of metered water entering the premises. The owner of any premises may, at his option and expense, install a separate meter designed to measure the wastewater actually entering the city system of sanitary sewers. Subject to the inspection and approval of the separate meter by the city, the rate of $4.88 per 100 cubic feet will be applied to the metered flow of wastewater into the sewer system. There shall be paid each two months, as prescribed, by each user of the city sewer system a minimum charge per two months of $24.40.

(2) Users of the city sewer system within the corporate limits of the city who do not have city water service shall be charged a flat rate of $48.80 each two months, with the exception of any existing contracts in effect specifying a different rate.

(3) The rate at which wastewater disposal services will be provided outside the corporate limits of the city shall be one and one-half the regular city rate, with the exception of any existing contracts in effect specifying a different rate.

(4) No sewer user fee will be charged for metered water supplies through an outside and separate water service which has been installed at the owner’s expense for the exclusive use of construction, lawn irrigation, and plant watering, and from which water cannot be reasonably expected to enter the sanitary sewer system. Refer to SCC 13.15.040(3).

(5) No sewer user fee will be charged for a portion of metered water entering the premises under the following conditions:

(a) Whenever the owner or occupant of a lot or premises is installing a new lawn or a new landscaping scheme upon the lot or premises and watering of the same is necessary for the initial gestation and growth of the same, the owner or occupant may obtain relief from the sewer user fee under the following conditions:

(i) The project must be the establishment of a new lawn of at least 1,800 square feet, the cost of which exceeds $1,500; or

(ii) The complete renovation of a previously established lawn of at least 1,800 square feet, the cost of which exceeds $1,500; or

(iii) A new landscaping plan or a renovation of an existing landscaping plan, the cost of which exceeds $2,000.

(b) An owner or occupant seeking relief under this section shall make application therefor at the water billing department of the city of Staunton and present to the water billing department such evidence, including receipts for seeding, plantings, etc., as requested by the water billing department to determine whether or not the applicant qualifies for relief. Upon approval by the water billing department of the request, the water used during the time concerned, to the extent that it exceeds the average amount of water used by the premises for the immediate past 12 months (or such lesser period of time that the premises were used or occupied), shall not be used in computing the sewer user fee set forth herein. In the event there is no past history available with regard to water usage for the subject premises, the water billing department shall determine an average water bill for the subject premises based on estimations for similarly sized dwellings or buildings in making its computations hereunder.

(c) No such relief shall be issued for the watering of vegetable gardens or for any other use except as set forth herein, and the relief granted hereunder shall be granted only for a period of time not to exceed 60 days and such relief shall not be granted with respect to the same premises more than once in each calendar year. 

(6) For any premises used exclusively as an industrial laundry for which it is impractical to separately measure the wastewater by meter, as determined by the city manager or designee, the user fee charge for an account shall be reduced by credit equal to 15 percent of the charge otherwise applicable. For purposes solely of this provision, an “industrial laundry” shall mean an establishment engaged on a non-retail contract basis in operating a mechanical laundry, with steam as a significant processing byproduct, for cleaning by washing with water various clothing, fabrics, and other similar items, when during a bimonthly billing period metered water on the premises for the particular account exceeds 1,000 hundred cubic feet.

(7) Upon prior written request and certification submitted by the owner to the city’s finance department, for a period of 90 days after connection of service or until the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever is earlier, no sewer user fee shall be charged as to any premises on which a new dwelling is being constructed on an unimproved lot. (Ord. 2012-02; Ord. 2010-12; Ord. 2009-13; Ord. 2008-12; Ord. 2006-16; Ord. 2005-15. Code 1985, § 22-37; Ord. 5-25-95; Ord. 5-13-99; Ord. 5-10-01; Ord. 5-24-01; Ord. 5-8-03).


13.45.040 Computation when meter fails to register.

If any water or wastewater meter fails to register or is temporarily out of order or inoperable for any reason, the user fee for each two-month period shall be based on the average meter reading for the preceding 12 months. (Code 1964, § 19-10.5; Code 1985, § 22-38).


13.45.050 Billing and records.

The chief finance officer shall bill and receive payment from each user for user fees in accordance with the rates prescribed by this chapter and with the keeping of the necessary records, which shall be made out and kept in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or by the council. (Ord. 2005-03. Code 1964, § 19-10.4; Code 1985, § 22-39).

Cross reference – General duties of chief finance officer relative to billing of utility customers, SCC 2.45.070.


13.45.060 Adjustment or refund when bill excessive.

(1) Any customer receiving an adjustment or refund on a water bill pursuant to SCC 13.20.060 of this code shall also receive a refund or adjustment on the user fee, based on the excess of the user fee over the average bill rendered for the preceding 12 months.

(2) In cases where a water line breaks within a residence or business, upon written request of the owner or other person responsible for the payment of the sewer user fee, the director of public works shall investigate the claim. If such investigation indicates that the water flowing from the break could not or did not enter the sanitary or combined sewer system, the claimant will be entitled to an adjustment on the sewer user fee. Such adjustment shall be accomplished by issuing a bill therefor equal to the highest bimonthly consumption billed to the account over the immediately prior 12-month period, in lieu of the bill subject of the complaint. Such adjustment provided herein shall be granted only once in any one 12-month period. In order to qualify for such adjustment, the claimant must have repaired the break within a reasonable time after discovery of the break, not to exceed 30 days. (Code 1964, § 19-10.6;Code 1985, § 22-40; Ord. 2-8-96; Ord. 5-24-01).


13.45.070 Terms and conditions of payment.

(1) The terms and conditions of payment of the user fee shall be the same as those specified in Chapter 13.20 SCC for water billing. Nonpayment of the user fee constitutes grounds for termination of water service, as specified in SCC 13.20.090.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the director of public works or his agents, to resume sewer service. (Code 1964, § 19-10.4; Code 1985, § 22-41; Ord. 5-24-01).


Chapter 13.50 SEWER STOPPAGE AND REPAIR

Sections:

13.50.010    Responsibility for repair and maintenance.


13.50.010 Responsibility for repair and maintenance.

(1) The city shall be responsible for the repair and maintenance of all main sewer lines and the property owner concerned shall be responsible for the repair and maintenance of the lateral connection to the main sewer line (from the point of entry to the house or building to the connection with the main line).

(2) Where repairs or maintenance are necessary to a lateral line, the property owner shall employ at his expense qualified persons to effect such repairs, but in the event any excavation for such repair or maintenance is necessary on public property, this excavation and refill and repaving, if necessary, shall be done by city personnel at the expense of the property owner whose lateral line is affected.

(3) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, however, if the maintenance or repair needed to a main line is caused by an agency owned, under control of or constructed upon the property of the owner, such as, but not limited to, roots of trees situated upon private property which invade the main, such cost of repair or maintenance shall be reimbursed to the city by the property owner concerned.

(4) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, however, if the maintenance or repair needed to a lateral line is caused by the faulty installation of the lateral line by the city under public property, such cost of repair or maintenance shall be reimbursed to the property owner by the city. (Code 1985, § 22-42; Ord. 5-13-87).


Chapter 13.55 PRETREATMENT AND DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS*

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

13.55.010    Purpose and policy.

13.55.020    Administration.

13.55.030    Definitions.

13.55.040    Abbreviations.

Article II. General Sewer Use Requirements

13.55.050    Prohibited discharge standards.

13.55.060    Federal categorical pretreatment standards and state requirements.

13.55.070    Specific pollutant limitations.

13.55.080    City’s right of revision.

13.55.090    Special agreement.

13.55.100    Dilution.

Article III. Pretreatment of Wastewater

13.55.110    Pretreatment facilities.

13.55.120    Additional pretreatment measures.

13.55.130    Accidental discharge/slug control plans.

13.55.140    Tenant responsibility.

13.55.150    Separation of domestic and industrial wastestreams.

13.55.160    Hauled wastewater.

13.55.170    Vandalism.

Article IV. Wastewater Permit Eligibility

13.55.180    Wastewater survey.

13.55.190    Wastewater permit requirement.

13.55.200    Permitting existing connections.

13.55.210    Permitting new connections.

13.55.220    Permitting extrajurisdictional industrial users.

13.55.230    Wastewater permit application contents.

13.55.240    Application signatories and certification.

13.55.250    Wastewater permit decisions.

Article V. Wastewater Permit Issuance Process

13.55.260    Wastewater permit duration.

13.55.270    Wastewater permit contents.

13.55.280    Wastewater permit appeals.

13.55.290    Wastewater permit modification.

13.55.300    Wastewater permit transfer.

13.55.310    Wastewater permit revocation.

13.55.320    Wastewater permit reissuance.

13.55.330    Municipal user permits.

Article VI. Reporting Requirements

13.55.340    Baseline monitoring reports.

13.55.350    Compliance deadline reports.

13.55.360    Periodic compliance reports.

13.55.370    Report of changed conditions.

13.55.380    Reports of potential problems.

13.55.390    Reports from noncategorical users.

13.55.400    Violation report – Repeat sampling.

13.55.410    Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.

13.55.420    Sample collection.

13.55.430    Analytical requirements.

13.55.440    Monitoring charges.

13.55.450    Timing.

13.55.460    Record keeping.

Article VII. Compliance Monitoring

13.55.470    Inspection and sampling.

13.55.480    Search warrants.

Article VIII. Confidential Information

13.55.490    Availability to the public.

Article IX. Significant Noncompliance

13.55.500    Publication of users in significant noncompliance.

Article X. Administrative Enforcement Remedies

13.55.510    Notification of violation.

13.55.520    Consent orders.

13.55.530    Show cause hearing.

13.55.540    Compliance orders.

13.55.550    Cease and desist orders.

13.55.560    Administrative fines.

13.55.570    Emergency suspensions.

13.55.580    Termination of permit.

Article XI. Judicial Enforcement Remedies

13.55.590    Injunctive relief.

13.55.600    Civil penalties.

13.55.610    Criminal prosecution.

Article XII. Supplemental Enforcement Action

13.55.620    Performance bonds.

13.55.630    Liability insurance.

13.55.640    Water supply severance.

13.55.650    Public nuisances.

13.55.660    Informant rewards.

13.55.670    Contractor listing.

Article XIII. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations

13.55.680    Upset.

13.55.690    General and specific prohibitions.

13.55.700    Bypass.

Article XIV. Miscellaneous Provisions

13.55.710    Pretreatment charges and fees.

13.55.720    Severability.

13.55.730    Conflicts.

13.55.740    Effective date.

*Editor’s note – By ordinance of 5-13-93, Article V was deleted and the existing Article VI was redesignated as Article V.

Article I. General Provisions


13.55.010 Purpose and policy.

(1) This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect dischargers of pollutants from nondomestic sources into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the city of Staunton and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are:

(a) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system;

(b) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;

(c) To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its marketability;

(d) To protect both municipal personnel who may come into contact with sewage, sludge and effluent in the course of their employment as well as protecting the general public;

(e) To preserve the hydraulic capacity of the municipal wastewater system;

(f) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system;

(g) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and

(h) To ensure the city complies with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws which the municipal wastewater system is subject to. 

(2) This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect discharges to the municipal wastewater collection system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, establishes administrative review procedures, requires user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.

(3) This chapter shall apply to the city and to persons outside of the city who, by contract with the city, are included as users of the municipal wastewater system. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of public works (director) or his designees shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. By discharging wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, industrial users located beyond the city limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions established in this chapter, as well as any permits or orders issued hereunder. (Code 1985, § 22-70A; Ord. 2-23-95).


13.55.020 Administration.

Except as otherwise provided herein, the director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director may be delegated by the director to other city personnel. (Code 1985, § 22-70B).


13.55.030 Definitions.

Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:

(1) “Act” or “the Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.

(2) “Approval authority” means the Virginia State Water Control Board.

(3) “Authorized representative of the industrial user”:

(a) If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized representatives shall mean:

(i) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or

(ii) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.

(b) If the industrial user is a partnership, association, or sole proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or the proprietor.

(c) If the individual user is representing federal, state or local governments, or an agent thereof, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility.

(d) The individuals described in subsections (3)(a)(i) and (ii) of this section may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the authorization is submitted to the city.

(4) “Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).

(5) “Building sewer” means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the publicly owned treatment work (POTW).

(6) “Categorical pretreatment standard” or “categorical standard” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 – 471, incorporated herein by reference.

(7) “City” means the city of Staunton.

(8) “Color” means the optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density.

(9) “Composite sample” means the sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on either an increment of flow or time.

(10) “Cooling water” means the water discharged from any such use as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.

(11) Control Authority. The term “control authority” shall refer to the city of Staunton.

(12) “Discharge” means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants into the municipal wastewater system by an industrial user.

(13) “Environmental Protection Agency” or “U.S. EPA” means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the Regional Waster Management Division Director or other duly authorized official of said agency.

(14) “Existing source” means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under Section 307(b) and (c) (33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.

(15) “Grab sample” means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the water stream and without consideration of time.

(16) “Holding tank waste” means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.

(17) “Industrial user” means any person which is a source of nondomestic discharge.

(18) “Industrial wastewater” means a nondomestic wastewater originating from a nonresidential source.

(19) “Interference” means a discharge which causes or contributes to the inhibition or disruption of the municipal wastewater system, including sewerage collection facilities, the processes or operations of the treatment plant, or the use or disposal of sewage sludge in accordance with the city’s NPDES permit or any of the following regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (including Title II, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)); any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.

(20) “Medical waste” means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.

(21) “Municipal wastewater system” or “system” means a “treatment works” as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned by the state or municipality. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the municipal entity having responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the system.

(22) New Source.

(a) Any source of a discharge, the construction or operations of which commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) (33 U.S.C. 1317(c)) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307(c); provided, that:

(i) No other source is located at that site; or

(ii) The source completely replaces the process or production equipment of an existing source at that site; or

(iii) The new wastewater-generating process of the source is substantially independent of an existing source at that site; and the construction of the source creates a new facility rather than modifying an existing source at that site. (In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.)

(b) For purposes of this definition, construction or operation has commenced if the owner or operator has:

(i) Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program:

(A) Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or 

(B) Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or

(ii) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition.

(23) “Nondomestic pollutants” means any substances other than human excrement and household gray water (shower, dishwashing operations, etc.). Nondomestic pollutants include the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, odor).

(24) “Pass through” means a discharge which exits the treatment plant effluent into waters of the U.S. in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with an indirect discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).

(25) “Person” means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state or local governmental entities.

(26) “pH” means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units; neutral wastewaters are numerically equal to seven while the number increases to show increasing alkalinity and decreases to show increasing acidity.

(27) “Pollutant” means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat-wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and agricultural wastes.

(28) “Pretreatment” or “treatment” means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater thereby rendering them less harmful to the municipal wastewater system prior to introducing such pollutants into the system. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, by process changes, or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.

(29) “Pretreatment standard and requirements” means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, including national pretreatment categorical standards and prohibitive discharge standards imposed on an industrial user.

(30) “Prohibited discharge standards” or “prohibited discharges” means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain defined types of industrial wastewater; these prohibitions appear in SCC 13.55.050.

(31) “Residential users” means persons only contributing sewage wastewater to the municipal wastewater system.

(32) “Receiving stream or water of the state” means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or under-ground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.

(33) “Sewage” means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).

(34) Significant Industrial User. The term “significant industrial user” shall mean:

(a) Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; and

(b) Any other industrial user that:

(i) Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater;

(ii) Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or

(iii) Is designated as significant by the city on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for causing pass through or interference.

(35) “Slug load” means any pollutant (including BOD) released in a discharge at a flow rate or concentration which will cause a violation of the specific discharge prohibitions in Article II of Chapter 13.55 SCC.

(36) “Standard industrial classification (SIC) code” means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget.

(37) “Stormwater” means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom, including snow melt.

(38) “Suspended solids” means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.

(39) “Director” means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the municipal wastewater system and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter or his duly authorized representative.

(40) “Toxic pollutant” means one of 126 pollutants or combination of those pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of Section 307 (33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act.

(41) “Treatment plant” means that portion of the municipal wastewater system designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste.

(42) “Treatment plant effluent” means any discharge of pollutants from the municipal wastewater system into waters of the state.

(43) “User” means any person who contributes, or causes or allows the contribution of sewage or industrial wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, including persons who contribute such wastes from mobile sources.

(44) “Wastewater” means the liquid and water-carried industrial wastes, or sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed to the municipal wastewater system.

This chapter is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall include the feminine and vice versa. “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive or discretionary. The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use. (Code 1985, § 22-70C).


13.55.040 Abbreviations.

The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:

	 BOD	-	Biochemical oxygen demand

	 CFR	-	Code of Federal Regulations 

	 COD	-	Chemical oxygen demand 

	 EPA	-	U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 

	 gpd	-	Gallons per day 

	 LC	-	Lethal concentration for 50 percent of the 50 test org

	 l	-	Liter

	 mg	-	Milligrams

	 mg/l	-	Milligrams per liter

	 NPDES	-	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System

	 O&M	-	Operation and maintenance

	 POTW	-	Publicly owned treatment works

	 RCRA	-	Resource Conservation and Recovery Act

	 SIC	-	Standard industrial classification

	 SWDA	-	Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.)

	 TSS	-	Total suspended solids

	 USC	-	United States Code

(Code 1985, § 22-70D).

Article II. General Sewer Use Requirements


13.55.050 Prohibited discharge standards.

(1) No industrial user shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the municipal wastewater system, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause interference or pass through. These general prohibitions apply to all industrial users of the municipal wastewater system whether or not the user is subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. Furthermore, no industrial user may contribute the following substances to the system:

(a) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the municipal wastewater system. Included in this prohibition are wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C). At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system or at any point in the system be more than five percent nor any single reading over 10 percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.

(b) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause interference with the flow in a sewer but in no case solids greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.

(c) Any fats or greases, including but not limited to petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.

(d) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the system, city personnel or equipment.

(e) Any wastewater containing pollutants in sufficient quantity (flow or concentration), either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to pass through or interfere with the municipal wastewater system, any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals.

(f) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.

(g) Any substance which may cause the treatment plant effluent or any other residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the system cause the city to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under Section 405 of the Act: the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or other state requirements applicable to the sludge use and disposal practices being used by the city.

(h) Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant effluent thereby violating the city’s NPDES permit. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation points for photosynthetic activity by more than 10 percent from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life.

(i) Any wastewater which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees F (40 degrees C).

(j) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.

(k) Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the system in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety problems.

(l) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city in accordance with SCC 13.55.160.

(m) Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the superintendent.

(n) Any industrial wastes containing floatable fats, waxes, grease or oils, or which become floatable at the wastewater temperature at the introduction to the treatment plant during the winter season; but in no case, industrial wastewater containing more than 100 mg/l of emulsified oil or grease.

(o) Nonbiodegradable cutting oils, commonly called soluble oils, which form a persistent water emulsion, and nonbiodegradable complex carbon compounds.

(p) Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes.

(q) Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director in a wastewater permit.

(r) Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the municipal wastewater system.

(s) Any material identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR Part 261 except as may be specifically authorized by the director.

(t) Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to show a lethal concentration (LC) of 50 percent as determined by a toxicity test of 96 hours or less, using a percentage of the discharge and aquatic test species chosen by the director.

(u) Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy.

(v) Any wastes containing substances which cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater system.

(2) Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that these wastes could be discharged to the municipal wastewater system. The director may require that floor drains located in process or storage areas discharge into the user’s pretreatment facility before connecting to the city system. (Code 1985, § 22-71A).


13.55.060 Federal categorical pretreatment standards and state requirements.

(1) Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 – 471 and incorporated herein.

(2) State pretreatment requirements set forth in VR 680-14-01 are incorporated herein. (Code 1985, § 22-71B).


13.55.070 Specific pollutant limitations.

The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits based on 24-hour composite samples:

	1.93	mg/l	arsenic

	0.15	mg/l	cadmium

	2.88	mg/l	chromium

	2.72	mg/l	copper

	1.66	mg/l	cyanide

	1.06	mg/l	lead

	0.02	mg/l	mercury

	0.81	mg/l	nickel

	3.64	mg/l	silver

	2.32	mg/l	zinc

Concentrations apply at the point where the industrial waste is discharged to the municipal wastewater system. All concentrations for metallic substances are for “total recoverable” metal. At his discretion, the director may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration- based limitations above. (Code 1985, § 22-71(C); Ord. 3-27-03).


13.55.080 City’s right of revision.

The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater permits, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the municipal wastewater system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in SCC 13.55.010 or the general and specific prohibitions in SCC 13.55.060. (Code 1985, § 22-71D).


13.55.090 Special agreement.

The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users setting out special terms under which the industrial user may discharge to the system. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment standard. However, the industrial user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. Industrial users may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from U.S. EPA. Such a request will be approved only if the user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by U.S. EPA when establishing that pretreatment standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13. (Code 1985, § 22-71E).


13.55.100 Dilution.

No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute, a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city. (Code 1985, § 22-71F).

Article III. Pretreatment of Wastewater


13.55.110 Pretreatment facilities.

Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in Article II of this chapter, within the time limitations specified by the director. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the city under the provisions of this chapter. (Code 1985, § 22-72A).


13.55.120 Additional pretreatment measures.

Whenever deemed necessary, the director may require industrial users to restrict the industrial user’s discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the municipal wastewater system and determine the industrial user’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

(1) Each person discharging, into the municipal wastewater system, greater than 100,000 gallons per day or greater than five percent of the average daily flow in the system, whichever is lesser, shall install and maintain, on his property and at his expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow over a 24-hour period. The facility shall have a capacity for at least 50 percent of the daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms and a rate of discharge controller, the regulation of which shall be directed by the director. A wastewater permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. The director may require such facility for lesser discharges in any case.

(2) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided, when in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, flammable substances, sand, or other harmful substances; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the director and shall be so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner, at his expense.

(3) Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. (Code 1985, § 22-72B).


13.55.130 Accidental discharge/slug control plans.

The director may require any industrial user to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two years, the director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs such a plan. Any industrial user required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following:

(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges.

(2) Description of stored chemicals.

(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the municipal wastewater system of any accidental or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the prohibited discharges in Article II of this chapter.

(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accident. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. (Code 1985, § 22-72C).


13.55.140 Tenant responsibility.

Any person who shall occupy the industrial user’s premises as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter in the same manner as the owner. (Code 1985, § 22-72D).


13.55.150 Separation of domestic and industrial wastestreams.

All new and domestic wastewaters from rest rooms, showers, drinking fountains, etc. shall be kept separate from all industrial wastewaters until the industrial wastewaters have passed through a required pretreatment system and the industrial user’s monitoring facility. When directed to do so by the director, industrial users must separate existing domestic wastestreams from industrial waste-streams. (Code 1985, § 22-72E).


13.55.160 Hauled wastewater.

Septic tank waste (septage) will not be accepted into the municipal wastewater system. (Code 1985, § 22-72F).


13.55.170 Vandalism.

No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the municipal wastewater system. Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in Article XI of this chapter. (Code 1985, § 22-72G).

Article IV. Wastewater Permit Eligibility


13.55.180 Wastewater survey.

When requested by the director all industrial users must submit information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater survey prior to commencing their discharge. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the industrial user and shall be considered a violation of this chapter. (Code 1985, § 22-73A).


13.55.190 Wastewater permit requirement.

(1) It shall be unlawful for significant industrial users to discharge wastewater into the city’s sanitary sewer system without first obtaining a wastewater permit from the director. Any violation of the terms and conditions of the wastewater permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the industrial user to the sanctions set out in Articles XI through XIII of this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to obtain other permits required by federal, state, or local law.

(2) The director may require other industrial users, including liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. (Code 1985, § 22-73B).


13.55.200 Permitting existing connections.

Any significant industrial user which discharges industrial waste into the municipal wastewater system prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 90 days after said date, apply to the city for a wastewater permit in accordance with SCC 13.55.230, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the system to continue after 180 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter except in accordance with a permit issued by the director. (Code 1985, § 22-73C).


13.55.210 Permitting new connections.

Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging industrial wastes into the municipal wastewater system must obtain a wastewater permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge. An application for this permit must be filed at least 90 days prior to the anticipated start-up date. (Code 1985, § 22-73D).


13.55.220 Permitting extrajurisdictional industrial users.

Any existing significant industrial user located beyond the city limits shall submit a permit application, in accordance with SCC 13.55.230, within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. New significant industrial users located beyond the city limits shall submit such applications to the director 90 days prior to any proposed discharge into the municipal system. Upon review of such application, the director may enter into a contract with the industrial user which requires the industrial user to subject itself to and abide by this chapter, including all permitting, compliance monitoring, reporting, and enforcement provisions herein. Alternately, the director may enter into an agreement with the neighboring jurisdiction in which the significant industrial user is located to provide for the implementation and enforcement of pretreatment program requirements against said user. (Code 1985, § 22-73E).


13.55.230 Wastewater permit application contents.

In order to be considered for a wastewater permit, all industrial users required to have a permit must submit the following information on an application form approved by the director.

(1) Name, mailing address, and location (if different from the mailing address);

(2) Environmental control permits held by or for the facility;

(3) Standard industrial classification (SIC) codes for pretreatment applicable to the industry as a whole and any processes for which categorical pretreatment standards have been promulgated;

(4) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used at the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the municipal system;

(5) Number and type of employees, and hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system;

(6) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production;

(7) Type and amount of raw materials process (average and maximum per day);

(8) The site plans, floor plans and mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation, and all points of discharge;

(9) Time and duration of the discharge;

(10) Measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the municipal system from regulated process streams as necessary to use the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e);

(11) Daily maximum, daily average, and monthly average wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variation, if any;

(12) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any federal, state, or local standards, pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; and nature and concentration (or mass if pretreatment standard requires) of regulated pollutants in each regulated process (daily maximum and average concentration or mass when required by a pretreatment standard). Sampling and analysis will be undertaken in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136;

(13) A statement reviewed by an authorized representative of the user and certified to by a qualified professional indicating whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, what additional pretreatment is necessary;

(14) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the standards, then the industrial user shall indicate the shortest time schedule necessary to accomplish installation or adoption of such additional treatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply to this schedule:

(a) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events exclude hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, beginning operation, and conducting routine operation). No increment referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall exceed nine months, nor shall the total compliance period exceed 18 months.

(b) No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the director including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied within the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director;

(15) Any other information as may be deemed by the director to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.

Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the industrial user for revision. (Code 1985, § 22-73F).


13.55.240 Application signatories and certification.

All permit applications and industrial user reports must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user:

I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 

(Code 1985, § 22-73G).


13.55.250 Wastewater permit decisions.

The director will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete permit application, the director will deter-mine whether or not to issue a wastewater permit. If no determination is made within this time period, the application will be deemed denied. (Code 1985, § 22-73H).

Article V. Wastewater Permit Issuance Process


13.55.260 Wastewater permit duration.

Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the director. Each permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. (Code 1985, § 22-74A).


13.55.270 Wastewater permit contents.

Wastewater permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the municipal wastewater system.

(1) Wastewater permits must contain the following conditions:

(a) A statement that indicates permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years.

(b) A statement that the permit is nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from the city, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing permit.

(c) Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable standards in federal, state and local law.

(d) Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and local law.

(e) Statements of applicable penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and compliance schedules.

(2) Permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following:

(a) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.

(b) Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties.

(c) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works.

(d) Development and implementation of spill control plans or other     special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges.

(e) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal wastewater system.

(f) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the system.

(g) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment.

(h) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests, and reporting schedules.

(i) Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within 30 days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s).

(j) Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and requirements.

(k) Requirements for submission of periodic self-monitoring or special notification reports.

(l) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified in SCC 13.55.440 and affording the director or his representatives access thereto.

(m) Requirements for prior notification and approval by the director of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of any significant change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to introduction in the system.

(n) Requirements for the prior notification and approval by the director of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee.

(o) Requirements for immediate notification of excessive, accidental, or slug discharges, or any discharge which could cause any problems to the system.

(p) A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the permit.

(q) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules and regulations for the term of the permit. (Code 1985, § 22-74B).


13.55.280 Wastewater permit appeals.

Any person, including the industrial user, may petition to the city to reconsider the terms of the permit within 10 days of the notice.

(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.

(2) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the permit.

(3) The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.

(4) If the city fails to act within 15 days of the receipt of the petition, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a permit, not to issue a permit, or not to modify a permit shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.

(5) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the circuit court for the city of Staunton, Virginia, within 30 days. (Code 1985, § 22-74C).


13.55.290 Wastewater permit modification.

The director may modify the permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:

(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.

(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of permit issuance.

(3) A change in the municipal wastewater system that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.

(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city’s municipal wastewater system, city personnel, or the receiving waters.

(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater permit.

(6) Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting.

(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.

(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the permit.

(9) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator.

The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification does not stay any permit condition. (Code 1985, § 22-74D).


13.55.300 Wastewater permit transfer.

Permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator with prior approval of the director if the permittee gives at least 30 days’ advance notice to the director. The notice must include a written certification by the new owner which:

(1) States that the new owner has no immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes.

(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur.

(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing permit.

Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater permit voidable on the date of facility transfer. (Code 1985, § 22-74E).


13.55.310 Wastewater permit revocation.

Wastewater permits may be revoked for the following reasons:

(1) Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;

(2) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;

(3) Tampering with monitoring equipment;

(4) Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records;

(5) Failure to meet effluent limitations;

(6) Failure to pay fines;

(7) Failure to pay sewer charges;

(8) Failure to meet compliance schedules;

(9) Failure to complete a wastewater survey;

(10) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility;

(11) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any terms of the permit or this chapter.

Permits shall be voidable upon nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater permit. (Code 1985, § 22-74F).


13.55.320 Wastewater permit reissuance.

A significant industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in accordance with SCC 13.55.230 a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing permit. (Code 1985, § 22-74G).


13.55.330 Municipal user permits.

In the event another municipality contributes all or a portion of its wastewater to the municipal wastewater system, the city may require this municipality to apply and obtain a municipal user permit.

(1) A municipal user permit application shall include:

(a) A description of the quality and volume of its wastewater at the point it enters the city’s system.

(b) An inventory of all industrial users discharging to the municipality.

(c) Such other information as may be required by the director.

(2) A municipal user permit shall contain the following conditions:

(a) A requirement for the municipal user to adopt both a sewer use ordinance, and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in SCC 13.55.070.

(b) A requirement for the municipal user to submit a revised industrial user inventory on at least an annual basis.

(c) Requirements for the municipal user to conduct pretreatment implementation activities including industrial user permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement as needed.

(d) A requirement for the municipal user to provide the city with access to all information that the municipal user obtains as part of its pretreatment activities.

(e) Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the municipal user’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the municipal wastewater system.

(f) Requirements for monitoring the municipal user’s discharge.

(3) Violation of the terms and conditions of the municipal user’s permit subjects the municipal user to the sanctions set out in Articles X and XI of this chapter. (Code 1985, § 22-74H).

Article VI. Reporting Requirements


13.55.340 Baseline monitoring reports.

Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the municipal system shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in subsection (1) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, including existing users which have changed their operation or processes so as to become new sources, shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in subsection (1) of this section. A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.

(1) The information required by this section includes:

(a) Identifying Information. The user shall submit the name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners.

(b) Permits. The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.

(c) Description of Operations. The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the system from the regulated processes.

(d) Flow Measurement. The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the system from regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).

(e) Measurement of Pollutants.

(i) The industrial user shall identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.

(ii) In addition, the industrial user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or city) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out in 40 CFR Part 136.

(iii) A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. All other pollutants will be measured by composite samples obtained through flow-proportional sampling techniques. If flow-proportional composite sampling is infeasible, samples may be obtained through time- proportional sampling techniques or through four grab samples if the user proves such a sample will be representative of the discharge.

(f) Special Certification. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required in order to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.

(g) Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this article must meet the requirements set out in SCC 13.55.230(14).

(h) All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with SCC 13.55.240. (Code 1985, § 22-75A).


13.55.350 Compliance deadline reports.

Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report containing the information described in SCC 13.55.340(1)(e) and (f). For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with SCC 13.55.240. (Code 1985, § 22-75B).


13.55.360 Periodic compliance reports.

Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard shall, at a frequency determined by the director but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with SCC 13.55.240.

(1) All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.

(2) In the event an industrial user’s monitoring results indicates a violation has occurred, the industrial user must immediately notify the director and resample its discharge. The industrial user must report the results of the repeated sampling within 30 days of discovering the first violation. (Code 1985, § 22-75C).


13.55.370 Report of changed conditions.

Each industrial user is required to notify the director of any planned significant changes to the industrial user’s operations or pretreatment systems which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater.

(1) The director may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater permit application under SCC 13.55.230, if necessary.

(2) The director may issue a wastewater permit under SCC 13.55.250 or modify an existing wastewater permit under SCC 13.55.290.

(3) No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition(s) until and unless the director has responded to the industrial user’s notice.

(4) For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of 10 percent or greater and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants shall be deemed significant. (Code 1985, § 22-75D).


13.55.380 Reports of potential problems.

Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental or intentional discharges of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent the discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s or user’s own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user’s facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.

(1) No industrial user which commences contribution to the system after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city.

(2) In the case of an accidental or other discharge which may cause potential problems for the municipal wastewater system, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the city of the incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.

(3) Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the system, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter.

(4) Failure to notify the city of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this chapter.

(5) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (2) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. (Code 1985, § 22-75E).


13.55.390 Reports from noncategorical users.

All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required to obtain a wastewater permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the director may require. (Code 1985, § 22-75F).


13.55.400 Violation report – Repeat sampling.

If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user must notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is not required to resample if the city performs monitoring at the industrial user’s at least once a month, or if the city performs sampling between the industrial user’s initial sampling and when the industrial user receives the results of this sampling. (Code 1985, § 22-75G).


13.55.410 Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.

(1) Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the city, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the wastewater system of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more than 10 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the wastewater system, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user; an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under SCC 13.55.370.

(2) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (1) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.

Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.

(3) In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the city, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.

(4) In the case of any notification made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. (Code 1985, § 22-75H).


13.55.420 Sample collection.

Except as indicated in subsection (1) of this section, wastewater samples collected for purposes of determining industrial user compliance with pretreatment standards and requirements must be obtained using flow-proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow-proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time-proportional sampling.

(1) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, toxicity, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds.

(2) Samples must be obtained using grab collection techniques. (Code 1985, § 22-75I).


13.55.430 Analytical requirements.

All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 or, if 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA and the city. (Code 1985, § 22-75J).


13.55.440 Monitoring charges.

The director may recover the city’s expenses incurred in collecting and analyzing samples of the industrial user’s discharge by adding the costs to the industrial user’s sewer charges. (Code 1985, § 22-75K).


13.55.450 Timing.

Written reports will be deemed to have been transmitted at the time of deposit, postage prepaid into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service. (Code 1985, § 22-75L).


13.55.460 Record keeping.

Any industrial user subject to reporting requirements herein shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities. Such records shall include for all samples:

(1) The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the persons taking the samples;

(2) The dates analyses were performed;

(3) Who performed the analyses;

(4) The results of such analyses. 

Such industrial user shall be required to retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not required by this section) and shall make the same available for inspection and copying by the director. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or when requested by the director. (Code 1985, § 22-75M).

Article VII. Compliance Monitoring


13.55.470 Inspection and sampling.

The city shall have the right to enter the facilities of any industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Industrial users shall allow the director or his representatives ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.

(1) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, state and U.S. EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.

(2) The city, state, and U.S. EPA shall have the right to set up or require installation of, on the industrial user’s property, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, and/or metering of the user’s operations.

(3) The city may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment, as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the industrial user at the industrial user’s expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated periodically to ensure their accuracy.

(4) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the industrial user.

(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing city personnel access to the industrial user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter. (Code 1985, § 22-76A).


13.55.480 Search warrants.

If the director has been refused access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof, and if the director has probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the city designed to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then upon application by the city attorney, the district court judge of the city shall issue a search and/or seizure warrant describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized on the property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the director in the company of a uniformed police officer of the city. In the event of an emergency affecting public health and safety, or if the industrial user consents, inspections shall be made without the issuance of a warrant. (Code 1985, § 22-76B).

Article VIII. Confidential Information


13.55.490 Availability to the public.

Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, and monitoring programs, and from city inspection and sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law.

(1) Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data” as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction.

(2) When requested and demonstrated by the industrial user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. (Code 1985, § 22-77).

Article IX. Significant Noncompliance


13.55.500 Publication of users in significant noncompliance.

The city shall annually publish, in the largest daily newspaper circulated in the area where the municipal wastewater system is located, a list of the industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean:

(1) Sixty-six percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the discharge limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;

(2) Thirty-three percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);

(3) Any other discharge violation that the city believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of city personnel or the general public);

(4) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment or has resulted in the city’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;

(5) Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;

(6) Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports in compliance with compliance schedules;

(7) Failure to report noncompliance; or

(8) Any other violation(s) which the city has reason to believe is significant. (Code 1985, § 22-78).

Article X. Administrative Enforcement Remedies


13.55.510 Notification of violation.

Whenever the director finds that any industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter, a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the director or his agent may serve upon said user a written notice of violation. Within 10 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take emergency action without first using a notice of violation. (Code 1985, § 22-79A).


13.55.520 Consent orders.

The director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the industrial user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the industrial user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to SCC 13.55.540 and 13.55.550 and shall be judicially enforceable. (Code 1985, § 22-79B).


13.55.530 Show cause hearing.

The director may order any industrial user which causes or contributes to violation(s) of this chapter, wastewater permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement to appear before the director and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the industrial user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the industrial user. Whether or not the industrial user appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. (Code 1985, § 22-79C).


13.55.540 Compliance orders.

When the director finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, he may issue an order to the industrial user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. Furthermore, the director may continue to require such additional self-monitoring for at least 90 days after consistent compliance has been achieved, after which time the self-monitoring conditions in the discharge permit shall control. (Code 1985, § 22-79D).


13.55.550 Cease and desist orders.

When the director finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the director may issue an order to the industrial user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:

(1) Immediately comply with all requirements.

(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. (Code 1985, § 22-79E).


13.55.560 Administrative fines.

Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any user which is found to have violated any provision of this chapter, permits and orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $25,000. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per- day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term-average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each business day during the period of violation.

(1) Assessments may be added to the user’s next scheduled sewer service charge and the director shall have such other collection remedies as may be available for other service charges and fees.

(2) Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of 20 percent of the unpaid balance and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of seven percent per month. Furthermore, these unpaid charges, fines and penalties, together with interest therefrom shall constitute a lien against the individual user’s property.

(3) Industrial users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the director to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 10 days of being notified of the fine. Where the director believes a request has merit, he shall convene a hearing on the matter within 15 days of receiving the request from the industrial user. In the event the user’s appeal is successful the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the industrial user. The city may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. (Code 1985, § 22-79F).


13.55.570 Emergency suspensions.

The director may suspend the wastewater permit of an industrial user, for a period not to exceed 30 days, whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, interferes with the operation of the municipal wastewater system, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment.

(1) Any industrial user notified of a suspension of its wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of an industrial user’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the system, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director shall allow the industrial user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in SCC 13.55.580 are initiated against the user.

(2) An industrial user which is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the director prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under SCC 13.55.530 and 13.55.580. (Code 1985, § 22-79G).


13.55.580 Termination of permit.

In addition to those provisions in SCC 13.55.310, any industrial user which violates the following conditions of this section or orders issued hereunder is subject to permit termination:

(1) Violation of permit conditions.

(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge.

(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge.

(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling.

Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and be offered an opportunity to show cause under SCC 13.55.530 why the proposed action should not be taken. (Code 1985, § 22-79H).

Article XI. Judicial Enforcement Remedies


13.55.590 Injunctive relief.

Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the director, through the city’s attorney, may petition the circuit court for the city of Staunton, Virginia, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as may be appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the industrial user. Such other action as may be appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the city. The court shall grant an injunction without requiring a showing of a lack of an adequate remedy at law. (Code 1985, § 22-80A).


13.55.600 Civil penalties.

Any industrial user which has violated or continues to violate this chapter, any order or permit hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall be liable to the director for a maximum civil penalty of $25,000 per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term-average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each business day during the period of the violation.

(1) The director may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.

(2) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the industrial user’s violation, corrective actions by the industrial user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.

(3) Where appropriate, the director may accept mitigation projects in lieu of the payment of civil penalties where the project provides a valuable service to the city and the industrial user’s expense in undertaking the project is at least 150 percent of the civil penalty. (Code 1985, § 22-80B).


13.55.610 Criminal prosecution.

(1) Any industrial user who willfully or negligently violates any provisions of this chapter, any orders or permits issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year or both.

(2) Any industrial user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year or both.

(3) In the event of a second conviction, the user shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed $3,000 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than three years or both. (Code 1985, § 22-80C).

Article XII. Supplemental Enforcement Action


13.55.620 Performance bonds.

The director may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, any orders, or a previous permit issued hereunder unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. (Code 1985, § 22-81A).


13.55.630 Liability insurance.

The director may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, any orders, or a previous permit issued hereunder, unless the industrial user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the municipal wastewater system caused by its discharge. (Code 1985, § 22-81B).


13.55.640 Water supply severance.

Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, orders, or permits issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (Code 1985, § 22-81C).


13.55.650 Public nuisances.

Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent limitations of this chapter, permits, or orders issued hereunder is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director or his designee. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of SCC 9.05.190 governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance. (Code 1985, § 22-81D).


13.55.660 Informant rewards.

The director is authorized to pay up to $500.00 for information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by an industrial user. In the event that the information provided results in an administrative fine or civil penalty levied against the industrial user, the director is authorized to disperse up to 10 percent of the collected fine or penalty to the informant. However, a single reward payment may not exceed $10,000. (Code 1985, § 22-81E).


13.55.670 Contractor listing.

Industrial users which have not achieved consistent compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held by an industrial user found to be in significant violation of pretreatment standards may be terminated at the discretion of the city. (Code 1985, § 22-81F).

Article XIII. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations


13.55.680 Upset.

An upset shall be an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against a user or violating a pretreatment standard and requirement if the following conditions are met:

(1) The user can identify the cause of the upset;

(2) The facility was operating in a prudent and workmanlike manner at the time of the upset and was in compliance with applicable O&M procedures;

(3) The user submits, within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset, a description of the discharge and its causes, the period of noncompliance (if not corrected, then time noncompliance is anticipated to end), and the steps being taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance;

(4) If this report is given orally, the user must also submit a written report containing such information within five days unless waived by the director;

(5) Upset shall mean an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards and requirements because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. Noncompliance caused by operational error, improperly designed pretreatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation does not constitute an upset. (Code 1985, § 22-82A).


13.55.690 General and specific prohibitions.

An industrial user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions in SCC 13.55.050 if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its discharge would cause pass through or interference and that either: (1) a local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the pass through or interference, or (2) no local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. (Code 1985, § 22-82B).


13.55.700 Bypass.

The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an individual user’s treatment facility shall be an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against the industrial user if the user can demonstrate that such a bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage. In order to be eligible for the affirmative defense, the industrial user must demonstrate that there was no feasible alternative to the bypass and submit notice of the bypass as required by 40 CFR 403.17. (Code 1985, § 22-82C).

Article XIV. Miscellaneous Provisions


13.55.710 Pretreatment charges and fees.

The city may adopt reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city’s pretreatment program which may include:

(1) Fees for permit applications including the cost of processing such applications;

(2) Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures including the cost of reviewing monitoring reports submitted by industrial users;

(3) Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;

(4) Fees for filing appeals;

(5) Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the city. (Code 1985, § 22-83A).


13.55.720 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Code 1985, § 22-83B).


13.55.730 Conflicts.

All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict. (Code 1985, § 22-83C).


13.55.740 Effective date.

This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately following its passage, approval and publication. (Code 1985, § 22-84; Ord. 4-23-92).


Chapter 13.60 NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE

Sections:

13.60.010    Purpose and authority.

13.60.020    Definitions.

13.60.030    Applicability.

13.60.040    Discharges to the city’s storm sewer system or local waters.

13.60.050    Right of entry.

13.60.060    Require the use of best management practices.

13.60.070    Reporting requirements.

13.60.080    Violations, enforcement, and penalties.

13.60.090    Compatibility with other permit and title requirements.

13.60.095    Severability.


13.60.010 Purpose and authority.

The purpose of this Division IV of this title is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Staunton and to protect the quality of state and local waters from the potential harm of non-stormwater discharges. Pollutants in stormwater from many sources have an adverse impact upon the quality of receiving waters. Major sources of stormwater that cause water quality impacts include construction sites, illicit connections, illicit discharges and industrial activities. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit requirements for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) require the city of Staunton to control through ordinance, permit, contract or other available means the contribution of pollutants into the city’s storm sewer system and local waters. Division IV of this title seeks to advance these purposes through the following initiatives:

(1) Regulate non-stormwater discharges entering the city’s storm sewer system and local waters;

(2) Establish methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city’s storm sewer system and local waters in compliance with requirements of the Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System’s (VPDES) General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems;

(3) Establish local legal authority to carry out inspections, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this title;

(4) Seek to assure compliance with the applicable provisions of Virginia law. (Ord. 2016-16).


13.60.020 Definitions.

Words and phrases used and contained in this Division IV of this title shall have the meanings ascribed to them by Section 9 VAC 25-870-10 of the Virginia Stormwater Management Program Regulations, as amended. The following words and terms used in Division IV of this title have the following meanings unless otherwise specified herein. If definitions differ or conflict, those prescribed by Section 9 VAC 25-870-10 and incorporated herein shall have precedence and control unless the context demonstrates otherwise.

(1) “Administrator” means the designated city staff person or department responsible for administering the Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Program on behalf of the locality. The administrator for the city of Staunton shall be the city engineer or designee or other person designated by the city manager.

(2) “Best management practice (BMP)” means a schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into the city’s storm sewer system or local waters.

(3) “Hazardous material” means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.

(4) “Illicit connection” means any connection, in any manner whatsoever, to the city’s storm sewer system or local waters which is not authorized by applicable state law or city ordinance, and which has not been approved by the city in accordance with applicable city ordinances.

(5) “Illicit discharge” means any discharge to the city’s storm sewer system or local waters that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to a separate VPDES or state permit (other than the state permit for discharges from the city’s MS4), discharges resulting from firefighting activities, and discharges identified by and in compliance with this Division IV of this title.

(6) “Local waters” means all water, on the surface and underground, wholly or partially within or bordering the city of Staunton or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands.

(7) “Non-stormwater discharge” means any discharge to the storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

(8) “Pollutant” means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides; herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.

(9) “Pollution prevention plan” means a document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that details the design, installation, implementation and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants.

(10) “Storm sewer system” means publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage structures.

(11) “Stormwater” means any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. (Ord. 2016-16).


13.60.030 Applicability.

Provisions of this Division IV of this title shall apply to all activities that cause or allow to be caused direct or indirect illicit discharges and illicit connections to the city’s storm sewer system or local waters. (Ord. 2016-16).


13.60.040 Discharges to the city’s storm sewer system or local waters.

(1) It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Division IV of this title to:

(a) Cause or allow any illicit discharge to the city’s storm sewer system or local waters;

(b) Cause or allow any illicit connection to the city’s storm sewer system or local waters;

(c) Dump or discharge, or to allow another person to dump or discharge, refuse, garbage, trash, litter, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings and industrial solid waste, or any other material or pollutant, natural or synthetic, into the city’s storm sewer system or local waters, unless the dumping or discharge is expressly authorized by the code of the city of Staunton; or

(d) Violate any condition or provision of this Division IV of this title, or any permit or approval granted to allow any stormwater discharge to the city’s storm sewer system or local waters.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Division IV of this title, the following activities shall not be unlawful illicit discharges:

(a) Discharges from public safety activities, including, but not limited to, law enforcement and fire suppression;

(b) Discharges associated with any breakages or the maintenance or repair of public water, sanitary and storm sewer lines and public drinking water reservoirs and drinking water treatment or distributions systems conducted in accordance with applicable federal and state regulations and standards;

(c) Discharges associated with any activity by the city, city employees and designees, in the maintenance of any component of a city-maintained stormwater management facility conducted in accordance with applicable federal and state regulations and standards;

(d) Discharges specified in writing by the administrator or designee as being necessary to protect public health and safety;

(e) Water line flushing;

(f) Landscape irrigation;

(g) Diverted stream flows or rising groundwaters;

(h) Infiltration of uncontaminated groundwater (as defined by 40 CFR 35.2005(20));

(i) Pumping of uncontaminated groundwater;

(j) Discharge from potable water sources, foundation drains, irrigation water, springs, crawl spaces or footing drains;

(k) Air conditioning condensation;

(l) Lawn watering;

(m) House washing;

(n) Noncommercial washing of vehicles;

(o) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges with pH between 6.0 to 8.0 standard units, at ambient water temperature, and with less than one parts per 1,000,000 of chlorine;

(p) Street washing;

(q) Application of salts or other de-icing substances to streets, sidewalks and parking lots;

(r) Discharges associated with dye testing, provided that the administrator is given a verbal notification prior to the time of the test.

(3) If any activity listed in subsection (2) of this section is found by the administrator or designee to be a source of pollutants to the city’s storm sewer system or local waters, the administrator or designee shall serve a written notice on the party responsible for the activity which orders that the activity be ceased or conducted in a manner that will avoid the discharges of pollutants to the city’s storm sewer system or local waters. The notice shall state the date by which the activity shall cease or be conducted without pollution. Failure to comply with such order within the time stated in the notice shall result in the revocation of any exemption listed in subsection (2) of this section and constitute a violation of this Division IV of this title. (Ord. 2016-16).


13.60.050 Right of entry.

In order to assure compliance with the provisions of this Division IV of this title, and all applicable city ordinances, state and federal laws, orders or regulations, the administrator or designee shall have the right to inspect any property, public or private, within the city at any reasonable time. In the event the administrator or designee shall be denied access to property, the administrator or designee may present sworn testimony to a magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction and if such sworn testimony establishes probable cause that a violation of this title has occurred, request that the magistrate or court grant the administrator or designee an inspection warrant to enable the administrator or designee to enter the property for the purpose of determining whether a violation of this title exists. The administrator or designee shall make a reasonable effort to obtain consent from the owner or occupant of the subject property prior to seeking the issuance of an inspection warrant under this section. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to deny the administrator or designee access to any property after the administrator or designee has obtained an inspection warrant from the magistrate or a court of competent jurisdiction for the inspection of such property. (Ord. 2016-16).


13.60.060 Require the use of best management practices.

The city may require the use of best management practices (BMPs) to prevent, control and reduce stormwater pollutants for any activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of the city’s storm sewer system or local waters. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at the expense of the owner or operator, reasonable protection from accidental discharges of prohibited materials or other wastes into the city’s storm sewer system or local waters through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs. Furthermore, any person responsible for a property or premises which is or may be the source of any illicit discharges may be required to implement, at such person’s expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs and/or implement a pollution prevention plan to prevent the further discharges of pollutants to the city’s storm sewer system or local waters. (Ord. 2016-16).


13.60.070 Reporting requirements.

Illicit discharges to the city’s storm sewer system or local waters are prohibited. Any person owning or occupying a premises or facility thereon who has knowledge of a discharge of pollutants from those premises or facilities which might result in a violation of the prohibitions found in SCC 13.60.040 shall immediately take action to abate the discharge and shall notify the city within 24 hours of the discharge. Discharges of hazardous materials or hazardous substances shall be immediately reported by calling “911.” Failure to report a discharge as provided above is a violation of this title. (Ord. 2016-16).


13.60.080 Violations, enforcement, and penalties.

(1) Notice of Violation. Whenever the administrator or designee finds that a person or entity has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Division IV of this title, the administrator or designee may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible party. The notice of violation shall contain at least the following information:

(a) The name and address of the alleged violator;

(b) The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred;

(c) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;

(d) A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this Division IV of this title and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;

(e) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed;

(f) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the administrator by filing a written notice of appeal not later than 30 days of service of the notice of violation; and

(g) A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore compliance within the established time schedule, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.

(h) The notice of violation may require without limitation:

(i) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;

(ii) The elimination of illicit connections and/or discharges;

(iii) That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and desist;

(iv) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;

(v) Payment of the costs to cover administration and remediation; and

(vi) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.

(2) Any person who commits any act prohibited by this Division IV of this title shall be liable to the city for all costs of testing, containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and disposal of any substance unlawfully discharged into the city’s storm sewer system or local waters.

(3) Any person or entity who commits any act prohibited by this Division IV of this title shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for each day that the violation continues. The court assessing such penalty may, at its discretion, order that the penalty be paid into the treasury of the city for the purpose of abating, preventing or mitigating environmental pollution.

(4) In addition to other remedies provided by the code of the city of Staunton and the Code of Virginia, any costs or fees that may be charged pursuant to this Division IV of this title that remain unpaid for more than 30 days after a bill or invoice was sent for such cost or fees, shall:

(a) Be reported and referred to the city treasurer who shall include those unpaid costs or fees in the next regular real estate tax bill sent to the owner of the real estate at which the cost of fees were incurred. All such unpaid costs and fees once reported and referred to the city treasurer shall constitute a lien against such real estate, and shall be collected as other taxes and liens are collected; or

(b) Be referred to the city attorney for collection through appropriate civil action.

(5) A willful violation of the provisions of Division IV of this title shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor each day that a violation of this title is maintained or permitted to remain shall constitute a separate offense.

(6) The city may elect to take any or all of the above remedies concurrently in any combination, and the pursuit of one or more remedies shall not preclude the pursuit of others. (Ord. 2016-16).


13.60.090 Compatibility with other permit and title requirements.

The provisions of this Division IV of this title are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of Division IV of this title should be considered minimum requirements, and when any provision of Division IV of this title imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. (Ord. 2016-16).


13.60.095 Severability.

If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Division IV of this title shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgement shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Division IV of this title. (Ord. 2016-16).


Title 14            

(Reserved)

 


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS*

Chapters:

15.05    In General

15.10    Building Code

15.15    Repealed

15.20    Unsafe Buildings

15.25    Fire Prevention Code

*Charter reference – General authority of council as to building regulations, § 11(18,19).

Cross references – Fire warning system, Ch. 8.15 SCC; limitation on building operations at night, SCC 8.25.170; streets and sidewalks generally, Title 12; street numbers for buildings, SCC 12.05.080; obstruction of streets or sidewalks during building operations, SCC 12.05.120; erosion and sediment control, Title 13, Division I; water supply, Title 13, Division II; sewers and sewage disposal, Title 13, Division III; fire prevention code, Ch. 15.25 SCC; subdivisions, Title 17; zoning, Title 18.

State law reference – General authority of city relative to building regulations, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1117 and 36-97 et seq.


Chapter 15.05 IN GENERAL

Sections:

15.05.010    Violations of title generally.

15.05.020    Department of building inspection generally – Appointment and removal of building official.

15.05.030    Maintenance of buildings and structures.


15.05.010 Violations of title generally.

(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided, any person who shall violate any provision of this title or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, repair or maintain a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building official or housing official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this title, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by fine of not more than $2,500.

(2) The imposition of the penalty described in subsection (1) of this section shall not preclude the city attorney from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction, to restrain, correct or abate a violation, to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or use of a building or structure in or about any premises. (Code 1964, §§ 8-51, 8-52; Code 1985, § 9-1; Ord. 2-27-97).


15.05.020 Department of building inspection generally – Appointment and removal of building official.

(1) The department of building inspection of the city is hereby created and the executive officer in charge thereof shall be known as the building official.

(2) The building official shall be appointed by the city manager and he shall not be removed from office except for cause and after opportunity has been granted him to be heard on specific relevant charges by and before the city manager.

(3) The building official hereby appointed shall also be the code official for the purposes set forth in this title, in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and as generally set forth in other chapters of this code, including Chapter 15.25 SCC. Wherever the term “building official” or the term “code official” appears herein, the term refers to one and the same person. (Code 1964, §§ 8-3, 8-4; Code 1985, § 9-2; Ord. 12-11-97).


15.05.030 Maintenance of buildings and structures.

(1) This section governs the maintenance of buildings and structures and all parts thereof, including residential housing, which existed or were under construction prior to September 1, 1973, and new buildings and structures built after September 1, 1973.

(2) All buildings and structures and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All service equipment, means of egress, devices and safeguards which are required by this title in a building or structure when erected, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order.

(3) The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for the safe and sanitary maintenance of a building or structure and its exit way facilities at all times. (Code 1964, § 8-45; Code 1985, § 9-3).


Chapter 15.10 BUILDING CODE

Sections:

Article I. Generally

15.10.010    Adopted.

15.10.020    Interpretation.

15.10.030    Enforcement.

15.10.040    Liability for expenses incurred by city in connection with code violations.

15.10.050    Board of building code appeals.

15.10.060    Electrical review board.

15.10.070    Plumbing and mechanical review board.

15.10.080    Fire limits.

15.10.090    Exemptions from permit requirements.

15.10.100    Bond as prerequisite to issuance of permit to erect, install, etc., sign.

Article II. Permit Fees

15.10.110    Payment prerequisite to issuance or amendment of permit.

15.10.120    Permit fees.

15.10.130    Repealed.

15.10.140    Repealed.

15.10.150    Repealed.

15.10.160    Repealed.

15.10.170    Repealed.

Article I. Generally


15.10.010 Adopted.

The Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code as adopted and as amended from time to time by the State Board of Housing and Community Development, of which not less than three copies are filed and maintained up-to-date in the office of the clerk of the council, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if set forth at length herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction and maintenance of buildings and structures within the area of jurisdiction of the city. (Code 1964, § 8-1; Ord. 1-14-82; Code 1985, § 9-14; Ord. 9-25-86; Ord. 6-25-91; Ord. 12-11-97).

Charter reference – Authority of council to provide a building code for city, § 11(18).

State law reference – Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq.


15.10.020 Interpretation.

The following rules of interpretation shall apply to the building code adopted in this chapter:

(1) References to the municipality shall mean the city of Staunton, Virginia.

(2) Where reference is made to the chief appointing authority, it shall mean the city manager.

(3) Where reference is made to the board of appeals described in Section 118.0 of such building code, it shall mean the board of building code appeals established by SCC 15.10.050. (Code 1964, § 8-1; Ord. 1-14-82; Code 1985, § 9-15).


15.10.030 Enforcement.

The building official (code official) shall enforce all the provisions of and shall have all the powers as set forth in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code as adopted and amended herein before set forth. (Code 1964, § 8-5; Code 1985, § 9-16; Ord. 9-25-86, § 2; Ord. 12-11-97).

State law reference – Local enforcement of Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-105.


15.10.040 Liability for expenses incurred by city in connection with code violations.

In addition to any penalty that may be imposed for a violation of the building code adopted by SCC 15.10.010, the person convicted of such violation shall pay all costs and expenses, with legal interest thereon, incurred by the city in connection with such violation. (Code 1964, § 8-53; Code 1985, § 9-17).


15.10.050 Board of building code appeals.

(1) There is hereby established a board, to be called the board of building code appeals, in lieu of the board of appeals as set forth in Section 118.0 of Volume 1, New Construction Code and Section 107.0 of Volume 11, Building Maintenance Code of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code.

(2) The board of building code appeals shall consist of five members. Such board shall be composed of one architect, one general contractor or engineer and three members at large from the building industry. The board shall be appointed by the city council, which shall set such qualifications and terms for service on the board as it shall deem appropriate.

(3) All hearings of the board of building code appeals shall be public and the appellant, his representative, the building official, the code official and any other person whose interest may be affected by the matter on appeal shall be given the opportunity to be heard. The board shall conduct its meetings in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and may, in addition, establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of such code. (Code 1964, §§ 8-6, 8-7; Code 1985, § 9-18; Ord. 9-25-86, § 3).

Cross reference – Appeal to board of building code appeals from denial of special permit to construct business or industrial structure requiring driveway from public street, SCC 12.20.040.

State law reference – Local board of building code appeals, Code of Virginia, § 36-105.


15.10.060 Electrical review board.

(1) There shall be an electrical review board consisting, insofar as feasible, of one member from the local power company, one master electrician, one journeyman electrician and two freeholders. The members of the board shall be appointed by the city council for five-year terms. The terms of the present members shall continue for the duration of their present appointments or until their successors have been appointed. The electrical inspector shall serve as secretary to the board, but he shall have no vote.

(2) The electrical review board shall elect its own chairman.

(3) The electrical review board shall have all the powers and be subject to all the restrictions provided by state law and city ordinances, but nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the authority or powers of the building official. It shall meet at such times as are fixed by the board.

(4) Whenever the electrical inspector shall reject or refuse to approve the mode or manner of electrical installation proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of an electrical installation, or when it is claimed that the provisions of appropriate regulations and ordinances do not apply, or that an equally good or more desirable form of construction can be employed in any specific case, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of such regulations and ordinances have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such structure or his duly authorized agent may request the building official to refer the decision of the electrical inspector to the electrical review board. Such request shall be filed with the building official within 30 days after the decision of the electrical inspector is rendered. The electrical review board shall set the time of the hearing, which shall not be later than 14 days after the date of the referral from the building official. The electrical review board shall recommend to the building official a proposed decision. (Code 1964, § 8-23; Code 1985, § 9-19).

Cross reference – Appeal to electrical review board from decisions of fire chief or building official concerning fire warning systems, SCC 8.15.010.


15.10.070 Plumbing and mechanical review board.

(1) There shall be a plumbing and mechanical review board consisting, insofar as feasible, of one member from the local gas company, one master plumber, one master heat and gas tradesman and two freeholders. The members of the board shall be appointed by city council for five-year terms. The terms of the present members shall continue for the duration of their present appointments or until their successors have been appointed. The plumbing inspector shall serve as secretary to the board, but he shall have no vote.

(2) The plumbing and mechanical review board shall elect its own chairman.

(3) The plumbing and mechanical review board shall have all the powers and be subject to all the restrictions provided by state law and city ordinances, but nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the authority or powers of the building official. It shall meet at such times as are fixed by the board.

(4) Whenever the plumbing inspector shall reject or refuse to approve the mode or manner of plumbing and mechanical installation proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a plumbing or mechanical installation, or when it is claimed that the provisions of appropriate regulations and ordinances do not apply, or that an equally good or more desirable form of construction can be employed in any specific case, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of the regulations and ordinances have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such structure or his duly authorized agent may request the building official to refer the decision of the plumbing inspector to the plumbing and mechanical review board. Such request shall be filed with the building official within 30 days after the decision of the plumbing inspector is rendered. The plumbing and mechanical review board shall set the time of the hearing, which shall not be later than 14 days after the date of the referral from the building official. The plumbing and mechanical review board shall recommend to the building official a proposed decision. (Code 1964, § 8-43; Code 1985, § 9-20).


15.10.080 Fire limits.

(1) There shall be and there is hereby established a fire district known as the fire limits. The center line of the streets named shall form the boundary line of the fire limits. The fire limits shall include all the territory situated, lying and being within the following described boundaries: beginning at Lewis and Baldwin Streets; east on Baldwin to Augusta Street; south on Augusta to Frederick Street; east on Frederick to Market Street; south on Market to Greenville Avenue; east on Greenville to the C&O Railroad; west along the C&O Railroad to Lewis Street; north on Lewis to the point of beginning.

(2) All areas not included in the fire limits shall be designated as outside fire limits. (Code 1964, § 8-44; Code 1985, § 9-21).


15.10.090 Exemptions from permit requirements.

Except as otherwise required by ordinances of the city, no permit under the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall be required for the following:

(1) The moving of any building 150 square feet or less in size, if the building is not connected to public utilities or will not be connected to public utilities at its new location.

(2) The demolition of any building which is less than 300 square feet in size, unless it is or has been connected to public utilities.

(3) The erection, installation, alteration or replacement of a sign, if the cost is $100.00 or less, unless the sign is illuminated; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to relieve a person erecting, installing, altering or replacing a sign from meeting the requirements of the zoning ordinance of the city. (Code 1964, §§ 8-10 – 8-12; Code 1985, § 9-22; Ord. 2-27-97).

Cross references – Special permit for construction of business or industrial structure requiring driveway from public street, SCC 12.20.020 et seq.; zoning, Title 18.


15.10.100 Bond as prerequisite to issuance of permit to erect, install, etc., sign.

No person shall erect, install, remove or change any sign for which a permit is required under the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code until an approved bond has been filed in such sum as is prescribed by the city and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Such bond shall be conditioned on the construction, erection and maintenance of the sign in accordance with the provisions of this code and such building code and shall protect and save the city harmless from any and all claims or demands for damages by reason of any negligence of the sign hanger or contractor or his agents, or by reason of defects in the construction, or damages resulting from the collapse or failure of the sign or part thereof. (Code 1964, § 8-12; Code 1985, § 9-23).

Article II. Permit Fees


15.10.110 Payment prerequisite to issuance or amendment of permit.

No permit required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code to begin work for new construction, alteration, removal, demolition or other building operation shall be issued until the fees prescribed in this article have been paid to the department of building inspection or other authorized municipal agency, nor shall an amendment be made to such a permit necessitating an additional fee, because of an increase in the estimated cost of the work involved, be approved until the additional fee has been paid. (Code 1964, § 8-8; Code 1985, § 9-29; Ord. 6-26-90).

State law reference – Authority of city to levy fees to defray cost of enforcement of building code, Code of Virginia, § 36-105.


15.10.120 Permit fees.

(1) The fees for building permits shall be as follows:

(a) Building Permit Fees.

	New residential building and residential additions	$0.18 per square foot of area

$75.00 minimum

	Residential alterations permits	$0.18 per square foot of area 

$75.00 minimum

	Residential accessory building	$75.00

	Residential swimming pool	$100.00

	New commercial building and commercial additions	$0.22 per square foot to 5,000 square feet, then $0.12 per square foot, $95.00 minimum

	Commercial alteration or interior up-fit of a shell building	$0.18 per square foot 

$95.00 minimum

	New multifamily building	$0.22 per square foot 

$95.00 minimum

	Commercial shell building	$0.18 per square foot 

$95.00 minimum

	Commercial swimming pool	$200.00

	Tents over 900 square feet	$100.00 per tent

	Elevator installation permits	$150.00 per car

	Sign permits	$95.00 per sign

Note: Square footage shall be measured by the outside dimensions of the structure and shall include all heated and unheated space excluding crawl spaces and unfinishable attics.

(b) Subtrade Permit Fees.

	New residential and residential additions mechanical, plumbing, electrical or gas permits	$90.00

	Residential mechanical w/gas or plumbing w/gas	$150.00

	Residential alterations	$90.00

	Residential repair including water or sewer line replacement or service change	$90.00

	Residential outside gas line and tank	$125.00

	Residential inside gas line	$90.00

	Residential gas combo tank, outside line, and inside line	$150.00

	New commercial and commercial additions mechanical, plumbing, electrical, or gas permits	$0.08 per square foot

$95.00 minimum

	Commercial alteration mechanical, plumbing, electrical, gas, re-roof or sprinkler permits	$0.05 per square foot 

$95.00 minimum

	Commercial hood or hood suppression	$150.00 per hood

	New multifamily buildings	$0.08 per square foot 

$95.00/apt. minimum

	Fire suppression systems (sprinkler systems)	$0.08 per square foot 

$150.00 minimum

	Fire alarm system installation	$250.00

	Water line, sewer line each	$95.00

	Fire main	$125.00

	Storage tank installations	$200.00 per tank

	Electrical for signs	$75.00

(c) Miscellaneous Fees.

	Move building over 150 square feet	$95.00

	Demolition of building over 150 square feet	$95.00

	Plan review prior to permit application	$200.00

	Plan review for revisions or changes to plans	$100.00

	Residential temporary certificate of occupancy	$100.00 for 60 days

	Commercial temporary certificate of occupancy	$250.00 for 60 days

	Certificate of occupancy for existing buildings	$95.00

	Reinspection fee	$50.00

	Modification request application fee	$200.00

	Amusement devices	$100.00 per ride

	Miscellaneous permits for which no fee appears in these tables will be determined by the building official at a rate of	$75.00 per inspection required

(d) Refunds and Renewals.

	Refunds – No work commenced

	 	75 percent of the fee paid in excess of the minimum fee

	Refunds – Work commenced

	 	Greater than 50 percent complete – No refund

	 	50 percent or less completed – 50 percent of the fee paid in excess of the minimum fee

	Permit renewal

	 	$25.00 per each permit

(2) Projects on property owned and operated by the city of Staunton, Virginia, or the school board of the city of Staunton, Virginia, shall be exempt from such building permit fees.

(3) Single-family residential projects which meet all of the following criteria may also be considered for exemption from building permit fees; however, organizations must submit a request for exemption from building permit fees which will then be considered by Staunton city council on a case-by-case basis using these criteria:

(a) The project is on property in the city of Staunton, is owned by the organization, and the organization has a 501(c)(3) exemption recognized by the Internal Revenue Service;

(b) The project provides home ownership to residents within the city of Staunton, classified as low- and moderate-income individuals, as defined by current HUD Section 8 income standards; and

(c) The organization administering the program requires the homeowner(s) to contribute a minimum of 200 hours in the construction of the subject single-family residence or being constructed by the organization for others. (Ord. 2018-23; Ord. 2007-11; Ord. 2005-10. Code 1964, § 8-9; Code 1985, § 9-30; Ord. 6-28-90).


15.10.130 Permit to move building.

Repealed by Ord. 2005-10. (Code 1964, § 8-10; Code 1985, § 9-31; Ord. 6-28-90).


15.10.140 Demolition permits.

Repealed by Ord. 2005-10. (Code 1964, § 8-10; Code 1985, § 9-32; Ord. 6-28-90).


15.10.150 Sign permits.

Repealed by Ord. 2005-10. (Code 1985, § 9-33).


15.10.160 Permits for electrical work.

Repealed by Ord. 2005-10. (Code 1964, § 8-13; Code 1985, § 9-34; Ord. 6-28-90).


15.10.170 Permits for plumbing and mechanical work.

Repealed by Ord. 2005-10. (Code 1964, § 8-14; Code 1985, § 9-35; Ord. 6-28-90; Ord. 4-27-00).


Chapter 15.15 CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRICIANS, PLUMBERS, AND BUILDING-RELATED MECHANICAL WORKERS

(Repealed by Ord. 2019-04)


Chapter 15.20 UNSAFE BUILDINGS*

Sections:

15.20.010    Application of chapter.

15.20.020    Appeals from decisions made under chapter.

15.20.030    Applicability.

15.20.040    Inspection.

15.20.050    Notice to repair or demolish.

15.20.060    Restoration.

15.20.070    Vacation of premises.

15.20.080    Demolition or repair by city in emergencies.

15.20.090    Closing of adjacent streets, buildings, etc.

*Charter reference – Authority of council as to dangerous buildings, § 11(17).

State law reference – Authority of city with respect to unsafe buildings and other structures, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-906.


15.20.010 Application of chapter.

This chapter governs unsafe buildings and structures and all parts thereof, including residential housing, which existed or were under construction prior to September 1, 1973, and new buildings and structures built after September 1, 1973. (Code 1964, §§ 8-46, 8-47; Code 1985, § 9-86).


15.20.020 Appeals from decisions made under chapter.

Appeals of decisions of the building official or code official under this chapter shall be to the board of building code appeals in accordance with the provisions of Section 106, Appeals of the Virginia Uniform Building Code, Volume II, Building Maintenance Code, as adopted and amended by the State Board of Housing and Community Development. (Code 1964, § 8-48; Code 1985, § 9-87; Ord. 9-25-86; Ord. 2-27-97).


15.20.030 Applicability.

This chapter shall apply to buildings and their equipment that fail to comply with the Building Maintenance Code through damage, deterioration, infestation, improper maintenance, or for other reasons, and thereby become unsafe, unsanitary, or deficient in adequate exit facilities, or which constitute a hazard or public nuisance, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, health, or safety, or the public welfare. All such buildings or other structures declared by the code official to be a public nuisance or other structures declared by the code official to be a public nuisance or unfit for human habitation shall either be: made safe through compliance with this code, or be vacated and secured against public entry, or taken down and removed as determined by the code official. A vacant building, unsecured or open at door or window, may be deemed a fire hazard and unsafe within the meaning of this section. (Code 1964, § 8-46; Code 1985, § 9-88; Ord. 2-27-97).


15.20.040 Inspection.

The building official, or the code official in appropriate cases, shall inspect every building or structure reported as dangerous or unsafe structurally or as constituting a fire hazard and he shall cause a report thereof to be filed in a docket of unsafe structures and premises, stating the use of the building or structure and the nature and estimated amount of damages, if any, caused by collapse or failure. (Code 1964, § 8-46; Code 1985, § 9-89; Ord. 9-25-86, § 6).


15.20.050 Notice to repair or demolish.

(1) The governing body of the city, through its agents and/or employees, may remove, repair, or secure any building, wall, or any other structure which might endanger the public health or safety of the occupants of the building or other residents of the city wherein the owner and lien holder of such property, after reasonable notice and a reasonable time to do so, has failed to remove, repair, or secure said building, wall, or other structure. For the purposes of this section, repair may include maintenance work to the exterior of a building to prevent deterioration of the building or to adjacent buildings. For purposes of this section, reasonable notice shall include a written notice (a) mailed by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, sent to the last known address of the property owner and lien holder and (b) published in a newspaper having general circulation within the city once a week for two successive weeks. No action of the city to remove, repair, or secure such building, wall, or other structure may be taken until at least 30 days following the later of the return of the receipt or newspaper publication.

(2) After complying with the notice provisions set forth above and in the event the governing body of the city, through its agents and/or employees, removes, repairs, or secures such building, wall, or other structure, the costs and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property and may be collected by the city as taxes and levies are collected. 

(3) Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of such property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid, shall constitute a lien against such property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in Articles 3 (Section 58.1-3940 et seq.) and 4 (Section 58.1-3965 et seq.) of Chapter 39 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, as amended.

(4) The remedy provided in this section is in addition to any other remedies provided by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, Volume II, Building Maintenance Code, adopted herein in SCC 15.10.010. (Code 1964, § 8-46; Code 1985, § 9-90; Ord. 9-25-86, § 7; Ord. 2-27-97).


15.20.060 Restoration.

A building or structure described in a notice given pursuant to SCC 15.20.050 may be restored to a safe condition, provided the change of use or occupancy is not contemplated or compelled by reason of such restoration, except that, if the damage or cost of restoration is in excess of 50 percent of its replacement value, exclusive of foundation, such building or structure shall be made to comply, in all respects, with the requirements for materials and methods of construction of new buildings or structures. (Code 1964, § 8-46; Code 1985, § 9-91).


15.20.070 Vacation of premises.

When, in the opinion of the building official, or the code official in appropriate cases, there is actual and immediate danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure or any part thereof which would endanger life, or when any building or structure or part thereof has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building or structure, the building official, or the code official in appropriate cases, is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the inmates and occupants to vacate the building or structure forthwith. He shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building or structure a notice reading as follows:

This building or structure is unsafe and its use or occupancy has been prohibited by the building official (or the code official in appropriate cases) and it shall be unlawful for any person to enter this building or structure except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the same.

(Code 1964, § 8-47; Code 1985, § 9-92; Ord. 9-25-86, § 8).


15.20.080 Demolition or repair by city in emergencies.

(1) When, in the opinion of the building official, or the code official in appropriate cases, there is actual and immediate danger of collapse or failure of a building or structure or any part thereof which would endanger life, he shall cause the necessary work to be done to demolish the building or structure or to render it temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure described in this chapter has been instituted.

(2) For the purpose of this section, the building official, or the code official in appropriate cases, shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.

(3) Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work or demolition under this section shall be paid from the city treasury, on certificate of the building official, or the code official in appropriate cases, and the city attorney shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe building or structure was located for the recovery of such costs. (Code 1964, § 8-47; Code 1985, § 9-93; Ord. 9-25-86, § 9).


15.20.090 Closing of adjacent streets, buildings, etc.

When necessary for the public safety, the building official, or the code official in appropriate cases, may temporarily close sidewalks, streets, buildings, structures and other places adjacent to an unsafe building or structure and prohibit the same from being used. (Code 1964, § 8-47; Code 1985, § 9-94; Ord. 9-25-86, § 10). 


Chapter 15.25 FIRE PREVENTION CODE*

Sections:

15.25.010    Adopted – Purpose – Etc.

15.25.015    Amendments and additions.

15.25.020    Availability of copies.

15.25.030    Repealed.

15.25.031    Appointment and authority of the fire marshal and deputy or assistant fire marshal.

15.25.032    Enforcement.

15.25.033    Authority to order immediate compliance with law, etc., or prohibit use of building or equipment.

15.25.034    Right of entry to investigate releases of hazardous material, hazardous waste or regulated substances.

15.25.035    Summoning a fire marshal.

15.25.040    Violations.

15.25.050    Liability insurance as prerequisite to issuance of blasting permit.

15.25.055    Permit fees.    

15.25.057    Miscellaneous fire prevention inspection and review schedule.

15.25.060    Repealed.

15.25.070    Appeals.

15.25.080    Repealed.

*Cross references – Fire alarm systems, Chapter 8.10 SCC; requirements and charges for fire sprinkler system connected to city water system, SCC 13.15.120; damaging fire hydrants, SCC 13.15.160; building regulations, Title 15; buildings constituting fire hazards designated as unsafe buildings, SCC 15.20.030.

State law references – Fire protection, Code of Virginia, Title 27.


15.25.010 Adopted – Purpose – Etc.

(1) The Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, as amended and adopted by the Commonwealth of Virginia Board of Housing and Community Development, of which copies are filed and maintained and required by law is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as fully as if set forth and the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the local enforcement for the protection of life and property from the hazards of fire or explosion arising from the improper maintenance of life safety and fire prevention and protection materials, devices, systems and structures, and the unsafe handling and use of material and devices, including explosives and blasting agents, wherever located.

(2) The fire code official and any deputy or assistant fire code official shall be appointed by the city manager and shall have all powers set forth in the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code. In the absence of such appointment, the fire chief of the city shall be fire code official. Any deputy or assistant fire code official may perform the duties of the fire code official in the fire code official’s absence or when otherwise designated by the fire code official or city manager. (Ord. 2015-18. Code 1964, 12-5; Code 1985, § 13-31; Ord. 3-24-88; Ord. 1-9-92; Ord. 2-24-94; Ord. 12-13-01).

State law reference – Authority of city to adopt fire prevention code, Code of Virginia, § 27-97. 


15.25.015 Amendments and additions.

(1) The city is empowered to adopt fire prevention regulations that are more restrictive or more extensive in scope than the Statewide Fire Prevention Code provided such regulations do not affect the manner of construction, or materials to be used in the erection, alteration, repair, or use of a building or structure, including the voluntary installation of smoke alarms and regulation and inspections thereof in commercial buildings where such smoke alarms are not required under the provisions of the code. The following provisions of this chapter are in addition to the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code: Appendix B through J. (Ord. 2015-18).


15.25.020 Availability of copies.

Copies of the fire prevention code adopted by this chapter are available for viewing at the office of the fire code official during normal business hours. (Ord. 2015-18. Code 1964, § 12-6; Code 1985, § 13-32).


15.25.030 Administration and enforcement.

Repealed by Ord. 12-13-01. (Code 1985, § 13-33).


15.25.031 Appointment and authority of the fire marshal and deputy or assistant fire marshal.

City council shall appoint a fire marshal and deputy or assistant fire marshal for the city of Staunton. The deputy or assistant fire marshal shall have the authority to perform the duties of the fire marshal in the fire marshal’s absence or when otherwise designated by the fire marshal or city manager. (Ord. 2015-18).


15.25.032 Enforcement.

The fire marshal, deputy and assistant fire marshals and fire code official(s) shall have the authority to enforce the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, the Code of Virginia and any sections of the Staunton City Code related to fire prevention and protection to the extent authorized under this chapter and under the Code of Virginia. (Ord. 2015-18).


15.25.033 Authority to order immediate compliance with law, etc., or prohibit use of building or equipment.

The fire marshal and deputy and assistant fire marshal and fire code official(s) shall have the authority as prescribed under this chapter to exercise in the same manner and subject to the same conditions, the powers conferred upon other authorities by the Code of Virginia, subject to the limitations prescribed by the Code of Virginia, including the prohibition on the use of a building or equipment. (Ord. 2015-18).


15.25.034 Right of entry to investigate releases of hazardous material, hazardous waste or regulated substances.

The fire marshal, deputy and assistant fire marshals and fire code official(s) shall have the right to enter upon any property from which a release of any hazardous materials, hazardous waste, or regulated substance, as defined by state law, has occurred or is reasonably suspected to have occurred and which has entered into the groundwater or soils of the city, in order to investigate the extent and cause of any such release. (Ord. 2015-18).


15.25.035 Summoning a fire marshal.

The fire and rescue department officer in charge of any fire, explosion or environmental crime incident scene shall contact the fire marshal, deputy fire marshal, or assistant fire marshal to investigate the circumstances involved when such circumstances require investigation. (Ord. 2015-18).


15.25.040 Violations.

(1) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this chapter, or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the local board of fire prevention code appeals or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally, for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each 10 days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.

(2) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 2015-18. Code 1964, § 12-10; Code 1985, § 13-34).


15.25.050 Liability insurance as prerequisite to issuance of blasting permit.

(1) As a condition to issuance of a blasting permit, the applicant for such permit shall comply with the financial responsibility provisions of the Explosives and Fireworks chapter of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code.

(2) Where blasting is to be conducted in an area where there is a high density of persons or where there are a number of nearby structures of two stories or more, the fire code official may require liability insurance coverage greater than that specified in subsection (1) of this section, in order to adequately make available protection commensurate with the risk to persons and property.

(3) This section shall not apply to blasting operations undertaken by city forces. (Ord. 2015-18. Code 1964, § 12-29; Code 1985, § 13-35; Ord. 3-24-88; Ord. 1-9-92; Ord. 12-14-01).

Charter reference – Authority of council to regulate storage, sale and use of explosives, § 11(14).


15.25.055 Permit fees.

(1) Payment Prerequisite to Issuance or Amendment of Permit. No permit required by the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code to begin work shall be issued until the fees prescribed in this section have been paid to the department of building inspection or other authorized municipal agency, nor shall an amendment be made to such a permit necessitating an additional fee, because of an increase in the estimated cost of the work involved, be approved until the additional fee has been paid.

(2) Fees. The fees for fire code permits shall be as follows: 

	Description	Permit Required	Fee	Time

	Amusement Buildings. An operational permit is required to operate a special amusement building.	Yes	$25.00	Event

	Carnivals and Fairs. An operational permit is required to conduct a carnival or fair.	Yes	$100.00	Event

	Explosives. An operational permit is required:

	To store explosives, fireworks or pyrotechnic special effects – per site.	Yes	$200.00	Annual

	To use explosives – per site.	Yes	$150.00	90 Days

	To conduct a fireworks display (public or private).	Yes	$200.00	Event

	Sale of fireworks – per site. (Allowed June 1st through July 15th per calendar year.) 	Yes	$100.00	45 Days

	Flammable and Combustible Liquids. An operational permit is required:

	To remove Class I or Class II liquids from an underground storage tank used for fueling motor vehicles by any means other than the approved, stationary on-site pumps normally used for dispensing purposes – per site.	Yes	$50.00	90 Days

	To remove, abandon, place temporarily out of service (for more than 90 days) or otherwise dispose of an underground, protected above-ground or above-ground flammable or combustible liquid tank – per site.	Yes	$100.00	90 Days

	To change the type of contents stored in a flammable or combustible liquid tank to a material which poses greater hazard than that for which the tank was designed and constructed – per site.	Yes	$50.00	90 Days

	To operate tank vehicles, equipment, tanks, plants, terminals, wells, fuel- dispensing stations, refineries, distilleries and similar facilities where flammable and combustible liquids are produced, processed, transported, stored, dispensed or used.	Yes	$50.00	Annual

	To store, handle or use Class II or Class IIIA liquids in excess of 25 gallons (95 L) in a building or in excess of 60 gallons (227 L) outside a building, except for fuel oil used in connection with oil-burning equipment.	Yes	$50.00	Annual

	Hazardous materials. An operational permit is required to store, transport on site, dispense, use or handle hazardous materials in excess of the amounts listed below:	Yes	$50.00	Annual

	PERMIT AMOUNTS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS	 	 	 

	Type of Material	Amount	 	 	 

	Combustible liquids	See Flammable and combustible liquids	 	 	 

	Corrosive materials	 	 	 

	Gases	200 cubic ft (at NTP)	 	 	 

	Liquids	55 gallons	 	 	 

	Solids	100 pounds	 	 	 

	Explosive materials	See Explosives	 	 	 

	Flammable materials	 	 	 

	Gases	200 cubic ft (at NTP)	 	 	 

	Liquids	See Flammable and combustible liquids	 	 	 

	Solids	100 pounds	 	 	 

	Highly toxic materials	 	 	 

	Gases	Any amount	 	 	 

	Liquids	Any amount	 	 	 

	Solids	Any amount	 	 	 

	Oxidizing materials	 	 	 

	Gases (including oxygen)	504 cubic ft. (at NTP)	 	 	 

	Liquids	 	 	 	 

	Class 4	Any amount	 	 	 

	Class 3	1 gallon	 	 	 

	Class 2	10 gallons	 	 	 

	Class 1	55 gallons	 	 	 

	Solids	 	 	 	 

	Class 4	Any amount	 	 	 

	Class 3	10 pounds	 	 	 

	Class 2	100 pounds	 	 	 

	Class 1	500 pounds	 	 	 

	Organic Peroxides	 	 	 

	Liquids	 	 	 	 

	Class I	Any amount	 	 	 

	Class II	Any amount	 	 	 

	Class III	1 gallon	 	 	 

	Class IV	2 gallons	 	 	 

	Class V	No permit required	 	 	 

	Solids	 	 	 	 

	Class I	Any amount	 	 	 

	Class II	Any amount	 	 	 

	Class III	10 pounds	 	 	 

	Class IV	20 pounds	 	 	 

	Class V	No permit required	 	 	 

	Pyrophoric materials	 	 	 	 

	Gases	200 cubic ft. (at NTP)	 	 	 

	Liquids	Any amount	 	 	 

	Solids	Any amount	 	 	 

	Toxic materials	 	 	 	 

	Gases	Any amount	 	 	 

	Liquids	10 gallons	 	 	 

	Solids	100 pounds	 	 	 

	Unstable (reactive) materials	 	 	 	 

	Liquids	 	 	 	 

	Class 4	Any amount	 	 	 

	Class 3	Any amount	 	 	 

	Class 2	5 gallons	 	 	 

	Class 1	10 gallons	 	 	 

	Solids	 	 	 	 

	Class 4	Any amount	 	 	 

	Class 3	Any amount	 	 	 

	Class 2	50 pounds	 	 	 

	Class 1	100 pounds	 	 	 

	Water-reactive materials	 	 	 	 

	Liquids	 	 	 	 

	Class 3	Any amount	 	 	 

	Class 2	5 gallons	 	 	 

	Class 1	55 gallons	 	 	 

	Solids	 	 	 	 

	Class 3	Any amount	 	 	 

	Class 2	50 pounds	 	 	 

	Class 1	500 pounds	 	 	 

	For SI: 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1 pound = 0.454 kg	 	 	 

	LP-Gas. An operational permit is required for:	Yes	$50.00	Annual

	1. Storage and use of LP-gas.	 	 	 

	Exception: An operational permit is not required for individual containers with a 500-gallon (1,893-L) water capacity or less serving occupancies in Group R-3; and 	 	 	 

	2. Operation of cargo tankers that transport LP-gas.	 	 	 

	Pyrotechnic Special Effects Material or Flame Effects Material. An operational permit is required for indoor use and handling of pyrotechnic special effects material or flame effect material.	Yes	$100.00	Event

	Storage of Scrap Tires and Tire Byproducts. An operational permit is required to establish, conduct or maintain storage of scrap tires and tire byproducts that exceed 2,500 cubic feet (71 m3) of total volume of scrap tires and for indoor storage of tires and tire byproducts.	Yes	$50.00	Annual

	Temporary Membrane Structures, Tents and Canopies. An operational permit is required to operate an air-supported temporary structure or a tent that covers an area in excess of 400 square feet (37 m2) and less than 900 square feet (84 m2).	Yes	$25.00	Event

	Exceptions:	 	 	 

	Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes;	 	 	 

	Tents and air-supported structures that cover an area of 400 square feet or less, including all connecting areas or spaces with a common means of egress or entrance and with an occupant load of 50 or less persons;	 	 	 

	Fabric canopies and awnings open on all sides which comply with the following:	 	 	 

	Individual canopies shall have a maximum size of 700 square feet (65 m2);	 	 	 

	The aggregate area of multiple canopies placed side by side without a fire break clearance of 12 feet (3,658 mm) shall not exceed 700 square feet (65 m2) total; and	 	 	 

	A minimum clearance of 12 feet (3,658 mm) to structures and other tents shall be provided.	 	 	 

(3) Refunds. Refunds shall be issued at the discretion of the fire code official or their designee. Refunds shall be based on the amount of staff work completed at the time of the request for permit withdrawal, with the refund not to exceed 50 percent of the permit cost. (Ord. 2020-15; Ord. 2015-18; Ord. 2005-11).


15.25.057 Miscellaneous fire prevention inspection and review schedule.

The fee schedule for inspections and/or reviews is as follows for the indicated purposes:

	PURPOSE	DESCRIPTION	FEE

	Required Fire Inspection for Social Service Licensure (Ex.: Day Care/Adult Care, etc.) or Behavioral Health Licensure	1 – 8 persons	$50

	9 – 20 persons	$75

	21 – 50 persons	$100

	51 – 100 persons	$200

	101 – 150 persons	$300

	151 – 200 persons	$400

	201 or more persons	$500

	Re-inspection Fees	Initial inspection and first re-inspection, if all violations are corrected, no charge. Upon 3rd inspection and each subsequent inspection incurs an increased fee until remediation is reached or all violations are corrected.	$0 (violations corrected)

	$50 (3rd inspection)

	$100 (per inspection for 4 or more)

	Staunton Fire and Rescue Plan Review Fee	Special event permit	$50 (per application)

	All other	$50.00

(Ord. 2020-15; Ord. 2015-18).


15.25.060 Modifications.

Repealed by Ord. 2015-18. (Code 1964, § 12-7; Code 1985, § 13-36; Ord. 12-13-01).


15.25.070 Appeals.

The board of building code appeals (BBCA) shall act as the board to hear all fire code related appeals. An appeal case of applied appendixes decided by the BBCA shall constitute an appeal in accordance with this section and shall be final. Appeals regarding the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code shall also be heard by the BBCA and in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 1 of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code. (Ord. 2015-18. Code 1964, § 12-8; Code 1985, § 13-37; Ord. 12-13-01).


15.25.080 New materials, processes or occupancies requiring permits.

Repealed by Ord. 2015-18. (Code 1964, § 12-9; Code 1985, § 13-38; Ord. 12-13-01).


Title 16            

(Reserved)

 


Title 17 SUBDIVISIONS*

Chapters:

17.05    In General

17.10    Plats

17.15    General Requirements and Design Standards

17.20    Required Improvements

17.25    Voluntary Off-Site Road Improvements

*Cross references – Planning commission, Chapter 2.55 SCC; solid waste, Chapter 8.30 SCC; traffic, Title 10; streets and sidewalks, Title 12; erosion and sediment control, Title 13, Division I; water supply, Title 13, Division II; sewers and sewage disposal, Title 13, Division III; building regulations, Title 15; zoning, Title 18.

State law references – Land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2240 through 15.2-2279; required provisions for subdivision ordinances, §§ 15.2-2241 through 15.2-2246; codification of subdivision ordinances, § 15.2-1433.


Chapter 17.05 IN GENERAL

Sections:

17.05.010    Purpose of title.

17.05.020    Definitions and construction generally.

17.05.030    Specific definitions.

17.05.040    Compliance with title.

17.05.050    Penalty for violation of title.

17.05.060    Relationship of title to private easements, covenants, etc.

17.05.070    Variances from title provisions.

17.05.080    Fees.


17.05.010 Purpose of title.

The purpose of this title is to establish certain subdivision standards and procedures for the city. (Code 1964, § 26-1; Code 1985, § 27-1).


17.05.020 Definitions and construction generally.

For the purpose of this title, certain words and terms used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise; the word “lot” includes the word “parcel”; and the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory; the word “approve” shall be considered to be followed by the words “or disapproved”; any reference to this title includes all ordinances amending or supplementing the same; all distances and areas refer to measurement in a horizontal plane. (Code 1964, § 26-2; Code 1985, § 27-2).


17.05.030 Specific definitions.

For the purposes of this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Alley” shall mean a permanent service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties.

“Building setback” shall mean the distance that a building must be set back from the lot or boundary line.

“Commission” shall mean the official planning commission of the city.* 

“Corner lot” shall mean a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection; provided, that the shortest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the front of the lot and the longest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the side of the lot.

“Cul-de-sac” shall mean a street with only one outlet and having an appropriate turnaround for a safe and convenient reverse traffic movement.

“Depth of lot” shall mean the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.

“Developer” shall mean an owner of property being subdivided, whether or not represented by an agent.

“Digital copy” shall mean an electronic version in a format that is compatible with the city engineering department’s current drafting software. Such digital copy shall be for internal use by the city only.

“Easement” shall mean a grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose or purposes.

“Engineer” shall mean an engineer licensed and certified by the state and the city.

“Health department” shall mean the Staunton-Augusta County health department.

“Health officer” shall mean the health director or sanitarian for the city.

“Interior lot” shall mean a lot other than a corner lot.

“Jurisdiction” shall mean the area or territory subject to the legislative control of the city council.

“Lot” shall mean a numbered and recorded portion of a subdivision intended for transfer of ownership or for building development for a single building and its accessory building.

“Major street” shall mean a heavily traveled thoroughfare or highway that carries a large volume of through traffic.

“Minor subdivision” means any subdivision of land which does not involve the creation or extension of public streets, alleys, central water systems or central sewer systems, and which is:

(1) A division of a lot or parcel of land existing on January 1st of a year into no more than three lots, parcels, or tracts in that same calendar year for any purpose; or

(2) A division which is solely for the purpose of a voluntary or judicial partition of land among co-owners where each owner’s partial interest was created by a devise or intestate succession from a deceased landowner, and where no more than one lot, parcel, or tract is conveyed to each owner. An assignee or successor in interest of a co-owner’s entire interest shall be permitted to participate in the partition as a separate co-owner; or

(3) A division which is solely for the purpose of a sale or transfer of a tract, lot, or parcel of land to the owner or owners of a contiguous tract, lot, or parcel of land for the purpose of adjusting the boundary lines or adding land area to an existing tract, with each of the resulting, combined tracts to be treated as one tract; or

(4) A revision of a lot line on existing parcel. 

“Other street” shall mean a street that is used primarily as a means of public access to the abutting properties and shall include the terms minor and neighborhood streets.

Plat. When used as a noun, the word “plat” shall mean a map of a tract or parcel of land which is to be or which has been subdivided, and it shall include the words map, plan, plot, replat or replot. When used as a verb, the word “plat” is synonymous with the word “subdivide.”

“Property” shall mean any tract, lot, parcel, or several of the same, collected together for the purpose of subdividing.

“Street” shall mean the principal means of access to abutting properties.

“Street width” shall mean the total width of the strip of land dedicated or reserved for public travel, including roadway, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and planting strips.

“Subdivider” shall mean an individual, corporation or registered partnership owning any tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided, or a group of two or more persons owning any tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided, who have given their power of attorney to one of their group or to another individual to act on their behalf in planning, negotiating for, representing, or executing the legal requirements of the subdivision.

“Subdivision” shall mean to divide a parcel of land into three or more new lots or parcels of less than five acres each for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or if a new street is involved in such division, any division of a parcel of land. The word “subdivision” shall include resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.

“Surveyor” shall mean a surveyor licensed and certified by the state and the city. 

“Width of lot” shall mean the mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-3; Code 1985, § 27-3; Ord. 12-16-93).

*Cross reference – Planning commission, Chapter 2.55 SCC.


17.05.040 Compliance with title.

No person shall subdivide any tract of land that is located within the corporate limits of the city except in conformity with the provisions of this title. (Code 1964, § 26-6; Code 1985, § 27-4).


17.05.050 Penalty for violation of title.

Any person violating the provisions of this title shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100.00 for each lot or parcel of land so subdivided or transferred or sold. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. (Code 1964, § 6-5; Code 1985, § 27-5).

State law reference – Penalty for violation of subdivision ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2254.


17.05.060 Relationship of title to private easements, covenants, etc.

This title bears no relation to any private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction, nor is the responsibility of enforcing such private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction implied herein to any public official. When this title calls for more restrictive standards than are required by private contract, the provisions of this title shall control. (Code 1964, § 26-6; Code 1985, § 27-6).


17.05.070 Variances from title provisions.

Where a subdivider can show that a provision of this title would cause an unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the planning commission a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provision, the council, on recommendation of the commission, may authorize a variance. Any variance thus authorized shall be entered in writing in the minutes of the council and the reason on which the departure was justified set forth. (Code 1964, § 26-4; Code 1985, § 27-7).


17.05.080 Fees.

The following fees shall be due and paid at time of application. Additional fees may be levied for the postage required for adjacent property owner notification.

Subdivision Fees 

	Variance to the provisions of the subdivision ordinance 	$200.00

	Street/alley vacation application fee	$150.00

	Subdivision preliminary plat submittal fee	$200.00 plus $15.00 per lot

	Minor subdivision submittal fee	$100.00

	Final plat submittal 	$200.00

(Ord. 2011-16; Ord. 2005-13).


Chapter 17.10 PLATS

Sections:

17.10.010    Preparation generally – Recordation.

17.10.020    Preliminary layout – Required – Scale – Contents.

17.10.030    Preliminary layout – Action by planning commission.

17.10.040    Final plat – Filing, scale, etc. – Contents.

17.10.050    Final plat – Approval or disapproval.

17.10.060    Same – Voidance for failure to record.

17.10.070    Minor subdivision plats.


17.10.010 Preparation generally – Recordation.

(1) Except as provided for a minor subdivision as set forth in SCC 17.10.070, any owner or any proprietor of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the city who subdivides the same shall cause a plat of such subdivision, with reference to published state plane coordinates, to be made and recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the city. No such plat of a subdivision shall be recorded unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the planning commission of the city in accordance with the regulations set forth in this title and so certified by its chairman or other agent designated by the commission and until such plat has also been approved by the city council. 

(2) No person shall sell or transfer any such land by reference to or by other use of a plat of a subdivision, before such plat has been duly recorded as provided herein, unless such subdivision was lawfully created prior to the adoption of a subdivision ordinance applicable thereto; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the recordation of the instrument by which such land is transferred or the passage of title as between the parties to the instrument.

(3) The clerk of circuit court shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision required by this chapter to be recorded until such plat has been approved as required herein, and the penalties provided by Section 15.2-2254 of the Code of Virginia shall apply to any failure to comply with the provisions of this section.

(4) Every such plat shall be prepared by a surveyor or civil engineer duly licensed by the state, who shall endorse upon each such plat a certificate signed by him setting forth the source of the title of the owner of the land subdivided, and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. When the plat is of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated upon such plat.

(5) All plats shall have an accuracy within the minimum standards established by the State Board of Architects, Professional Engineers, Land Surveyors, Certified Interior Designers and Landscape Architects and meet the standard for plats as adopted under the Virginia Public Records Act.

(6) Every such plat, or the deed of dedication to which such plat is attached, shall contain, in addition to the surveyor’s or civil engineer’s certificate, a statement to the effect that the above and foregoing subdivision of (here insert correct description of the land subdivided) as appears in this plat is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, which shall be signed by the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, and shall be duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgments of deeds, and when thus executed and acknowledged shall be filed and recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the city, and indexed under the names of the owners of the lands signing such statement and under the name of the subdivision.

(7) The recordation of such plat shall operate to transfer, in fee simple, to the city such portion of the premises platted as is on such plat set apart for streets, alleys, public easements or other public use and to create a public right of passage over the same; but nothing contained in this chapter shall affect any right of a subdivider of land heretofore validly reserved.

(8) All private easements and rights-of-way shall be designated as such. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-6; Code 1985, § 27-18; Ord. 12-16-93).


17.10.020 Preliminary layout – Required – Scale – Contents. 

Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed involving more than 50 lots, and before any permit for the erection of a structure shall be granted, the subdivider or agent shall apply in writing to the planning commission for approval of the subdivision plat and submit the required number of paper copies and a digital copy of the preliminary subdivision plat lot, street and utilities layout. For any subdivision of land involving 50 or fewer lots, a preliminary subdivision plat conforming to the requirements of this section may be submitted for tentative approval at the option of the landowner. The preliminary plat layout shall be at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch and shall show the following:

(1) Proposed subdivision name or identifying title and a description of its location.

(2) Name and address of record owner, subdivider and designer of preliminary layout.

(3) Location of existing structures.

(4) Location of existing and proposed property lines and existing and proposed easements, buildings, watercourses, existing sewers and water lines, culverts, drains and other essential features.

(5) The names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent and the names of owners of record of adjacent property.

(6) Location, names and present widths of existing and proposed streets, highways, easements, building lines, alleys, parks and other public spaces.

(7) All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated for public use and the conditions of such dedication.

(8) Any proposed changes in the use, height, area or density districts under any zoning regulations applicable to the area.

(9) Date, north point and scale.

(10) Deed description and map of survey of the tract boundary made and certified by a licensed surveyor or engineer, total acreage and acreage of subdivided area.

(11) Connections with existing sanitary sewers and existing water supply or alternate means of sewage disposal and water supply.

(12) Provisions for collecting and discharging surface drainage and preliminary designs for any bridges or culverts which may be required.

(13) The proposed lot lines with dimensions and suggested location of buildings.

(14) The location of all improvements including but not limited to streets and utilities (public and private) necessary to serve the development.

(15) Contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet. 

(16) Flood data as required (SCC 18.170.080). (Ord. 2018-25; Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, §§ 26-7, 26-8; Code 1985, § 27-19).


17.10.030 Preliminary layout – Action by planning commission.

The planning commission may discuss the preliminary layout with the subdivider at a meeting of the commission. After such discussion, the commission shall communicate, within 30 days and in writing, to the developer: specific changes that are required in the preliminary layout; the character and extent of public improvements that will have to be made in keeping with the public health, safety, morals and general welfare; and the amount of construction or improvement or the amount of performance bond which it will require as a prerequisite to recommendation of approval of the final subdivision plat. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-7; Code 1985, § 27-20).


17.10.040 Final plat – Filing, scale, etc. – Contents.

(1) The subdivider shall, within six months after official notification by the commission in respect to the preliminary layout, file with the commission the final subdivision plat. Such plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, providing the required number of paper and digital copies of the plat. After approval of the subdivision plat by the planning commission and the city council, no revision of the lot layout shall be made until a plat of the proposed lot revision is submitted to the planning commission and approved by the planning commission and city council.

(2) The final subdivision plat shall show the following:

(a) Proposed subdivision name or identifying title, location, address of record owner and subdivider; name of the licensed professional surveyor or engineer; the surveyor or engineer’s certificate showing source of title and the owner’s statement of consent in accordance with SCC 17.10.010; and space for the signature of the approving authorities.

(b) Street lines, pedestrian ways, lots, reservations, easements and areas to be dedicated to public use.

(c) All private easements and rights-of-way.

(d) Sufficient data acceptable to the planning commission and council to determine readily the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line and boundary line and to reproduce them on the ground. Reference should be made to known monuments on the published state plane coordinate system.

(e) The boundaries of the property, location, graphic scale and north point.

(f) Every such plat shall show all lands which the owner proposes to dedicate for public use, together with the covenants, if any, as to the use thereof.

(g) All permanent reference monuments shown by an appropriate symbol on the plat. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, §§ 26-7, 26-9; Code 1985, § 27-21).


17.10.050 Final plat – Approval or disapproval.

(1) The planning commission shall recommend to the city council that it approve, modify or disapprove such plat and the city council shall approve, modify or disapprove such plat.

(2) The plat shall not be approved by the city council until the subdivider has complied with the general requirements and minimum standards of design in accordance with Chapter 17.15 SCC and has made or provided for the improvements as required by the council pursuant to this section and Chapter 17.20 SCC to the satisfaction of the council and so certified on the plat by the city manager. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-7; Code 1985, § 27-22).


17.10.060 Same – Voidance for failure to record.

Unless the owner of the subdivision shall have the final plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the city of Staunton, Virginia, within six months after final approval thereof by the city council, such approval shall be withdrawn and the plat marked “void” and returned to the planning department for the city of Staunton; however, in any case where construction of facilities to be dedicated for public use has commenced pursuant to an approved plan or permit with surety approved by the governing body, or where the developer has furnished surety to the governing body by certified check, cash, escrow, bond, letter of credit in the amount of the estimated cost of construction of such facilities, the time for plat recordation shall be extended to one year after such final approval or to the time limit specified in the surety agreement approved by the governing body, whichever is the greater. (Code 1964, § 26-7; Code 1985, § 27-23; Ord. 12-16-93).


17.10.070 Minor subdivision plats. 

The required number of paper and digital copies of a minor subdivision plat, as set forth herein, shall be submitted to the senior planner or designee for approval as follows:

(1) Plat Requirements. A minor subdivision plat shall contain or be drawn in accordance with the following:

(a) Sheet size to be 18 inches by 24 inches, or 11 inches by 17 inches, or eight and one-half inches by 14 inches, or eight and one-half inches by 11 inches. In cases where more than one sheet is required, they shall be match-marked;

(b) The name of the recorded owner and identification of the plat;

(c) The exact layout, including all dimensions, both linear and angular, for locating lots, streets, alleys, and easements. The linear dimensions shall be expressed in feet and hundredths of a foot and the angular measurements shall be expressed by bearings in degrees, minutes, and seconds. Each curve shall be defined by its chord bearing, chord length, radius, central angle, tangent length, and arc length;

(d) New lot designations;

(e) Existing structures;

(f) Existing and proposed lot lines;

(g) Existing and proposed easements;

(h) All lot lines to be deleted shall be shown as dashed lines and labeled as such;

(i) The plat title shall reflect the intent of the plat;

(j) Approved monumentation shall be shown on the plat;

(k) Date, north point, and scale (not greater than 100 feet to the inch) of the drawing shall be shown on the plat;

(l) The area of each lot or parcel affected by the subdivision;

(m) Name and license of the surveyor or engineer preparing the plat;

(n) Approval signature panel;

(o) Identify adjacent properties;

(p) The plat shall be accompanied by written confirmation as requested by the city from the appropriate officials that a public water and sanitary sewer connection is available for each lot or parcel being created or water supply or septic system permits have been obtained;

(q) Flood data as required in SCC 18.170.080.

(2) Plat Approval. A minor subdivision plat shall be reviewed in accordance with the following procedures:

(a) A minor subdivision plat shall be reviewed by the senior planner or designee. Upon the senior planner or designee’s determination that the plat is in conformance with the requirements of this title, the senior planner or designee shall sign the plat. Approval by the senior planner or designee shall have the same force and effect as approval by the city council. Consideration by the planning commission and the city council shall not be required;

(b) If the senior planner or designee determines that the plat does not meet the requirements of this title, the original and one copy of the plat shall be returned to the applicant with a written explanation of the deficiencies;

(c) The plat shall be either approved or the written explanation of deficiencies shall be forwarded to the applicant within 15 regular workdays of the receipt of the plat. The applicant may elect to treat a failure by the senior planner or designee to act on the plat within 15 regular workdays of receipt of the plat as a decision denying approval;

(d) An applicant may appeal the decision of the senior planner or designee by filing a written request in the office of the clerk of council within 30 days of the decision of the senior planner. Upon appeal, the city council shall consider the plat at the earliest possible date and the decision of the governing body shall supersede the decision of the senior planner.

(3) Voidance for Failure to Record. The approved plat shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the city of Staunton, Virginia, within six months after its approval; otherwise, the approval of the plat shall be deemed to have been withdrawn and such plat shall be marked “void” and returned to the senior planner. (Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2010-08; Ord. 2005-14. Code 1985, § 27-24; Ord. 12-16-93).


Chapter 17.15 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

17.15.010    Application of chapter.

17.15.020    Certain land not to be platted.

17.15.030    Private streets prohibited.

17.15.040    Repealed.

17.15.050    Street names.

17.15.060    Street cross-section.

17.15.070    Grades of streets.

17.15.080    Curves in streets.

17.15.090    Angle of street intersections.

17.15.100    Dead-end streets.

17.15.110    Where alleys required.

17.15.120    Monuments – Markers for corner lots.

17.15.130    Length of blocks.

17.15.140    Width of blocks.

17.15.150    Tier of lots backing on major street may be required.

17.15.160    Arrangement of lots generally.

17.15.170    Lots to abut on dedicated street.

17.15.180    Size and shape of residential lots generally.

17.15.190    Increase of size of corner lots.

17.15.200    Design of lots for business or industrial use.

17.15.210    Disposition of lot remnants.

17.15.220    Arrangement of parcels larger than ordinary building lots.

17.15.230    Reservation of land for parks, schools, etc.

17.15.240    Utility easements.

17.15.250    Building setbacks.

17.15.260    Parking facilities.


17.15.010 Application of chapter.

The requirements and standards of design for the subdivision of land set out in this chapter shall apply to subdivisions within the scope of this title. (Code 1964, § 26-10; Code 1985, § 27-34).


17.15.020 Certain land not to be platted.

Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall not be platted for occupancy nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-35; Code 1985, § 27-35).


17.15.030 Private streets prohibited.

There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision. Every subdivided property shall be served from a publicly dedicated street. (Code 1964, § 26-34; Code 1985, § 27-36).

Charter reference – Dedication of streets in subdivisions, § 1.

Cross reference – Streets generally, Title 12.


17.15.040 Location and alignment of streets.

Repealed by Ord. 2010-08. (Code 1964, § 26-11; Code 1985, § 27-37).


17.15.050 Street names.

Proposed streets that are in alignment with existing streets already named shall bear their names. No new street shall duplicate names of existing streets. (Code 1964, § 26-16; Code 1985, § 27-38).


17.15.060 Street cross-section.

Street cross-sections shall be as determined by a traffic impact analysis as required in the city engineering department’s design and construction standards. In no case shall the street cross-section be less than that established by the Virginia Department of Transportation to be eligible for urban street maintenance reimbursement funds. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-12; Code 1985, § 27-39).


17.15.070 Grades of streets.

No street shall exceed 12 percent in a residential zone, or eight percent in all other zoning classifications. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-13; Code 1985, § 27-40).


17.15.080 Curves in streets.

Where a deflection angle of more than 10 degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius shall be introduced. On streets 60 feet or more in width, the center line radius of curvature shall not be less than 300 feet, and on other streets, not less than 100 feet. (Code 1964, § 26-14; Code 1985, § 27-41).


17.15.090 Angle of street intersections.

Intersections of streets shall be at an angle as nearly 90 degrees as possible and shall not be less than 60 degrees. (Code 1964, § 26-15; Code 1985, § 27-42).


17.15.100 Dead-end streets.

Dead-end streets and cul-de-sacs shall be designed so that turnarounds for reversing traffic movements at the closed ends shall have a minimum radius of at least 50 feet. They shall not be over 400 feet in length. (Code 1964, § 26-18; Code 1985, § 27-43).


17.15.110 Where alleys required.

Alleys shall be provided in the rear of lots to be used for business purposes, and in residential lots where the subdivider shows evidence to the commission or council of the need for alleys. (Code 1964, § 26-17; Code 1985, § 27-44).


17.15.120 Monuments – Markers for corner lots.

All lot corners shall be marked by iron pins, not less than one-half inch in diameter and 24 inches long, driven flush with the ground. A minimum of four of these markers shall be city standard survey markers tied to the city’s vertical and horizontal control. A monument data sheet shall be provided to the city engineer. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-19; Code 1985, § 27-45).


17.15.130 Length of blocks.

Blocks shall not exceed 800 feet in length and they shall not be less than 400 feet in length, unless prevented by topographic conditions. (Code 1964, § 26-20; Code 1985, § 27-46).


17.15.140 Width of blocks.

Blocks shall be wide enough for two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where fronting on major streets, unless prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the commission may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. (Code 1964, § 26-21; Code 1985, § 27-47).


17.15.150 Tier of lots backing on major street may be required.

Where a proposed subdivision will adjoin a major street, the commission may require a single tier of lots of minimum depth to back upon such major street to avoid unnecessary ingress and egress. (Code 1964, § 26-22; Code 1985, § 27-48).


17.15.160 Arrangement of lots generally.

Arrangements of lots shall be at right angles to street lines, if possible, or radical to curved street lines. (Code 1964, § 26-23; Code 1985, § 27-49).


17.15.170 Lots to abut on dedicated street.

Each lot shall abut on a street dedicated by the subdivision plat, or on an existing publicly dedicated street, except as provided under SCC 18.105.020, planned residential development. If the existing street width is less than required, the commission may require the subdivider to dedicate the extra width necessary to widen the street. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-24; Code 1985, § 27-50).

Cross reference – Zoning, Title 18.


17.15.180 Size and shape of residential lots generally.

The lot arrangement, design, and shape shall be such that lots will provide satisfactory and desirable sites for building. Lots shall not contain peculiarly shaped elongations which are designed solely to provide necessary square footage of area or frontage on a public road and which would be unusable for normal purposes. 

The size and shape of residential lots shall be in accordance with the regulations established in the zoning code for the district in which the subdivision lies, except that, if a connection to either the public sewer or water systems, but not both, is provided, the lot size shall be increased to contain at least 10,000 square feet in those zones allowing for smaller sizes, and if a connection to neither the public sewer or water system is provided, the lot size shall be increased to contain at least 20,000 square feet, and the installation of a water system and a sewage disposal method shall be approved by the health department. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-25; Code 1985, § 27-51; Ord. 1-11-96).

Cross reference – Zoning, Title 18.


17.15.190 Increase of size of corner lots.

Corner lots shall be increased in size whenever necessary so as to provide that any structure to be placed thereon shall conform to the building setback lines on both streets. (Code 1964, § 26-26; Code 1985, § 27-52).


17.15.200 Design of lots for business or industrial use.

Lots intended for business or industrial use shall be designed specifically for such purposes, with adequate space set aside for off-street parking and delivery facilities. (Code 1964, § 26-27; Code 1985, § 27-53).


17.15.210 Disposition of lot remnants.

All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing a tract must be added to adjacent lots or otherwise disposed of rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. (Code 1964, § 26-33; Code 1985, § 27-54).


17.15.220 Arrangement of parcels larger than ordinary building lots.

In case a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow the opening of future streets and logical further subdivision. (Code 1964, § 26-28; Code 1985, § 27-55).


17.15.230 Reservation of land for parks, schools, etc.

The commission may require subdividers of residential subdivisions to set aside land for parks, playgrounds, schools and similar public and semipublic uses, subject to the following regulations:

(1) Subdividers shall not be required to dedicate land for parks or playgrounds in an amount exceeding 10 percent of the area of the subdivision, exclusive of street and drainage reservations, without reimbursement by the city council.

(2) Subdividers shall not be required to reserve land for public purposes other than streets, drainage, parks and playgrounds, except on a reimbursement basis. They shall be reimbursed within 18 months following the recording of the plat for the reserved land, or it may be subdivided and sold as lots. (Code 1964, § 26-29; Code 1985, § 27-56).


17.15.240 Utility easements.

Except where alleys are permitted, the commission may require easements up to 10 feet in width for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and heat mains and other public utilities along all rear and side lot lines. Easements may be of a greater width for the extension of existing or planned utilities. (Code 1964, § 26-30; Code 1985, § 27-57).


17.15.250 Building setbacks.

Building setbacks shall conform to those established in the zoning code for the district in which the subdivision lies. (Code 1964, § 26-31; Code 1985, § 27-58).

Cross reference – Zoning, Title 18.


17.15.260 Parking facilities.

Where the regulations of the zoning code do not apply, parking facilities shall be provided and be approved by the planning commission. (Code 1964, § 26-32; Code 1985, § 27-59).

Cross reference – Zoning, Title 18.


Chapter 17.20 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

17.20.010    Application of chapter.

17.20.020    Standards and specifications generally.

17.20.030    Street improvements generally.

17.20.040    Repealed.

17.20.050    Repealed.

17.20.060    Sidewalks.

17.20.070    Street signs.

17.20.080    Drainage facilities.

17.20.090    Utility lines.

17.20.100    Bond or other security to ensure installation.

17.20.110    Supervision of installation.

17.20.120    Approval of installation.


17.20.010 Application of chapter.

Improvements required in subdivisions lying in whole or in part in the city, including new streets, easements, extension of sewer and water systems or rights-of-way connecting two public streets, shall be as provided in this chapter. (Code 1964, § 26-36; Code 1985, § 27-70).


17.20.020 Standards and specifications generally.

All grading and surfacing shall be done and sanitary sewers, water and gas mains, curbs and gutters and all other items pertaining to the development of any street or alley shall be installed in strict accordance with the city engineering department’s design and construction standards. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-37; Code 1985, § 27-71).


17.20.030 Street improvements generally.

Streets and alleys shall be graded to the approved cross-section and profile and constructed in strict accordance with the design and construction standards. Concrete curb and gutter shall be installed on both sides of all streets dedicated to the public use. Right-of-way and pavement width shall be as established in SCC 17.15.060. The entire cost to satisfy all the requirements of this section shall be borne by the subdivider. (Ord. 2010-08; Ord. 2006-12. Code 1964, § 26-38; Code 1985, § 27-72).

Cross reference – Streets generally, Title 12.


17.20.040 Surfacing of streets.

Repealed by Ord. 2006-12. (Code 1964, § 26-39; Code 1985, § 27-73).


17.20.050 Sodding or seeding of area between back edge of curb and limits of street construction.

Repealed by Ord. 2010-08. (Code 1964, § 26-40; Code 1985, § 27-74).


17.20.060 Sidewalks.

Sidewalks shall be provided on all streets. The entire cost thereof shall be borne by the subdivider. (Ord. 2011-02. Code 1964, § 26-42; Code 1985, § 27-75).


17.20.070 Street signs.

Street signs of a design approved by the department of public works shall be installed at all intersections. The entire cost thereof shall be borne by the subdivider. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-43; Code 1985, § 27-76).


17.20.080 Drainage facilities.

A drainage system, including storm sewers where necessary, adequate to serve the subdivision and the contributing drainage area in its vicinity shall be provided to ensure drainage of both natural and storm water. Storm drainage shall be in accordance with SCC Title 13 and with the city of Staunton’s design and construction standards, and as approved by the city engineer or designee. The entire cost thereof shall be borne by the subdivider. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-41; Code 1985, § 27-77).


17.20.090 Utility lines.

All underground utilities in the right-of-way shall be installed by the subdivider or the responsible utility company prior to the installation of the roadway base material, when such utilities are reasonably available to the property being subdivided. Installation of the foregoing shall be in strict accordance with the standards, specifications and plans as approved by the city engineer or designee. The entire cost thereof shall be borne by the subdivider regardless of whether installed by the subdivider or the utility company. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-44; Code 1985, § 27-78; Ord. 5-24-90, § 1).

Cross references – Water supply, Title 13, Division II; sewers, Title 13, Division III.


17.20.100 Bond or other security to ensure installation.

All physical improvements required by the provisions of this title to be installed by the subdivider shall be installed at his expense and, pending the actual installation, the subdivider shall execute and file with the city, prior to final approval of the plat, an agreement and a 100 percent performance bond and a 100 percent payment bond, in an amount determined by the council equal to the approximate total costs of such improvements, in such form and with such surety as the city may approve, guaranteeing that the required improvements will be properly and satisfactorily installed within a reasonable length of time, as stipulated by the council, but in no event more than two years. In lieu of such bonds, the subdivider may place with the city, in escrow, such security as may be approved by the council. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-45; Code 1985, § 27-79).


17.20.110 Supervision of installation.

The installation of improvements required by this chapter shall be supervised by the design engineer, who shall submit certification of compliance along with supporting inspection records. (Ord. 2010-08. Code 1964, § 26-46; Code 1985, § 27-80).


17.20.120 Approval of installation.

Approval of the installation of the improvements shall be granted by the city upon completion of the installation of all improvements and receipt of certification from the supervising engineer that all improvements have been installed in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the city. (Code 1964, § 26-47; Code 1985, § 27-81).


Chapter 17.25 VOLUNTARY OFF-SITE ROAD IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

17.25.010    Voluntary off-site road improvements.


17.25.010 Voluntary off-site road improvements.

If a subdivider or developer makes an advance of payments for or construction of reasonable and necessary road improvements located outside the property limits of the land owned or controlled by him, the need for which is substantially generated and reasonably required by the construction or improvement of his subdivision or development, and such advance is accepted, the city council may agree to reimburse the subdivider or developer from such funds as the city council may make available for such purpose from time to time for the cost of such advance together with interest, which shall be excludable from gross income for federal income tax purposes, at a rate equal to the rate of interest on bonds most recently issued by the city council on the following terms and conditions:

(1) The city council shall determine or confirm that the road improvements were substantially generated and reasonably required by the construction or improvement of the subdivision or development and shall determine or confirm the cost thereof, on the basis of a study or studies conducted by qualified traffic engineers and approved and accepted by the subdivider or developer.

(2) The city council shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, a report accepted and approved by the subdivider or developer, indicating the governmental services required to be furnished to the subdivision or development and an estimate of the annual cost thereof for the period during which the reimbursement is to be made to the subdivider or developer.

(3) The city council may make annual reimbursements to the subdivider or developer from funds made available for such purpose from time to time, including, but not limited to, real estate taxes assessed and collected against the land and improvements on the property included in the subdivision or developments in amounts equal to the amount by which such real estate taxes exceed the annual cost of providing reasonable and necessary governmental services to such subdivision or development. (Code 1985, § 27-90; Ord. 11-11-93).

 


Title 18 ZONING

Chapters:

Division I. General Provisions

18.05    Title and Purposes

18.10    Definitions

18.15    Zoning Districts and Map

Division II. District Regulations

18.20    R-1 Low Density Residential District

18.25    R-2 Low Density Residential District

18.30    R-3 Medium Density Residential District

18.35    R-4 High Density Residential District

18.40    R-5 Manufactured Home Park District

18.45    R-6 Manufactured Home Subdivision

18.50    P-1 Professional District

18.53    TND-I Traditional Neighborhood Development Infill District

18.55    B-1 Local Business District

18.60    B-2 General Business District

18.65    B-3 Planned Business District

18.70    B-4 Cultural and Recreational Planned Business District

18.75    I-1 Light Industrial District

18.80    I-2 Heavy Industrial District

18.83    Entrance Corridor Overlay District

18.85    H-1 Historic Preservation District

18.90    HE-1 Higher Education District

18.95    A-1 Agricultural-Forestal District

18.100    I-3 Planned Industrial District

Division III. Supplementary Regulations Applying to a Specific, to Several, or to All Districts

18.105    Development Standards for Uses Permitted on Review

18.110    Accessory Uses

18.115    Height

18.120    Yard, Building Setback, and Open Space Exceptions

18.125    Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements

18.130    Storage and Parking of Trailers and Commercial Vehicles

18.135    Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements

18.140    Signs, Billboards, and Other Advertising Structures

18.145    Gasoline Service Stations

18.150    Home Occupation

18.152    Homestay

18.153    Chickens

18.155    Temporary Uses

18.160    Tents

18.165    Lighting

18.169    Site Plans

18.170    Floodplain Districts and Regulations

18.175    Landscaping and Screening

18.180    Occupancy Limitations

18.185    Telecommunications Facilities

18.190    Nonconforming Buildings, Structures, and Uses of Land

Division IV. Administration and Enforcement

18.195    Organization

18.200    Board of Zoning Appeals

18.205    Certificate of Occupancy

18.210    Procedure for Authorizing Uses Permitted on Review

18.215    Amendments

18.220    Fees

18.225    Penalties

18.230    Conflicts with Other Laws


Chapter 18.05 TITLE AND PURPOSES

Sections:

18.05.010    Title.

18.05.020    Short title.

18.05.030    Purposes.


18.05.010 Title.

A code to provide for the establishment of zoning districts within which the proper use of land and natural resources shall be encouraged and regulated; to establish minimum standards for open space, building and population density; to regulate the occupancy and use of dwellings, buildings and structures, including tent and trailer coaches, that may hereafter be erected, altered, or moved; to provide for the administration hereof; to provide for a method of amending; to provide for conflicts with other acts, codes, or regulations; to provide for the collection of fees for the furtherance of the purpose of this title; to provide for petitions and public hearings, to provide for appeals and for the organization and procedure of the city of Staunton board of zoning appeals; and to provide for penalties for the violation of this title. (Ord. 2009-04. Zoning ordinance Art. 1, § 1).


18.05.020 Short title.

These regulations shall be known and may be cited as “The Zoning Code of Staunton.” (Zoning ordinance Art. 1, § 2).


18.05.030 Purposes.

It is the purpose of this title to promote the safety, health, morals, convenience, and general welfare; to encourage the use of lands and natural resources in the city in accordance with their character, adaptability, and suitability for particular purposes; to conserve social and economic stability, property values, and the general character and trend of community development; to prevent excessive concentration of population; to lessen congestion on the public streets and highways; to facilitate adequate provision of streets and highways, sewerage and drainage, water supply and distribution, educational, and other public resources, by establishing herein standards for community development in accordance with these objectives and by providing for the enforcement of such standards.

The city council does ordain and enact into law the following chapters. (Zoning ordinance Art. 1, § 3).


Chapter 18.10 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

18.10.010    General definitions.

18.10.020    “A” definitions.

18.10.030    “B” definitions.

18.10.040    “C” definitions.

18.10.050    “D” definitions.

18.10.060    “E” definitions.

18.10.070    “F” definitions.

18.10.080    “G” definitions.

18.10.090    “H” definitions.

18.10.100    “I” definitions.

18.10.110    “J” definitions.

18.10.120    “K” definitions.

18.10.130    “L” definitions.

18.10.140    “M” definitions.

18.10.150    “N” definitions.

18.10.160    “O” definitions.

18.10.170    “P” definitions.

18.10.180    “Q” definitions.

18.10.190    “R” definitions.

18.10.200    “S” definitions.

18.10.210    “T” definitions.

18.10.220    “U” definitions.

18.10.230    “V” definitions.

18.10.240    “W” definitions.

18.10.250    “X” definitions.

18.10.260    “Y” definitions.

18.10.270    “Z” definitions.


18.10.010 General definitions.

For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are hereby defined as follows. Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.020 “A” definitions.

“Accessory building” means a subordinate building or a portion of the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the dominant use of the main building or land.

“Accessory use” means a use which is incidental to the main use of the premises.

Administrator. See “Zoning administrator.”

“Advertising” includes any writing, printing, painting, display, emblem, drawing, sign, or other device designed, used, or intended for advertising, whether placed on the ground, rocks, trees, tree-stumps, or other natural structures or on a building, structure, milestone, signboard, billboard, wallboard, roofboard, frame, support, fence, or other manmade structure, and any such advertising is a structure within the meaning of the word “structure” as used in this title.

“Alley” means a way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.

“Alterations,” as applied to a building or structure, means a change or rearrangement in the structural parts, or an enlargement, whether by extending to a side or by increasing in height, for utility purposes.

“Amusement and recreational establishments” means businesses whose primary function is entertainment, such as theaters, billiard halls, etc.

“Animated sign” means any sign, the character or appearance of any element or part of which changes by any device, mechanical, electrical or otherwise.

“Apartment hotel sign” means any sign advertising or identifying an apartment hotel.

Apartment House. See “Dwelling, multiple.”

“Awning” means a covering attached to a building or structure, erected in or over a window or door, and usually supported by gravity and a metal frame. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.030 “B” definitions.

“Ballpark sign” means any sign located on the inside of fencing in an enclosed ballfield in a public park.

“Banner” means any sign appended on or from a staff, pole, wire, frame or similar support, extending across the entire width of any street, road, highway or alley.

“Basement” means a story partly or wholly underground; provided, however, that for purposes of height measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story where more than one-half of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground.

“Billboard” means any sign, in excess of 150 square feet, advertising a person, place, event, product, business or other matter, which is remote from the site or property upon which the sign is erected or displayed.

“Boarding house” means a building other than a hotel where, for compensation, meals or lodging and meals are provided for three or more but not exceeding nine guests.

“Buildable area of a lot” means that portion of a lot bounded by the required rear and side yards and the building setback line. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).

“Building” means any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, except a tent and a structure used for dwelling purposes commonly known as a trailer.

Building, Accessory. See “Accessory building.”

“Building, height of” means the vertical distance measured from the adjoining curb grade to the highest point of the roof surface if a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. Where buildings are set back from the street line, the height of the building shall be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building.

“Building, main or principal” means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated.

“Building setback line” means a line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the street right-of-way and the front of a structure, within which no building or other structure shall be placed except as provided in Chapters 18.110 and 18.120 SCC. The building setback line is parallel to or concentric with the street right-of-way.

“Building site” means a single parcel of land under one ownership, occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a building or structure.

“Building unit group” means two or more buildings, other than dwellings, grouped upon a lot and held under single ownership, such as universities, hospitals, and institutions.

“Business sign” means any sign advertising a business conducted within the building or structure, or upon the real property, on which the sign is erected or displayed. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.040 “C” definitions.

“Church sign” means any bulletin board type of sign erected or displayed on the real property of a church, chapel, temple, synagogue or other place of worship for the display of messages.

“Contractor or subcontractor sign” means any sign containing the name and type of work performed by a contractor or subcontractor and erected or displayed on the property upon which building operations are being conducted.

“Convenience sign” means any sign indicating the location of or direction to a place or object of public convenience, such as a restroom, telephone, bus stop or public parking area.

“Corner lot” means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets, having an angle of intersection of not more than 135 degrees.

“Council” means the city council of Staunton, Virginia.

“Court” means an open, unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot with a principal structure.

“Curb grade” means the elevation of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb grade has been established, the administrator shall establish such curb grade or its equivalent for the purpose of this title.

“Curb sign” means any sign composed of one or more numerals painted on a curb located within a public right-of-way that designates the premises upon which it is located. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.050 “D” definitions.

“Day nurseries, private” means any place, home, or institution which receives six or more young children, conducted for cultivating the normal aptitude for exercise, play, observation, imitation, and construction.

“Directional sign” means any sign indicating the location of or direction to a person, place, event, product, business or other matter which is remote from the site or property upon which the sign is erected or displayed.

“District” means any section or sections of the city of Staunton for which the regulations governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height, and coverage of buildings and other structures are uniform.

“Double-face sign” means any sign having two parallel planes or surfaces upon which advertising is displayed.

“Dwelling” means any building or portion thereof which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes.

“Dwelling, attached” means a dwelling with two or more party walls, or one party wall in the case of a dwelling at the end of a group of attached dwellings.

“Dwelling, multiple” means a detached building designed for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other, exclusive of auto or trailer courts or camps, hotels, or resort type hotels.

“Dwelling, semi-attached” means two dwellings with a single party wall common to both.

“Dwelling, single-family” means a detached building designed to be occupied by one family, including a residential facility in which no more than eight mentally ill, mentally retarded, or developmentally disabled persons reside, with one or more resident counselors or other staff persons. For the purposes of this definition, mental illness and developmental disability shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance, as defined in Section 54.1-3401 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. “Residential facility” as used herein includes, but is not limited to, any group or other residential facility for which the Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services of the Commonwealth of Virginia is the licensing authority for such.

“Dwelling, two-family” means a detached building designed to be occupied by two families living independently of each other, exclusive of auto or trailer courts or camps, hotels or resort type hotels.

“Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy by one family for living purposes and having cooking facilities. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.060 “E” definitions.

Reserved. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.070 “F” definitions.

“Family” means one or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodging house, or hotel as defined herein.

“Flag” means a piece of material, usually rectangular in shape, on which is imprinted, or into which is woven, a distinctive design which is or denotes the official symbol of a national, state or local government. A flag shall not be considered a sign. However, a piece of material on which is imprinted, or into which is woven, a design, business trademark or other pattern or symbol that does not constitute or denote an official government symbol shall be considered a sign.

“Flashing sign” means any sign consisting of, or illuminated by, flashing or intermittent lights or other lights of changing degrees of intensity, brightness or color, except a sign showing the date, time and/or temperature.

“Floor area” means the sum of the gross floor area for each of the several stories under roof, measured from the interior limits or faces of a building or structure.

“Fraternity or sorority house” means a building housing the members of a fraternity or sorority group living together under a cooperative arrangement, as distinct from a boarding or lodging house or private club.

“Freestanding sign” means any sign permanently affixed into the ground, erected on its own foundation or placed on a pole which is independent of but on the same lot or parcel as the building or structure in which the person, place, event, product, business or other matter noted on the sign is located.

“Front yard” means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the nearest principal building and the front lot line. The depth of the required front yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of the principal building to the nearest point of the front lot line.

“Frontage” means all of the property on one side of a street between the intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the street; or, if the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.080 “G” definitions.

“Gasoline service station” means any building, structure, or land used for dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail any automobile fuels, oils, or accessories or for the servicing of motor vehicles, including lubrication and replacement or installation of minor parts and accessories, but not including major repair work, such as motor replacement, body and fender repairs, or spray painting. When such dispensing, sale, or offering for sale is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises are classified as a public garage. When such dispensing, sale or offering for sale any automobile fuel, oils, or accessories without any additional servicing of motor vehicles is incidental to the conduct of other retail business, the premises are classified as a retail business with incidental gasoline dispensing services.

“Group house” means a building other than a boarding house, hotel, or a single-family dwelling as defined herein, occupied by a nonfamily, essentially nontransient group of unrelated persons who, for whatever reason, including by reason of physical infirmity, mental illness, mental retardation, or developmental disability, reside together with one or more resident counselors or other staff persons, where, for compensation, meals, lodging, and a degree of supervision are provided. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.090 “H” definitions.

“Health department” means the Staunton-Augusta County Health Department.

Home Occupation. See Chapter 18.150 SCC.

“Home occupation sign” means any sign erected or displayed on the exterior wall of a private dwelling that states only the name of a person occupying the dwelling and the name of a product or service offered in or from the dwelling by that person.

“Hotel” means any building or portion thereof which contains guest rooms which are designed or intended to be used, let, or hired out for occupancy and which together are intended for compensation to provide accommodations for 10 or more individuals at any given time.

“Housing for the elderly” means housing for the elderly and/or physically handicapped, multifamily structure containing at least three dwelling units and within which at least 90 percent of all dwelling units or all but one dwelling unit of the number of dwelling units if less than 10 are occupied or designed for occupancy by:

(1) Families of two or more persons, the head of which (or his or her spouse) is 62 years of age or over or is handicapped; or

(2) The surviving member or members of any family described in subsection (1) of this section living in a unit within the building with the deceased member of the family at the time of his or her death; or

(3) A single person who is 62 years of age or over or a nonelderly handicapped person between the ages of 18 and 62; or

(4) Two or more elderly or handicapped persons living together, or one or more such persons living with another person who is determined by a licensed physician’s certificate to be essential to their care or well-being.

For the purpose of this definition, “handicapped person” means any adult having an impairment which is expected to be of long, continued and indefinite duration, is a substantial impediment to his or her ability to live independently and is of a nature that such ability could be improved by more suitable housing conditions. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.100 “I” definitions.

“Identification sign” means any sign stating the use and name given to the use of a building, structure or area, when such use is permitted in the zone in which the sign is located.

“Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.110 “J” definitions.

“Junk yard” means any land or building used for abandonment, storage, keeping, collecting, processing, or baling of paper, rags, scrap metals, and other scrap or discarded materials, including dismantled automobiles or other vehicles. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.120 “K” definitions.

Reserved. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.130 “L” definitions.

“Lot” means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this code, including one main building together with its accessory buildings, the open spaces and parking and loading spaces required by this code, and having its principal frontage either on a public street or on a private residence street of record at the time of the effective date of this code.

“Lot area” means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. No alley, public way, public land, or area proposed for future street purposes is included within the net area of a lot.

“Lot depth” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.140 “M” definitions.

“Marquee” means a fixed covering erected over a sidewalk as a protection to an entrance of a building or structure.

“Medical care facility” means any institution, place, building, or agency, whether or not licensed or required to be licensed by the Board of the State Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services Board, whether operated for profit or nonprofit and whether privately owned or privately operated or owned or operated by a local governmental unit, (i) by or in which health services are furnished, conducted, operated, or offered for the prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of human disease, pain, injury, deformity, or physical condition, whether medical or surgical, of two or more nonrelated mentally or physically sick or injured persons, or for the care of two or more nonrelated persons requiring or receiving medical, surgical, or nursing attention or services as acute, chronic, convalescent, aged, physically disabled, or crippled, or (ii) which is the recipient of reimbursements from third-party health insurance programs or prepaid medical service plans, including:

(1) General hospitals;

(2) Sanitariums;

(3) Nursing homes;

(4) Intermediate care facilities;

(5) Extended care facilities;

(6) Mental hospitals;

(7) Mental retardation facilities;

(8) Psychiatric hospitals and intermediate care facilities established primarily for the medical, psychiatric, or psychological treatment and rehabilitation of alcoholics or drug addicts.

“Mobile sign” means any sign mounted on wheels or built with axles to which wheels may be attached. A sign attached to a motor vehicle shall not be considered a mobile sign. A parking permit sticker, inspection sticker, regulatory permit or bumper sticker attached to a motor vehicle shall not be considered a sign.

“Motor vehicle sign” means any sign on or attached to a motor vehicle which is being used primarily for the purpose of displaying advertising and is not being utilized in the normal business or work of the vehicle owner.

“Moving or windblown sign” means any sign, any element or part of which (such as a pennant, streamer, moored blimp or propeller) moves by means of a mechanized, electrical or other device or is set in motion by movement of the atmosphere.

Multiple-Family Dwelling (Apartment House). See “Dwelling, multiple.”

“Multifamily dwelling sign” means any sign identifying or advertising a multifamily dwelling. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.150 “N” definitions.

“Nonconforming structure” means a building or part thereof lawfully existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or any amendment thereof, and which does not conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located.

“Nonconforming use” means a use which lawfully occupied a building or land on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.160 “O” definitions.

“Off-street parking sign” means any sign identifying an off-street parking area or lot.

One-Family Dwelling. See “Dwelling, single-family.” (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.170 “P” definitions.

“Parking area” means an open, occupied space used or required for use for parking of automobiles or other private vehicles exclusively and in which no gas or automobile accessories are sold, no other business is conducted, and no fees are charged.

“Parking lot” means an off-street facility, including parking spaces, along with adequate provision for drives and aisles for maneuvering and giving access, and for entrance and exit, all laid out in a way to be usable for parking.

“Parking space” means an off-street space available for parking of one motor vehicle and having an area of not less than 200 square feet exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto, and having direct access to a street or alley.

“Person” means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, trust or other group or combination of persons operating as a unit.

“Political sign” means any sign addressing the candidacy of one or more persons for elective office.

“Portable sign” means any sign which is not permanently affixed into the ground or to a building or structure and which can easily be picked up and moved to another location.

“Private garage” means a detached accessory building or portion of a principal building designed for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles by the occupants of the premises and in which no business, occupation, or service for profit is in any way conducted, except that one of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more than two-ton capacity.

“Public garage” means a building other than a private garage where automobiles are parked, stored, cared for, or equipped. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.180 “Q” definitions.

Reserved. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.190 “R” definitions.

“Real estate sign” means any sign advertising the sale, lease or further use of real estate, which is placed upon the property, so advertised.

“Rear yard” means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the nearest rear principal building and rear lot line. The depth of the required rear yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of a principal building toward the nearest point of the rear lot line.

“Remote sign” means any sign advertising or indicating the location of or direction to a person, place, event, product, business or other matter which is remote from the site or property upon which the sign is erected or displayed, other than the billboard, directional sign, real estate sign, ballpark sign or contractor or subcontractor sign.

“Roof line” means the line composed of the highest points of the roof of a building or structure not to include mechanical penthouses or other structures attached to or erected on such roof.

“Roof sign” means any sign erected on or affixed to a building or structure that extends, in whole or in part, above the roof line.

“Rooming house” means a dwelling in which, as a home occupation and for compensation, lodging only is furnished to three or more but not over nine guests. Such dwelling shall contain not over five guest rooms.

“Row dwelling” means one of a series of three or more attached one-family dwellings separated from one another by single partition walls without openings extending from basement to roof. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.200 “S” definitions.

“Sandwich board sign” means a freestanding sign consisting of two boards hinged at the top.

“School sign” means any bulletin board type of sign erected or displayed on the real property of a school for the display of messages.

“Shopping center” means a business development having a common ownership of real estate as well as improvements thereon where three or more retail establishments are located, having common parking for all commercial and professional establishments located within the business development complex.

“Side yard” means a yard between the main building on a lot and the side lot line, of the lot, extending from the front yard, or street line, if there is no required front yard, to the rear yard, or the rear lot line, if there is no required rear yard; or the horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main building or any projection thereof.

“Sign, billboard, or other advertising device” means any structure or part thereof or device attached thereto or represented thereon, which shall display or include any letter, words, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, or representation used as, or which is in the nature of an announcement, direction, or advertisement. Any letters, parts of letters, words, figures, numerals, emblems, devices, designs, trademarks, posters, handbills or any other objects (i) which make known or designate, or attract attention to, any person or any thing (such as a place, event, product or business), (ii) which are visible to persons located outdoors, and (iii) which are capable of attracting the attention of such persons. Any supporting standard for a sign shall not itself be considered a sign if no letters, parts of letters, words, figures, numerals, emblems, devices, designs, trademarks, posters, handbills or other objects are affixed thereon.

The word “sign” includes the word “billboard” or any other type of advertising device, but does not include the flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city, or other political unit. Types of signs are defined by the following categories:

(1) “Animated sign” means any sign, the character or appearance of any element or part of which changes by any device, mechanical, electrical or otherwise.

(2) “Apartment hotel sign” means any sign advertising or identifying an apartment hotel.

(3) “Awning” means a covering attached to a building or structure, erected in or over a window or door, and usually supported by gravity and a metal frame.

(4) “Ballpark sign” means any sign located on the inside of fencing in an enclosed ballfield in a public park.

(5) “Banner” means any sign appended on or from a staff, pole, wire, frame or similar support, extending across the entire width of any street, road, highway or alley.

(6) “Billboard” means any sign, in excess of 150 square feet, advertising a person, place, event, product, business or other matter which is remote from the site or property upon which the sign is erected or displayed.

(7) “Business sign” means any sign advertising a business conducted within the building or structure, or upon the real property, on which the sign is erected or displayed.

(8) “Church sign” means any bulletin board type of sign erected or displayed on the real property of a church, chapel, temple, synagogue or other place of worship for the display of messages.

(9) “Contractor” or “subcontractor sign” means any sign containing the name and type of work performed by a contractor or subcontractor and erected or displayed on the property upon which building operations are being conducted.

(10) “Convenience sign” means any sign indicating the location of or direction to a place or object of public convenience, such as a restroom, telephone, bus stop or public parking area.

(11) “Curb sign” means any sign composed of one or more numerals painted on a curb located within a public right-of-way which designates the premises upon which it is located.

(12) “Directional sign” means any sign indicating the location of or direction to a person, place, event, product, business or other matter which is remote from the site or property upon which the sign is erected or displayed.

(13) “Double-face sign” means any sign having two parallel planes or surfaces upon which advertising is displayed.

(14) “Flag” means a piece of material, usually rectangular in shape, on which is imprinted, or into which is woven, a distinctive design which is or denotes the official symbol of a national, state or local government. A flag shall not be considered a sign. However, a piece of material on which is imprinted, or into which is woven, a design, business trademark or other pattern or symbol that does not constitute or denote an official government symbol shall be considered a sign.

(15) “Flashing sign” means any sign consisting of, or illuminated by, flashing or intermittent lights or other lights of changing degrees of intensity, brightness or color, except a sign showing the date, time and/or temperature.

(16) “Freestanding sign” means any sign permanently affixed into the ground, erected on its own foundation or placed on a pole which is independent of but on the same lot or parcel as the building or structure in which the person, place, event, product, business or other matter noted on the sign is located.

(17) “Home occupation sign” means any sign erected or displayed on the exterior wall of a private dwelling which states only the name of a person occupying the dwelling and the name of a product or service offered in or from the dwelling by that person.

(18) “Identification sign” means any sign stating the use and name given to the use of a building, structure or area, when such use is permitted in the zone in which the sign is located.

(19) “Marquee” means a fixed covering erected over a sidewalk as a protection to an entrance of a building or structure.

(20) “Mobile sign” means any sign mounted on wheels or built with axles to which wheels may be attached. A sign attached to a motor vehicle shall not be considered a mobile sign. A parking permit sticker, inspection sticker, regulatory permit or bumper sticker attached to a motor vehicle shall not be considered a sign.

(21) “Motor vehicle sign” means any sign on or attached to a motor vehicle which is being used primarily for the purpose of displaying advertising and is not being utilized in the normal business or work of the vehicle owner.

(22) “Moving or windblown sign” means any sign, any element or part of which (such as a pennant, streamer, moored blimp or propeller) moves by means of a mechanized, electrical or other device or is set in motion by movement of the atmosphere.

(23) “Multifamily dwelling sign” means any sign identifying or advertising a multifamily dwelling.

(24) “Off-street parking sign” means any sign identifying an off-street parking area or lot.

(25) “Person” means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, trust or other group or combination of persons operating as a unit.

(26) “Political sign” means any sign addressing the candidacy of one or more persons for elective office.

(27) “Portable sign” means any sign which is not permanently affixed into the ground or to a building or structure and which can easily be picked up and moved to another location.

(28) “Real estate sign” means any sign advertising the sale, lease or further use of real estate which is placed upon the property so advertised.

(29) “Remote sign” means any sign advertising or indicating the location of or direction to a person, place, event, product, business or other matter which is remote from the site or property upon which the sign is erected or displayed, other than the billboard, directional sign, real estate sign, ballpark sign or contractor or subcontractor sign.

(30) “Roof line” means the line composed of the highest points of the roof of a building or structure not to include mechanical penthouses or other structures attached to or erected on such roof.

(31) “Roof sign” means any sign erected on or affixed to a building or structure which extends, in whole or in part, above the roof line.

(32) “School sign” means any bulletin board type of sign erected or displayed on the real property of a school for the display of messages.

(33) “Special advertising” means advertisement of a product or service which constitutes less than 50 percent of the gross business conducted by the person erecting or displaying the sign either in the building or structure or on the property to which the sign containing the advertisement is affixed.

(34) “Street median” means a defined area of the public right-of-way located between traffic lanes, usually elevated and narrow, which follows the course of the roadway to separate traffic moving in the same or opposite directions.

(35) “Subdivision sign” means any sign erected or displayed for the purpose of identifying or advertising a residential development or subdivision.

(36) “Temporary signs” shall include any sign, banner, pennant, valance, or advertising display made of cloth, canvas, or other light fabric, without frames. Sandwich board signs and real estate signs shall be exempt from these restrictions as to materials.

(37) “Erect,” when used in connection with signs, shall mean to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix and shall also include the painting of wall signs.

(38) “Traffic channelization island” means a defined area of the public right-of-way located in a roadway to confine specific movements of traffic, usually turning movements at an intersection, to definite channels.

(39) “Warning sign” means any sign stating that solicitation, trespassing or parking is prohibited on the premises upon which the sign is erected or displayed, and any sign stating that dogs are present, that the building or structure to which it is affixed is protected by a security or alarm system, or other similar statements of caution.

(40) “Window sign” means any sign affixed to, or visible from the outdoors through, any window in a building or structure; provided, however, that any object which is sold or available for purchase on the premises of the property upon which it is erected or displayed shall not be considered a window sign.

(41) “Yard sale sign” means any sign stating the date and time of a yard sale or garage sale to be conducted on the premises of the property upon which it is erected or displayed.

“Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it; or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and ceiling next above it.

“Street” means a public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.

“Street line” means a dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street.

“Structural alteration” means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof.

“Structure” means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground; provided, however, that utility poles shall not be considered to be structures.

“Student activity building” means a building used for a variety of student co-curricular functions and events, including, but not limited to, student government, social functions, cultural events and meetings.

“Student housing” means any building designed to provide living quarters for more than one student. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2009-20. Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.210 “T” definitions.

“Through lot” means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.

“Tourist court” means a group of attached or detached buildings which are provided for transient guests, including auto courts, motels, and motor lodges.

“Tourist home” means a dwelling in which boarding or rooming or both are offered to the traveling public for compensation; open to transient guests in contradistinction to a boardinghouse or rooming house.

“Tourist or trailer camp” means premises available to the public used to supply parking areas accommodating two or more trailers for a period not exceeding 90 days, including all buildings, structures, tents, vehicles, accessories, and appurtenances used or intended as equipment of such tourist or trailer camp.

Two-Family Dwelling. See “Dwelling, two-family.” (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.220 “U” definitions.

“Use” means the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or maintained. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.230 “V” definitions.

Reserved. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.240 “W” definitions.

Reserved. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.250 “X” definitions.

Reserved. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.260 “Y” definitions.

“Yard” means an open space on the same lot with a principal building or group of principal buildings, which open space lies between the building or outer building or a group and nearest lot or street line. (Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


18.10.270 “Z” definitions.

“Zoning administrator” means the senior planner or the senior planner’s designee; except, however, only the senior planner or the senior planner’s specified zoning designee within a particularly prescribed zoning function or area shall be authorized to act to inform any property owner or any other person with an interest in the property that a structure or other aspect or use complies with the zoning code or zoning ordinance provision.

Zoning Districts. See “District.” (Ord. 2017-03. Zoning ordinance Art. 2).


Chapter 18.15 ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP

Sections:

18.15.010    Establishment of zoning districts.

18.15.020    Zoning map.

18.15.030    Scope of regulations.

18.15.040    Rules for interpretation of district boundaries.


18.15.010 Establishment of zoning districts.

For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, convenience, and the general welfare of the community, the city of Staunton is hereby divided into districts of 17 different classifications, each district being of such number, shape, kind, and area, and such common unity of purpose, and adaptability of use that is deemed most suitable to carry out the purpose of this code.

	DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION

	A-1	Agricultural-forestal district

	R-1	Low density residential district

	R-2	Low density residential district

	R-3	Medium density residential district

	R-4	High density residential district

	R-5	Manufactured home park district

	R-6	Manufactured home subdivision district

	P-1	Professional district

	B-1	Local business district

	B-2	General business district

	B-3	Planned business district

	B-4	Cultural and recreational planned business district

	H-1	Historic preservation district

	HE-1	Higher education district

	I-1	Light industrial district

	I-2	Heavy industrial district

	I-3	Planned industrial district

(Zoning ordinance Art. 3, § 1).


18.15.020 Zoning map.

The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this code are denoted and defined as shown on the map entitled “Zoning Districts of Staunton, Virginia,” adopted November 1, 1969, and certified by the city clerk. The said map, together with everything shown thereon, is hereby incorporated into this title as is fully set forth and described herein.

The zoning map shall be kept and maintained by the building inspector and shall be available for inspection and examination by the public at all reasonable times as any other public record. (Zoning ordinance Art. 3, § 2).


18.15.030 Scope of regulations.

The regulations applying to each district include specific limitation on the use of land and structure, height and bulk of structures, density of population, lot area, yard dimension, and area of lot that can be covered by structures. (Zoning ordinance Art. 3, § 3).


18.15.040 Rules for interpretation of district boundaries.

Where uncertainty exists with respect to the precise location of any of the aforesaid districts shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:

(1) Boundaries shown as following or approximately following streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow the center lines of such streets, highways or alleys.

(2) Boundaries shown as following or approximately following platted lot lines or other property lines, such lines shall be construed to be said boundary lines.

(3) Boundaries shown as following or approximately following railroad lines shall be construed to lie midway between the main tracks of such railroad lines.

(4) Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the center line of streams, rivers, or other continuously flowing water courses shall be construed as following the channel center line of such water courses and the said boundaries shall be deemed to be at the limit of the jurisdiction of the city unless otherwise indicated.

(5) Boundaries shown as following or closely following the limits of the city of Staunton shall be construed as following such limits.

(6) Where the application of the aforesaid rules leaves a reasonable doubt as to the boundaries between two districts, the regulations of the more restrictive district shall govern the entire parcel in question, unless otherwise determined by the board of zoning appeals.

(7) Whenever any street, alley, or other public easement is vacated, the district classification of the property to which the vacated portions of land accrue shall become the classification of the vacated land. (Ord. 2009-04. Zoning ordinance Art. 3, § 4).


Chapter 18.20 R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Sections:

18.20.010    General description.

18.20.020    Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures.

18.20.030    Uses permitted on review.

18.20.040    Area regulations.

18.20.050    Height regulations.

18.20.060    Off-street parking.

18.20.070    Occupancy limitations.


18.20.010 General description.

These districts are intended to be used for single-family residential development with low population densities. Additional permitted uses, by review of the planning commission, include educational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 1).


18.20.020 Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures.

Property and buildings in an R-1 district shall be used only for the following purposes:

(1) Detached single-family dwellings, but not including trailer houses or mobile homes.

(2) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be immediately adjacent to said construction work and which buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.

(3) Transportation and utility easements, alleys, and rights-of-way.

(4) Accessory uses and buildings, provided such uses are incidental to the principal use and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business. Any accessory building shall be located on the same lot with the principal building.

(5) Signs as regulated in Chapter 18.140 SCC.

(6) Agricultural crops (not to be sold), and not the raising of farm animals or poultry except for keeping of chickens, as defined and provided in Chapter 18.153 SCC.

(7) The keeping of less than three boarders or roomers by a resident family with parking as required by Chapter 18.125 SCC, Table of Parking Spaces Required, boarding or rooming house.

(8) Home occupations as regulated in Chapter 18.150 SCC.

(9) Co-location of telecommunication antenna and related equipment as regulated in SCC 18.185.020(4). (Ord. 2015-10. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 1).


18.20.030 Uses permitted on review.

The following uses may be permitted on review by the city council in accordance with provisions contained in Chapter 18.210 SCC:

(1) Churches or similar places of worship, with accessory structures but not including missions or revival tents.

(2) Elementary or high schools, public or private.

(3) Public parks, playgrounds, and playfields, and neighborhood and municipal buildings and uses in keeping with the character and requirements of the district.

(4) Libraries, museums, and historical monuments or structures.

(5) Utilities, substations and pumping plants, provided the area is adequately landscaped and structures are reasonably attractive.

(6) Golf courses, or country clubs, with adjoining grounds of not less than 60 acres, but not including miniature courses and driving tees operated for commercial purposes.

(7) Cemeteries.

(8) A planned residential development as regulated in SCC 18.105.020.

(9) Social and recreational uses not operated for gain. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 1).


18.20.040 Area regulations.

All buildings shall be set back from street right-of-way lines and lot lines to comply with the following yard requirements:

(1) Front Yard.

(a) For dwellings, the minimum depth of the front yard shall be 30 feet and in no case shall an accessory building be located or extend into the front yard.

(b) All other permitted uses shall have a front yard setback of 35 feet.

(2) Side Yard.

(a) For a single-story dwelling, located on interior lots, side yards shall be not less than eight feet in width; however, the sum of the two side yards shall not be less than 20 feet. For dwellings of more than one story there shall be side yards of not less than 12 feet each.

(b) For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than eight feet; provided, however, that unattached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than five feet from an interior side lot line when all parts or the accessory buildings are located more than 10 feet behind the main building.

(c) Churches and other main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings, and buildings accessory to dwellings, shall set back from all side lot lines a distance of not less than 35 feet.

(3) Rear Yard.

(a) For main buildings there shall be a rear yard of not less than 35 feet.

(b) Unattached buildings of accessory use shall not be located closer to any rear lot line than five feet.

(4) Lot Width.

(a) For all dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width of 75 feet at the front building line, such lot shall abut on a public street for a distance of not less than 30 feet.

(b) For lots having width of not more than 150 feet, the lot length shall be not greater than three times the lot width.

(5) Intensity of Use.

(a) For each dwelling and building accessory thereto there shall be a lot area of not less than 15,000 square feet.

(b) For churches and other main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings, and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this chapter and the off-street parking areas required in Chapter 18.125 SCC; provided, however, that the lot area for a church shall be not less than 30,000 square feet.

(c) There shall be no more than one dwelling unit on each lot.

(6) Maximum Lot Coverage.

(a) Dwellings and buildings accessory thereto shall cover not more than 30 percent of the lot area.

(b) Churches and other main and accessory buildings shall cover not more than 25 percent of the lot area. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 1).


18.20.050 Height regulations.

No main building shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height, except as provided in Chapter 18.115 SCC. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 1).


18.20.060 Off-street parking.

Off-street parking is as regulated in Chapter 18.125 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 1).


18.20.070 Occupancy limitations.

Occupancy limitations are as regulated in Chapter 18.180 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 1).


Chapter 18.25 R-2 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Sections:

18.25.010    General description.

18.25.020    Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures.

18.25.030    Uses permitted on review.

18.25.040    Area regulations.

18.25.050    Height regulations.

18.25.060    Off-street parking.

18.25.070    Occupancy limitations.


18.25.010 General description.

These districts are intended to be used for single-family residential development with low to moderate population densities. Additional permitted uses, by review of the planning commission, include educational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 2).


18.25.020 Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures.

Property and buildings in an R-2 district shall be used only for the following purposes:

(1) Detached single-family dwellings, but not including trailer houses or mobile homes.

(2) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be immediately adjacent to said construction work and which buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.

(3) Transportation and utility easements, alleys, and rights-of-way.

(4) Accessory uses and buildings, provided such uses are incidental to the principal use and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business. Any accessory building shall be located on the same lot with the principal building.

(5) Signs as regulated in Chapter 18.140 SCC.

(6) Agricultural crops (not to be sold), and not the raising of farm animals or poultry except for keeping of chickens, as defined and provided in Chapter 18.153 SCC.

(7) The keeping of less than three boarders or roomers by a resident family with parking as required by Chapter 18.125 SCC, Table of Parking Spaces Required, boarding or rooming house.

(8) Home occupations as regulated in Chapter 18.150 SCC.

(9) Co-location of telecommunication antenna and related equipment as regulated in SCC 18.185.020(4). (Ord. 2017-17; Ord. 2015-11. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 2).


18.25.030 Uses permitted on review.

The following uses may be permitted on review by the city council in accordance with provisions contained in Chapter 18.210 SCC:

(1) Churches or similar places of worship, with accessory structures but not including missions or revival tents.

(2) Elementary or high schools, public or private.

(3) Public parks, playgrounds and playfields, and neighborhood and municipal buildings and uses in keeping with the character and requirements of the district.

(4) Libraries, museums, and historical monuments or structures.

(5) Utility substations.

(6) Plant nursery in which no building or structure is maintained in connection therewith.

(7) Golf courses, or country clubs, with adjoining grounds of not less than 60 acres, but not including miniature courses and driving tees operated for commercial purposes.

(8) Cemeteries.

(9) Social and recreational uses not operated for gain.

(10) A planned residential development as regulated in SCC 18.105.020. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 2).


18.25.040 Area regulations.

All buildings shall be set back from street right-of-way lines and lot lines to comply with the following yard requirements:

(1) Front Yard.

(a) For dwellings, the minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet from lot line and in no case shall an accessory building be located or extend into the front yard.

(b) All other permitted use shall have a front yard setback of 35 feet.

(2) Side Yard.

(a) For a single-story dwelling, located on interior lots, side yards shall be not less than seven feet in width; however, the sum of the two side yards shall not be less than 18 feet. For dwellings of more than one story there shall be side yards of not less than 10 feet each.

(b) For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than seven feet; provided, however, that unattached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than five feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory building are located more than 10 feet behind the main building.

(c) Churches and other main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings, and buildings accessory to dwellings, shall set back from all side lot lines a distance of not less than 35 feet.

(3) Rear Yard.

(a) For main buildings there shall be a rear yard of not less than 30 feet.

(b) Unattached buildings of accessory use shall not be located closer to any rear lot line than five feet.

(4) Lot Width.

(a) For all dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width of 70 feet at the front building line, such lot shall abut on a public street for a distance of not less than 25 feet.

(b) For lots having a width of not more than 150 feet, the lot length shall be not greater than three times the lot width.

(5) Intensity of Use.

(a) For each dwelling and building accessory thereto, there shall be a lot area of not less than 8,750 square feet.

(b) For churches and other main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings, and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this chapter and the off-street parking areas required in Chapter 18.125 SCC; provided, however, that the lot area for a church shall be not less than 30,000 square feet.

(c) There shall be no more than one dwelling unit on each lot.

(6) Maximum Lot Coverage.

(a) Dwellings and buildings accessory thereto shall cover not more than 30 percent of the lot area.

(b) Churches and other main and accessory buildings shall cover not more than 25 percent of the lot area. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 2).


18.25.050 Height regulations.

No main building shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height, except as provided in Chapter 18.115 SCC. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 2).


18.25.060 Off-street parking.

Off-street parking is as regulated in Chapter 18.125 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 2).


18.25.070 Occupancy limitations.

Occupancy limitations are as regulated in Chapter 18.180 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 2).


Chapter 18.30 R-3 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Sections:

18.30.010    General description.

18.30.020    Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures.

18.30.030    Uses permitted on review.

18.30.040    Area regulations.

18.30.050    Usable open space.

18.30.060    Height regulations.

18.30.070    Off-street parking.

18.30.080    Occupancy limitations.


18.30.010 General description.

These districts provide for medium to high residential population density. The principal uses of land may range from single-family to multiple-family apartment uses. Certain uses which are more compatible functionally with intensive residential uses than with commercial uses are permitted. The recreational, religious, educational facilities, and other related uses in keeping with the residential character of the district may be permitted on review by the planning commission. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 3).


18.30.020 Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures.

Property and buildings in an R-3 medium density residential district shall be used only for the following purposes:

(1) Any use permitted in an R-1 and R-2 low density residential district.

(2) Two-family dwelling.

(3) Multiple-family dwelling.

(4) Rooming or boarding house.

(5) Group house.

(6) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses when located on the same lot.

(7) Housing for the elderly.

(8) Home occupations as regulated in Chapter 18.150 SCC.

(9) Co-location of telecommunication antenna and related equipment as regulated in SCC 18.185.020(4). (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 3).


18.30.030 Uses permitted on review.

The following uses may be permitted on review by the city council in accordance with provisions contained in Chapter 18.210 SCC:

(1) Any use permitted on review in an R-1 and R-2 low density residential district.

(2) Fraternities, sororities, and denominational student headquarters.

(3) Medical care facility.

(4) Medical facility, except veterinary hospital or clinic.

(5) Private day nurseries and kindergartens, as regulated in SCC 18.105.060.

(6) A planned residential development as regulated in SCC 18.105.020.

(7) Single-family attached dwellings and single-family semi-detached dwellings as regulated in SCC 18.105.030.

(8) Additional Dwelling Unit(s). 

(a) For an already existing single-family dwelling that, as of August 27, 2015, contained and continues to contain the same 3,000 square feet or more of net floor area and does not otherwise meet the minimum area requirements established in the intensity-of-use provisions for each district under this title, one or more additional dwelling units within such dwelling may be permitted as follows: 

	EXISTING DWELLING NET FLOOR AREA	ADDITIONAL DWELLING UNIT(S)

	3,000 square feet or less	None

	3,001 square feet to 5,500 square feet	1 additional unit

	5,501 square feet to 8,000 square feet	2 additional units

	8,001 square feet to 10,500 square feet	3 additional units

(b) Parking for two-family dwellings shall be regulated the same as for single-family dwelling. 

(c) Parking for any use in excess of a two-family dwelling shall comply with all provisions of Chapter 18.125 SCC. 

(d) For the purposes of this section, “net floor area” means the total of all floor areas of a building, excluding stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or loading, and all floors below the first or ground floor, except when used or intended and permitted to be used for human habitation or service to the public. (Ord. 2015-12. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 3).


18.30.040 Area regulations.

All buildings shall be set back from street right-of-way lines and lot lines to comply with the following yard requirements:

(1) Front Yard.

(a) For single-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings the minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet and in no case shall an accessory building be located or extend into the front yard.

(b) Churches and other main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings, shall have a front setback of 35 feet.

(2) Side Yard.

(a) For single-story dwellings, located on interior lots, side yards shall be not less than eight feet in width; however, the sum of the two side yards shall be not less than 20 feet each.

(b) For dwellings of more than one story, there shall be side yards of not less than 12 feet.

(c) For unattached buildings of accessory use there shall be a side yard of not less than eight feet; provided, however, that unattached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than five feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory building are located more than 10 feet behind the main building.

(d) Churches and other main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings, and buildings accessory to dwellings, shall set back from all side lot lines a distance of not less than 35 feet.

(3) Rear Yard.

(a) For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.

(b) Five-foot setback for accessory buildings.

(4) Lot Width.

(a) For single- and two-family dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width of 75 feet at the front building line.

(b) For multiple-family dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width of 100 feet at the front building line.

(c) For lots having a width of not more than 150 feet, the lot length shall be not greater than three times the lot width.

(5) Intensity of Use.

(a) For each single-family dwelling and building accessory there served by a sanitary sewer system there will be a lot area of not less than 7,500 square feet.

(b) For each two-family dwelling there shall be a lot area of not less than 9,000 square feet.

(c) For multiple-family structures, there shall be a lot area of not less than 6,000 square feet plus an additional 1,500 square feet for each dwelling unit. For those structures which provide off-street parking within the main structure, the lot area requirement may be reduced 200 square feet per dwelling unit.

(d) For churches and other main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings, and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this chapter and the off-street parking areas required in Chapter 18.125 SCC; provided, however, that the lot for a church shall not be less than 30,000 square feet.

(6) Maximum Lot Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall cover not more than 30 percent of the lot area. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 3).


18.30.050 Usable open space.

For multiple-family structures there shall be usable open space provided for each dwelling unit of not less than 400 square feet. Open space does not include drives, parking, and service areas. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 3).


18.30.060 Height regulations.

(1) No main building shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height, except as provided in Chapter 18.115 SCC; and

(2) By special use permit as set forth in Chapter 18.210 SCC, city council may allow an increase to the allowable height of this district. The guidelines for considering such an increase shall include but not be limited to:

(a) The proposed structure is compatible with the character of the surrounding area.

(d) There is no substantial degradation of air movement or light infiltration.

(c) There is no adverse effect to the health, safety, and welfare of the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 2002-30. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 3).


18.30.070 Off-street parking.

Off-street parking is as regulated in Chapter 18.125 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 3).


18.30.080 Occupancy limitations.

Occupancy limitations are as regulated in Chapter 18.180 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 3).


Chapter 18.35 R-4 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Sections:

18.35.010    General description.

18.35.020    Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures.

18.35.030    Uses permitted on review.

18.35.040    Area regulations.

18.35.050    Usable open space.

18.35.060    Height regulations.

18.35.070    Off-street parking.

18.35.080    Occupancy limitations.


18.35.010 General description.

These residential districts are intended to promote and encourage the establishment and maintenance of a suitable environment for urban residence in areas appropriate by location and character for occupancy by high density, multiple-family dwellings. One of the important purposes of this district is to create adequate standards of residential development in order to prevent overcrowded and unhealthy housing conditions. The intensity of land use should not be so great as to cause congestion of building or traffic or to preclude the amenities of good housing. Densities should be limited to provide adequate light, air, and usable open space for dwellings and functional space for all related facilities.

No new R-4 high density residential district may be created which contains less than four acres. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 4).


18.35.020 Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures.

Property and buildings in an R-4 high density residential district shall be used only for the following purposes:

(1) Any use permitted and as regulated in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 residential districts.

(2) High density multiple-family dwellings.

(3) Co-location of telecommunication antenna and related equipment as regulated in SCC 18.185.020(4). (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 4).


18.35.030 Uses permitted on review.

The following uses may be permitted on review by the planning commission in accordance with provisions contained in Chapter 18.210 SCC:

(1) Any use permitted on review in an R-1, R-2, and R-3 residential district.

(2) Retail business may be conducted, in multiple-family buildings only, for the convenience of the occupants of the building; provided, there shall be no entrance to such place of business except from the inside of the building.

(3) There shall be no show window, sign, or other advertising matter visible from the outside of multiple-family buildings, except as regulated in Chapter 18.140 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 4).


18.35.040 Area regulations.

No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected unless the following yards, lot area building coverage, and open space requirements are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement.

(1) Front Yard.

(a) For single-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings not exceeding three stories or 35 feet, the minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet.

(b) For multiple-family dwellings having a greater height than three stories or 35 feet, the minimum depth of the front yard shall be 35 feet.

(c) For churches and other main and accessory buildings, as regulated in the R-3 district.

(2) Side Yard.

(a) For single-story dwellings, side yard requirements shall be the same as for the R-3 district.

(b) For two-story dwellings there shall be side yards of not less than 12 feet each.

(c) For buildings more than two stories in height, one foot additional side yard on each side of the main building shall be added for each additional story above two stories.

(d) All other side yard requirements shall be the same as required in the R-3 district.

(3) Rear Yard.

(a) For main buildings of three stories in height and less, rear yard requirements shall be the same as for the R-3 district.

(b) For all main buildings more than three stories in height, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 30 feet.

(4) Lot Width. Lot width is the same as for the R-3 district.

(5) Intensity of Use.

(a) The lot area requirement for single- and two-family dwellings shall be in accordance with the R-3 district.

(b) For multiple-family structures of one and two stories, the lot area requirements shall be not less than 6,000 square feet plus an additional 1,500 square feet for each dwelling unit.

For those residential structures exceeding two stories, the lot area requirements shall be as follows:

	MULTIPLE-FAMILY	LOT AREA REQUIREMENT

	3-5 story	6,000 square feet plus 800 square feet per dwelling unit

	6-8 story	6,000 square feet plus 750 square feet per dwelling unit

	9-12 story	6,000 square feet plus 700 square feet per dwelling unit

	13 story and over	6,000 square feet plus 650 square feet per dwelling unit

For those structures which provide off-street parking within the main building, the lot area requirement may be reduced 200 square feet per such parking space.

(6) Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot area which may be covered by main buildings shall be as follows:

	MULTIPLE-FAMILY	MAXIMUM NET BUILDING COVERAGE

	2 story or less	30%

	3-5 story	30%

	6-8 story	25%

	9-12 story	20%

	13 story and over	17%

(Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 4).


18.35.050 Usable open space.

For all multiple-family uses of land, usable open space shall be provided as follows:

	MULTIPLE-FAMILY	SQUARE FEET OF USABLE OPEN SPACE PER DWELLING UNIT

	2 story or less	400

	3-5 story	300

	6-8 story	250

	9 story and over	200

(Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 4).


18.35.060 Height regulations.

There are unlimited height regulations in the R-4 high density residential district. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 4).


18.35.070 Off-street parking.

Off-street parking is as regulated in Chapter 18.125 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 4).


18.35.080 Occupancy limitations.

Occupancy limitations are as regulated in Chapter 18.180 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 4).


Chapter 18.40 R-5 MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT

Sections:

18.40.010    General description – Purpose and intent.

18.40.020    Definitions.

18.40.030    Establishment of district.

18.40.040    Permitted uses.

18.40.050    Uses permitted on review.

18.40.060    Area regulations.

18.40.070    Public water and sewer.

18.40.080    Storage tanks.

18.40.090    Records to be kept.

18.40.100    Bonding for streets, sidewalks, utility, lighting and amenities.

18.40.110    Certificate of use and occupancy required.

18.40.120    Amendments to site plan.


18.40.010 General description – Purpose and intent.

The purpose of this district is to establish areas in the city to accommodate manufactured homes as attractive and affordable housing with standards of livability in accord with the goals of health, safety, and welfare consistent with and compatible with surrounding land uses, the intent of this title and the comprehensive plan for the city. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 5).


18.40.020 Definitions.

Lot. As used in this chapter, a “lot” is the site within which the manufactured home will be placed, to be leased to a person for exclusive occupancy.

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein.

“Manufactured home park” means a group of manufactured homes located on a single tract of land owned by one person or entity who may lease lots to occupants who may own or lease the manufactured home as their permanent residence for single-family residential purposes.

“Stand” means the area within a lot upon which the manufactured home will be located. The stand must be paved, or made of concrete, or be of a hard-surface dust-free drained nonerosive surface. The stand shall have permanent water, sewer, power, and utility connections so that the manufactured home may be readily connected to them. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 5).


18.40.030 Establishment of district.

(1) Applicants seeking to have an R-5 district established shall apply therefor to the senior planner for the city. The application shall include the following:

(a) A survey showing the area of proposed rezoning.

(b) A site plan drawn to scale showing the proposed layout, including lots, streets, sidewalks, lighting provisions, landscaping plan, water system, waste disposal system, drainage facilities, fire hydrants, open space and recreation areas, and accessory buildings and service structures.

(c) Proposed street names (which will be subject to city approval).

(d) Utility easements.

(e) A plan for storm water management and erosion and sedimentation control.

(f) If the proposed park is to be developed in sections, the application must so state and the site plan must identify each section thereon.

The senior planner may require additional plans if special conditions exist upon the property, such as unusual topography. The applicant is advised to consult with the senior planner prior to submitting the request to be certain that all requirements hereunder are made known to the applicant.

(2) The application process shall be as set forth in Chapter 18.215 SCC, and Section 15.2-2285 of the Code of Virginia, as amended.

(3) Upon approval, the R-5 district is intended to overlap existing zoning districts and the regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to manufactured home parks in lieu of existing zoning districts it overlaps.

(4) If the tract approved for the R-5 designation has not been developed and used for the manufactured home park for a period of two years after approval of the designation, then the underlying zoning district regulations shall apply, unless the owner obtains an extension of time for completion by applying to the planning commission and city council. Such extension may be granted not to exceed two years. If an extension is granted, no further extensions will be considered. The owner of such tract may file a certificate of intent to discontinue the manufactured home park use with the senior planner for the city stating the date upon which such use shall terminate. From that date, the underlying zoning district classification regulations shall then apply to said tract. Upon the termination of the district, the senior planner shall have the zoning map of the city changed showing the underlying zoning that existed prior to the designation of the R-5 district and all property owners of record in the parcel so affected shall be notified of the change by first class mail.

(5) Only rental spaces or lots shall be permitted in the R-5 district and all uses therein must conform to the specific regulations set forth in this chapter and, as applicable, as generally set forth in this title. (Ord. 2017-03. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 5).


18.40.040 Permitted uses.

(1) Manufactured home parks.

(2) Permanent buildings, housing management offices, child care centers, laundry facilities, indoor recreational facilities, or other service facilities to accommodate the tenants of the manufactured home park; provided, that:

(a) Parking requirements for such facilities are met; and

(b) Such uses are subordinate to the residential use and character of the park.

(3) One permanent single-family building to be used as a residence of the owner of said park, provided the same meets the requirements for a single-family dwelling in the R-3 district of this title.

(4) Accessory uses and structures as set forth in Chapter 18.110 SCC.

(5) Co-location of telecommunication antenna and related equipment as regulated in SCC 18.185.020(4). (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 5).


18.40.050 Uses permitted on review.

(1) Commercial retail uses primarily for the occupants of the park and otherwise compatible with the residential character of the district.

(2) Those uses permitted on review by SCC 18.20.030. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 5).


18.40.060 Area regulations.

(1) Size and Density of Use.

(a) A manufactured home park shall have a minimum area of at least five acres. If the park is to be developed in sections, each section must have a minimum area of five acres.

(b) At least 10 percent of the gross acreage of the park, or any one section thereof, shall be maintained as open space and/or recreational use. This space shall not include roads, sidewalks, home lots, parking lots, or maintenance or utility area.

(c) The overall density of any manufactured home park shall not exceed five lots per gross acre. The density of any particular acre within the park shall not exceed seven lots.

(d) Each lot within a manufactured home park shall have a lot area of at least 6,000 square feet and shall have at least 50 foot frontage on a street within the park (“the front lot line”).

(e) No manufactured home shall exceed 20 feet in height measured from mean ground level.

(f) Dwellings and buildings accessory thereto shall cover not more than 30 percent of the lot area.

(2) Setback and Yard.

(a) Each lot in the park shall have a stand upon which the manufactured home will be sited. No manufactured home shall be sited within 25 feet of the front lot line nor closer than 15 feet of the rear and side lot lines. A porch, constructed to the standards of the Uniform Statewide Building Code, may be attached to the manufactured home. As a minimum, a three foot by three foot landing shall be required at each door of the manufactured home. Any porch or patio or other accessory structure of a size greater than three feet by three feet shall be considered a part of the main structure and must meet the setback requirements.

(3) Skirting and Anchoring.

(a) All manufactured homes shall be completely skirted, such that no part of the undercarriage shall be visible to a casual observer, and with a durable material with a life expectancy of at least five years.

(b) All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to the stand. The anchorage shall be adequate to withstand wind forces and uplift as required by the Virginia Statewide Building Code, as amended, for buildings and structures, based upon the size and weight of the unit.

(4) Streets, Lighting, and Sidewalks.

(a) All streets within a manufactured home park shall be built to city specifications for public streets, curb, and gutter required.

(b) Sidewalks shall be built and maintained by the owner to city specifications in such manner as to afford the occupants of the park access to all recreational areas, service facilities, and accessory buildings open to the public.

(c) Lighting of all streets and sidewalks shall be provided and maintained by the owner, as required by the city.

(d) Street names (approved by the city) shall be identified by signs at each street intersection within the park.

(e) All manufactured homes shall have the street address in numbers located on the side of the manufactured home facing the street in such manner that it may be readily seen by persons in the street.

(5) Off-Street Parking.

(a) Each manufactured home lot shall have at least two off-street parking spaces thereon. These spaces shall be of a surface sealed construction and be dust free.

(b) Accessory and other service buildings within the park shall comply with the parking requirements of this title.

(6) Setback and Height Restrictions for Other Buildings.

(a) All other buildings permitted in the manufactured home park shall be sited no closer than 25 feet of any property line of the park, including the lot lines of the lots within the park.

(b) No other building permitted in the park shall exceed two stories in height. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 5).


18.40.070 Public water and sewer.

All lots and other buildings within a manufactured home park shall be connected to the public water and sewer systems of the city. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 5).


18.40.080 Storage tanks.

All gasoline, liquefied petroleum, gas or oil tanks shall be installed in compliance with all city, state, and federal fire prevention and safety regulations. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 5).


18.40.090 Records to be kept.

The operator of a manufactured home park shall keep an accurate register of all tenants occupying manufactured homes located in the park. The register shall show the name and permanent residence address of the owner and occupants of any manufactured home located in the park, the make and registration of any manufactured home, and such other information as might be necessary to provide information about the occupants of the manufactured home. These records shall be open to the law enforcement officers and public officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register record for each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of three years following the date of departure of the registrant from the park. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 5).


18.40.100 Bonding for streets, sidewalks, utility, lighting and amenities.

Prior to obtaining final zoning approval for the establishment of this R-5 district, the owner and/or developer of the proposed park shall post a bond with corporate surety, or a letter of credit suitable to the city in the amount of the estimated cost of construction of streets, sidewalks, utility lines, lighting and amenities, conditioned upon the satisfactory completion of said facilities in compliance with all city, state, and federal regulations attendant thereto. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 5).


18.40.110 Certificate of use and occupancy required.

No manufactured home shall be occupied in any manufactured home park until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the city building official. Such certificate shall not be issued until after the same has been approved by the health department, administrator, and other agencies concerned. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 5).


18.40.120 Amendments to site plan.

After approval of the site plan for a manufactured home park, any amendments to said plan or material changes thereto must be submitted to the senior planner with the information as required by SCC 18.40.030. The process for approval or not of this amendment or change shall be the same as set forth in the aforesaid SCC 18.40.030. (Ord. 2017-03. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 5).


Chapter 18.45 R-6 MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION

Sections:

18.45.010    General description – Purpose and intent.

18.45.020    Definitions.

18.45.030    Establishment of district.

18.45.040    Establishment of manufactured home subdivision.

18.45.050    Permitted uses.

18.45.060    Uses permitted on review.

18.45.070    Area regulations.


18.45.010 General description – Purpose and intent.

The purpose of this district is to accommodate manufactured home subdivisions as attractive and affordable housing with standards of livability in accord with the goals of health, safety, and welfare consistent and compatible with surrounding land uses and the comprehensive plan for the city. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 6).


18.45.020 Definitions.

“Manufactured home subdivision” means a parcel of land to be divided into three or more lots of less than five acres each for the purpose of siting thereon three or more manufactured homes to be used as single-family residences on said lots to be owned by the manufactured home owner.

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein.

“Stand” means the area within a lot upon which the manufactured home will be located. The stand must be paved, or made of concrete, or be of a hard-surface, dust-free drained nonerosive surface. The stand shall have permanent water, sewer, power, and utility connections so that the manufactured home may be readily connected to them. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 6).


18.45.030 Establishment of district.

(1) Applicants seeking to have an R-6 district established shall apply therefor to the senior planner for the city. The application shall include the following:

(a) A survey showing the area of proposed rezoning.

(b) The name and address of the record owners of the property to be rezoned.

(c) The name and address of the owners of all properties immediately adjacent to the property to be rezoned, including those properties separated from the subject property only by a street, road, or alleyway.

(2) The application process shall be as set forth in Chapter 18.215 SCC and Section 15.2-2285 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. (Ord. 2017-03. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 6).


18.45.040 Establishment of manufactured home subdivision.

Once a subject property has been zoned R-6 hereunder, persons wishing to establish a manufactured home subdivision therein must meet the requirements of SCC Title 17, subject to the other specific requirements set forth herein. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 6).


18.45.050 Permitted uses.

(1) Manufactured home subdivisions.

(2) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be immediately adjacent to said construction work, and which buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction.

(3) Transportation and utility easements, alleys, and rights-of-way.

(4) Accessory uses and structures as permitted by Chapter 18.110 SCC.

(5) Signs, as regulated in Chapter 18.140 SCC.

(6) Home occupations as regulated in Chapter 18.150 SCC.

(7) Co-location of telecommunication antenna and related equipment as regulated in SCC 18.185.020(4). (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 6).


18.45.060 Uses permitted on review.

The following uses may be permitted on review by the city council in accordance with provisions contained in Chapter 18.210 SCC:

(1) Churches or similar places of worship, with accessory structures but not including missions or revival tents.

(2) Elementary or high schools, public or private.

(3) Public parks, playgrounds and playfields, and neighborhood and municipal buildings and uses in keeping with the character and requirements of the district.

(4) Libraries, museums, and historical monuments or structures.

(5) Utilities substations.

(6) Plant nursery in which no building or structure is maintained in connection therewith.

(7) Golf courses, or country clubs, with adjoining grounds of not less than 60 acres, but not including miniature courses and driving tees operated for commercial purposes.

(8) Cemeteries.

(9) Social and recreational uses not operated for gain. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 6).


18.45.070 Area regulations.

(1) Size and Density of Use.

(a) A manufactured home subdivision shall have a minimum area of 10 acres. If the subdivision is to be built in sections, each section shall have a minimum area of 10 acres.

(b) For each manufactured home and building accessory thereto, there shall be a lot area of not less than 8,750 square feet and the lot shall have at least 50 feet frontage on a public street within the subdivision.

(c) For each other use permitted hereunder, other than manufactured homes, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this chapter, and the off-street parking areas required by Chapter 18.125 SCC; provided, that the lot area for a church shall not be less than 30,000 square feet.

(d) There shall be no more than one dwelling unit on each lot.

(e) A manufactured home subdivision shall abut at least 50 feet on a dedicated public street completed to city specifications.

(f) Dwellings and buildings accessory thereto shall cover not more than 30 percent of the lot area.

(2) Setback and Yard.

(a) A manufactured home shall not be sited closer than 25 feet of the front lot line. The front lot line is that line or lines that abut on a public street.

(b) A manufactured home shall not be sited closer than 15 feet of the rear or side lot lines.

(c) For all other permitted uses, the main building shall be sited no closer than 35 feet of any lot line.

(3) Height Regulation.

(a) No manufactured home shall exceed a height of 20 feet measured from mean ground level.

(b) For other permitted uses, no main building shall exceed 35 feet in height measured from mean ground level.

(c) Accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height.

(4) Skirting and Anchoring.

(a) All manufactured homes shall be completely skirted, such that no part of the undercarriage shall be visible to a casual observer, and with a durable material with a life expectancy of at least five years.

(b) All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to the stand. The anchorage shall be adequate to withstand wind forces and uplift as required by the Virginia Statewide Building Code, as amended, for buildings and structures, based upon the size and weight of the unit.

(5) Off-Street Parking. All lots in a manufactured home subdivision are required to have two off-street parking spaces. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 6).


Chapter 18.50 P-1 PROFESSIONAL DISTRICT

Sections:

18.50.010    General description.

18.50.020    Uses permitted.

18.50.030    Area regulations.

18.50.040    Height regulations.

18.50.050    Off-street parking.

18.50.060    Occupancy limitations.


18.50.010 General description.

This professional district is intended to encourage and promote the use of lands adjacent to residential areas that are undesirable for residential use and older homes that are no longer practical to maintain as dwellings. These uses are intended to be compatible with the other uses in the area and should not be a detriment to the surrounding properties. One important purpose of this district is to increase the value of surrounding properties by maintaining attractive buildings with open spaces landscaped and all service entrances or unattractive area screened. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 7).


18.50.020 Uses permitted.

The following uses shall be permitted in the P-1 professional district:

(1) Any use permitted in the R-4 residential district.

(2) Any use permitted on review in the R-4 district.

(3) Medical care facility, except veterinary establishments.

(4) Clinical laboratories.

(5) Hospitals, incidental hospital retail uses such as cafeterias, gift or variety shops, soda bars conducted solely for the convenience of employees, patients, patrons, or visitors wholly within the principal buildings and without exterior advertising display.

(6) Agencies and offices rendering specialized services in the professions, finance, insurance, real estate and brokerage, including service agencies not involving on-premises retail or wholesale trade nor the maintenance of a stock of goods for display of sale.

(7) Chiropractors, optometrists, osteopaths.

(8) Dental laboratories.

(9) Offices of architects and engineers.

(10) Funeral homes.

(11) Signs as regulated by Chapter 18.140 SCC.

(12) Living or sleeping quarters shall be permitted in the same building with professional uses, provided they meet the requirements of the building codes and additional off-street parking is provided.

(13) Co-location of telecommunication antenna and related equipment as regulated in SCC 18.185.020(4). (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 7).


18.50.030 Area regulations.

The following shall apply to all uses permitted in this district:

(1) Front Yard. All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-way lines not less than 25 feet.

(2) Side Yard. On the side of a lot adjoining a residential district, there shall be a side yard of not less than 12 feet. There shall be a side yard setback from an intersecting street of not less than 25 feet. In all other cases, a side yard for a professional building shall not be required. Side yard for dwellings shall be as required in the R-4 district.

(3) Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard, alley, service court or combination thereof, of not less than 30 feet in depth and all of the service areas of all buildings shall be completely screened from public view with permanent ornamental screening materials. Rear yard for dwellings is the same as R-4 district.

(4) Maximum Lot Coverage. No building or buildings shall cover more than 35 percent of the lot area. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 7).


18.50.040 Height regulations.

No building shall exceed two and one-half stories, or 35 feet in height, except as provided in Chapter 18.115 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 7).


18.50.050 Off-street parking.

Off-street parking is as regulated in Chapter 18.125 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 7).


18.50.060 Occupancy limitations.

Occupancy limitations are as regulated in Chapter 18.180 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 7).


Chapter 18.53 TND-I TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT INFILL DISTRICT

Sections:

18.53.010    General description.

18.53.020    Definitions.

18.53.030    Permitted uses.

18.53.040    Area regulations and intensity of use.

18.53.050    Off-street parking.

18.53.060    Application process.

18.53.070    Development standards.

18.53.080    Design and architectural standards.

18.53.090    Appeals.


18.53.010 General description.

The TND-I traditional neighborhood development infill district is intended to permit the development of a mixed-use traditional neighborhood integrated into the existing pattern of historic buildings by reuse of buildings as appropriate, the repetition of historic patterns as appropriate, the integration of parking, recreational facilities and other use elements in a manner that does not detract from historic elements but utilizes existing topographic features, and the creation of new neighborhoods and uses which are pedestrian-oriented and create streetscapes compatible with the existing buildings. These provisions are designed to achieve the following objectives: promote efficient use of land and infrastructure through high-quality urban design; promote a development pattern in harmony with existing development and the objectives of the city’s comprehensive plan; permit a compatible mix of commercial, professional, and residential uses; provide safe, efficient access and traffic circulation to and within the development; create opportunities to use new technologies in managing the quality and quantity of storm water; and encourage the preservation of steep slopes, floodplains, historic structures and areas, and unique, natural, or geological formations.

Unless provided herein or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, the other zoning provisions of the Staunton City Code applicable generally to all districts shall apply to development in the TND-I, traditional neighborhood development infill district. 


18.53.020 Definitions.

“Master plan” means a conceptual proposal for development, including site plans, maps, and other documentation delineating all information relating to use, location, and bulk of buildings, density of development, parking arrangements, public access, common open space, landscaping, public facilities, and other such information necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter and of the other provisions of this title. (Ord. 2005-36).


18.53.030 Permitted uses.

The following uses shall be permitted in the TND-I traditional neighborhood development infill district:

(1) Any use permitted in the R-4 residential district.

(2) Any use permitted in the B-2 general business district.

(3) Mixed-Use Buildings – Accessory Buildings. Buildings may contain both commercial uses and residential uses. Accessory buildings may be used as dwelling units; provided, that if the primary house or the accessory building is leased to a third party separate from the other, the property owner must dwell in one of the buildings. Accessory buildings shall conform to other provisions of Chapter 18.110 SCC.

(4) Signs as regulated in SCC 18.140.040 (3)(d), special regulations for the downtown business area. (Ord. 2005-36).


18.53.040 Area regulations and intensity of use.

(1) Existing Structures.* For buildings and structures existing as of December 8, 2005, the following shall apply to all uses permitted in the district:

	Lot	House (attached/ detached)	Multifamily	Commercial

	Lot size	30' x 100' min.	72' x 100' min.	20' x 70'

	 	 	 	 

	Setbacks	X	X	X

	Front	0'	0'	0'

	Side	0'	0'	0'

	Rear	0'	0'	0'

	 	 	 	 

	Outbuilding	X	X	X

	Side	0'	N/A	N/A

	Rear	0'	N/A	N/A

	 	 	 	 

	Permitted encroachment (for stairs, open porch, stoop, chimney)	Into Setback	X	X

	Front	0'	0'	0'

	Side	0'	0'	0'

	Height (not including basement)	X	X	X

	Principal building	2.5 stories max.	5 stories max. max. 75'	5 stories max. max. 75'

	Outbuilding	2 stories max.	N/A	N/A

	Outbuilding permitted	Yes	Yes	Yes

	Min. building separation on the same lot	10' min.	0'	0'

	Outbuilding	10' min.	N/A	N/A

	Lot coverage by roof	65% max.	90% max.	100% max.

	*When mixed uses (multifamily and commercial uses) are in one building, the lot size and setbacks of the commercial district shall apply.

(2) New Structures.* For buildings and structures commenced after December 8, 2005, the following shall apply to all uses permitted in the district:

	Lot	Townhouse	House (attached/ detached)	Multifamily	Commercial

	Lot size	20' x 70' min.	30' x 100' min.	70' x 100' min.	20' x 70' min.

	 	 	 	 	 

	Setbacks	X	X	X	X

	Front	0'	10' min.	10' min.	0'

	Side	0'	5' min.	5' min.	0'

	Rear	20% of lot depth not to exceed 20'	20% of lot depth not to exceed 20'	20% of lot depth not to exceed 20'	0'

	 	 	 	 	 

	Outbuilding	 	 	 	 

	Side	0'	5' min.	N/A	N/A

	Rear	0'	0'	N/A	N/A

	 	 	 	 	 

	Permitted encroachment (for stairs, open porch, stoop, chimney)	Into setback	X	X	X

	Front	0'	8' max.	8' max.	0'

	Side	0'	2' max.	2' max.	0'

	Height (not including basement)	X	X	X	X

	Principal building	3 stories max.	2.5 stories max.	5 stories max. max. 75 ft.	5 stories max. max. 75 ft.

	Outbuilding	2 stories max.	2 stories max.	N/A	N/A

	Outbuilding permitted	Yes	Yes	No	No

	Min. building separation on the same lot	0'	10' min.	10' min.	0'

	Outbuilding	10' min.	10' min.	N/A	N/A

	Lot coverage by roof	80% max.	65% max.	65% max.	100% max.

	*When mixed uses (multifamily and commercial uses) are in one building, the lot size and setbacks of the commercial district shall apply.

(Ord. 2006-17; Ord. 2005-36).


18.53.050 Off-street parking.

Off-street parking is as regulated in Chapter 18.125 SCC, except as follows:

(1) Dwellings, Single-Family. Parking shall be at the ratios set forth in the SCC; provided, that any lot may have credit for one parking space available on the street bordering the parcel the structure is located upon. Space(s) in a garage (attached or detached) shall count toward this requirement. 

(2) Commercial parking shall be furnished at the ratios set forth in the SCC; provided, that any lot may have credit for one parking space available on the street bordering the parcel the structure is located upon. Shared parking shall be located no farther than 500 feet from the structure it is intended to serve.

(3) Multifamily units (leased or owned) and elder care facilities shall have a minimum of one parking space per dwelling unit; provided, that any lot may have credit for any parking spaces available on the street bordering the parcel the structure is located upon. Shared parking shall be located no farther than 500 feet from the structure it is intended to serve. (Ord. 2005-36).


18.53.060 Application process.

Within the traditional neighborhood development infill district, no building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected or altered except in conformance with a master plan that has been reviewed by the planning commission and approved by city council and until and unless the following conditions have been complied with:

(1) Uses permitted shall be those listed in SCC 18.53.020 and 18.53.030.

(2) There shall have been filed a written application for approval of the contemplated uses by the zoning administrator, to include a proposed development plan, drawn to scale, containing the following information and necessary explanatory materials: 

(a) A site plan indicating the location boundaries of the proposed development area and the ownership of properties contained therein, as well as all existing public and private streets;

(b) Location, size, and use of existing buildings and the location, size, and use of proposed buildings or additions to existing buildings; 

(c) Location of all existing parking facilities and the approximate location of all proposed surface parking lots or parking structures, including the number of parking spaces for each lot or structure and all existing and proposed means of access to parking areas and to public or private streets, alleys, and easements; 

(d) Proposed changes in the location, width, or character of public streets, alleys, or easements within and adjacent to the district, and the delineation of any private driveways or loading spaces that intersect with public rights-of-way or easements; 

(e) Existing and proposed pedestrian routes, including links between various buildings; 

(f) General use of major existing and proposed open spaces within the site and specific features of the development plan, such as screening, buffering, or retention of natural areas, which are intended to enhance compatibility with adjacent properties, and calculations of the percentage of usable open space for the area; 

(g) Infrastructure plans indicating the size and location of existing and proposed stormwater, sanitary sewer, and water lines as well as estimates of impacts of the proposed development on infrastructure capacity in the district and impacts on collector lines immediately outside of the area; 

(h) Information to demonstrate the compatibility of all structures with the surrounding neighborhood; 

(i) Landscaping plan; and

(j) Such other information as deemed necessary by the department of planning to promote the objectives of the TND-I district. (Ord. 2005-36).


18.53.070 Development standards.

In order to accomplish the objectives of the TND-I district, the following development standards shall apply:

(1)  Utilities. All utility service laterals or service lines associated with a basic or comprehensive development plan shall be located underground; however, utility service laterals or service lines may be located above ground to the point of connection when routed directly to the rear of the structure by way of an alley or utility easement where there are existing overhead distribution lines. Because of their size, traditional neighborhood lots are very sensitive to the location of utility easements. Easements shall be located in the alleys, open spaces and street rights-of-way and shall not be required to be located within the area of lots.

(2) Outdoor Lighting. 

(a) Definitions.

“Flood- or spotlight” means a form of lighting, with reflecting or refracting elements, designed to direct its output in a specific direction. 

“Fully shielded fixture” means a lighting fixture constructed in such a manner that all light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the luminaire, is projected below the horizontal plane. The lamp or any optical part (a reflector, prismatic lens or a clear nonprismatic lens) is not visible from the side of a luminaire (or any angle above) if it is fully shielded. Shielding devices may include internal or external louvers. 

“Light trespass” means outdoor lighting falling beyond the lot lines of the use it is intended to serve and spilling over and shining onto adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. 

“Louvers” means a series of baffles designed to shield a light source from being viewed directly within certain angles. 

“Outdoor lighting” means any lighting fixture which is installed outdoors, whether attached to a building, pole, or self-supported.

“Wallpacks” means wall-mounted lighting fixtures, typically surface-mounted on a vertical wall surface, with optical elements (reflectors or refractors) that generally direct a large portion of their light at angles near the horizontal. 

(b) Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to promote the general welfare by controlling light trespass and to protect the public safety through the prevention of glare by regulating the size, height, and placement of outdoor lighting in a manner that:

(i) Is consistent with the city’s comprehensive plan policy of reducing light pollution, particularly in residential neighborhoods; 

(ii) Permits the reasonable use of outdoor lighting for safety, utility, commerce, and security; 

(iii) Minimizes glare and obtrusive light on public streets and adjacent properties by limiting outdoor lighting that is misdirected; and 

(iv) Protects residential neighborhoods by limiting light trespass. 

(c) Applicability. The regulations of this section shall apply to any outdoor lighting installed or replaced in association with: 

(i) A site plan; 

(ii) The erection of a new light support structure exceeding eight feet in height in any zoning district; 

(iii) New floodlights or spotlights attached to existing structures in residentially zoned districts; or 

(iv) New lighting fixtures attached to existing structures in nonresidentially zoned districts. 

(v) The routine servicing or lamp replacement in-kind of any existing outdoor lighting shall not be subject to the requirements of this section. 

(d) Exempt Lighting. The following outdoor lighting shall be exempt from the requirements of this section: 

(i)  Landscape lighting two feet or less in height; 

(ii) Accent directional lighting to emphasize the facade of a building or other architectural elements, provided they are aimed so as to preclude light projection beyond the immediate objects intended to be illuminated; 

(iii) Security lighting controlled by motion sensors which provides illumination for 15 minutes or less; 

(iv) Temporary lighting, such as holiday decorative lighting, construction lighting, or emergency lighting used by or at the direction of police, firefighting, or medical personnel; 

(v) Lighting of the United States of America or Commonwealth of Virginia flag and other noncommercial flags expressing constitutionally protected speech; 

(vi) Submerged lighting in swimming pools; 

(vii) Uniform Statewide Building Code-required lighting for exterior stairs and ramps and exterior exit doors at grade level; and 

(viii) Lighting required and regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration. 

(e)  Lighting Plan. The applicant for any site plan shall submit as part of the application evidence that the proposed work will comply with the outdoor lighting requirements of this section. Such submission shall contain the following, all or part of which may be part or in addition to the information required by other applicable regulations of the city: 

(i) The location on the lot of all outdoor lighting fixtures, both proposed and existing; 

(ii) The mounting heights of lighting fixtures and the heights of any support structures; and 

(iii) The angle of cut-off of light emissions and a description of any shielding devices to mitigate light trespass and glare onto abutting lots and public streets. 

(f) Outdoor Lighting Standards.

(i) Generally.

(A) All outdoor lighting shall be located, aimed, and shielded so as not to present glare on abutting lots or public streets and to minimize spill light trespassing across lot lines. 

(B) No outdoor lighting shall be permitted which shines directly into abutting residential dwelling units, buildings on adjacent lots, or abutting public streets, or for which the point source of illumination (arc tube) is visible at the property line. 

(C) With the exception of flood or spot lights which shall be subject to subsection (2)(f)(i)(D) of this section, control of glare and light trespass shall be accomplished through the application of fully shielded fixtures and a downward aiming angle of no greater than 45 degrees above straight down (halfway between straight down and straight to the side). 

(D) Flood- or spotlights shall be aimed no higher than 45 degrees above straight down (halfway between straight down and straight to the side) when the light source is visible from any abutting lot. 

(E) Outdoor lighting shall not be permitted to be located in any buffer yard required by this chapter. 

(ii) Shielding.

(A) Any structural part of a fixture providing shielding to mitigate or control light trespass or glare in order to comply with the regulations of this subsection (2)(f) shall be permanently affixed. 

(B) All canopy lighting shall be fully shielded or fully recessed. 

(C) Wallpacks shall be installed and shielded. 

(iii) Mounting Heights.

(A) Pole-Mounted Lighting. Lighting fixtures mounted onto a pole or any structure intended primarily for the mounting of lighting shall not exceed a height of 50 percent of the distance of the light pole to the lot line as measured in a horizontal plane, or a maximum height of 40 feet, whichever is lower, except as provided below.

(B) Lighting for tennis courts or swimming pools on residentially zoned lots shall not exceed 20 feet above court or pool deck surface; and 

(C) In nonresidential districts, heights greater than 50 percent of the distance from the light pole to the lot line as measured in a horizontal plane but no greater than 40 feet shall be permitted; provided, the light fixture is side-shielded on the side of the lot line. 

(D) Flood- or Spotlights Mounted to Residential Dwellings in Residential Districts. Flood- or spotlights attached to single-family and two-family dwellings in residential districts shall not exceed the height of the eaves. 

(E) Lighting Fixtures Mounted to Buildings in Nonresidential Districts. Lighting mounted onto buildings in nonresidential districts shall not exceed a height higher than 50 percent of the horizontal distance of the light from the lot line, except as further provided below: 

(F) Lighting for facades may be mounted at any height equal to or less than the total height of the structure being illuminated regardless of the horizontal distance to the lot line; and 

(G) For buildings less than 40 feet from the lot line, outdoor lighting shall be mounted to the vertical facades or the underside of canopies at a height of 16 feet or less. 

(3) General Development Standards.

(a) New Structures.

(i) Where existing patterns of historic buildings create campus or center plaza orientations, these historic forms may be extended into adjacent commercial, multifamily or elder-care facilities; provided, that all buildings shall either be oriented to the street (and utilize the setbacks and build-to lines set forth herein) or to a plaza or central courtyard, but not a parking lot, with the primary entrance in the direction of orientation. Where orientation is to a center plaza and parking is between the street and the buildings, clear pedestrian paths shall be provided from the parking areas to the center plaza and street walls or landscaping, shall screen the parking areas from the street. Where new structures are placed among existing historic structures, either as new construction or to replace a structure being demolished, the height, massing, site location, architecture and materials of the new structure shall utilize precedents of the surrounding historic structures.

(ii) Single-family residential, attached or detached, and commercial or multifamily buildings not in a campus or center plaza orientation shall meet the following minimum design standards: For new buildings, the master plan or any accompanying textual document shall identify where different types of buildings will be placed and identify any additional standards for buildings subject to special architectural treatment (the “design and architectural standards”). The design and architectural standards, if any, shall address such matters as materials, styles, windows, doors and architectural detail. Any design and architectural standards shall be subject to the standards set forth below but the design and architectural standards may provide greater differentiation among single-family (attached or detached) housing types within the limitations set forth below. For example, the minimum setback for a house (other than rowhouse) is 10 feet. Design and architectural standards may provide a cottage-type house with a 10-foot setback and an estate-type house with a 20-foot setback. 

(b) Product Mixture. In any new neighborhoods of single-family housing (attached or detached) a mix of product types shall be provided with no less than three different product types, none of which constitutes less than 10 percent of the proposed neighborhood (different “product types” shall include without limitation town houses, flats of condominiums, single-family attached houses, small single-family detached (less than 1,800 square feet) and large single-family detached homes (greater than 1,800 square feet).)

(c) Location of Uses. Uses shall be located as shown on the master plan.

(d) Work/Live and Live/Work Units. The permitted location of any work/live and live/work units shall be identified on the master plan. Live/work units shall be permitted throughout areas identified for residential uses. “Live/work” units shall be those units in which a home occupation use, otherwise permitted under the Staunton City Code to occur in a residential zone, may take place on the ground floor of the principal or accessory building. The front facade of the live/work unit shall be residential and no extra parking need be provided for such uses. “Work/live” units shall be those units in which a commercial undertaking takes place on the ground floor of the principal or accessory building of what would otherwise be deemed a single-family residence. The facade of the work/live unit may be more commercial, utilizing display windows, and at least two additional on-site parking spaces shall be provided.

(e) Parking.

(i) If accessed from the front, garages and all parking shall be a minimum of 20 feet behind the front facade of the main building.

(ii) Where practicable, parking decks adjacent to streets may be provided with liner buildings and uses at their ground level.

(iii) Except for campus-style buildings, parking for all new structures, commercial or multifamily, shall be provided behind the structure. For existing structures, new parking areas shall be integrated into the topography and landscaped to minimize the view of such areas from the street.

(f) Garden Walls, Fences and Hedges. Except where incompatible with the topography or historic features, fences, garden walls or hedges shall be required along all streets and alleys and are otherwise encouraged along side and rear yards. In front yards such structures shall have a maximum height of 42 inches, with pillars and posts extending farther. In rear and side yards the maximum height shall be 6 feet. In the traditional neighborhood development infill district, fences, walls and hedges are utilized instead of berms and landscaped buffers; provided, however, long expanses of unlandscaped fences or walls shall be avoided.

(g) General.

(i) Marquees or awnings (minimum five-foot depth, eight-foot clearance and 25 percent length of building) may occur in front of the setback line but may not encroach in the right-of-way or over the sidewalk except with written permissions from the city. Awning shall be made of fabric or metal; high-gloss or plasticized fabrics are prohibited.

(ii) Balconies may have roofs but are otherwise required to be open, un-air-conditioned parts of the buildings.

(iii) Except where impractical because of historic structures, topography or building configuration, the following shall be located in rear yards or side yards not facing side streets: window and wall air conditioners; electrical utility meters; air conditioning compressors; and irrigation and pool pumps.

Where such location is not practicable, the elements shall be screened.

(iv) The following are prohibited: undersized shutters (the shutter or shutters must be sized so as to equal the width that would be required to cover the window opening); plastic shutters (shutters fastened flatly to the sides of buildings are strongly discouraged); reflective and/or bronze-tint glass; backlit awnings or exposed cell phone towers.

(h) Landscaping. Landscaping shall meet the requirements of Chapter 18.175 SCC and shall incorporate the following design considerations:

(i) Landscaping in the traditional neighborhood infill district is different from other districts. Most landscaping is expected to be concentrated in open spaces such as parks, squares and greens.

(ii) Buildings with substantial lot coverage should provide interior or rear courtyards or forecourts or roof gardens.

(iii) Because buildings have small front yards, street trees substitute for front yard trees and the focus is well-designed hedges and planters rather than berms or mown lawns.

(iv) Parking lots are moved from the fronts of buildings or walled or screened. Landscaping should be integrated into these walls and screens.

(v) In general, the same or more landscaping should occur as in a conventional district but with different locations.

(i) Roads and Alleys.

(i) Neotraditional neighborhood street design will be permitted upon review by city council. A street layout and design shall be presented in its entirety to the city and VDOT as required by VDOT Subdivision Street Design Guidelines.

(ii) Substantially all of the streets shall terminate at other streets, forming a network. Cul-de-sacs shall be permitted only when warranted by site conditions or the inability to complete external connections.

(j) Pedestrian Connections. 

(i) Pedestrian paths or sidewalks shall connect all portions of the district. 

(ii) Each street shall have a sidewalk on at least one side unless precluded by plans for preservation of historic resources or topographic conditions. The district shall provide connections to regional pedestrian trail systems.

(k) Parks, Recreational Facilities and Open Spaces.

(i) In traditional neighborhood developments, smaller lots are balanced by the preservation or creation of significant open spaces. The master plan shall identify open spaces to be preserved or created. In general, not less than one-third of the total district should be open space and each building should be within one-quarter mile of open space which is designed to be utilized by pedestrians or in some form of human activity.

(ii) Open space may take many forms: active recreational areas, plazas, squares, greens, parks or courtyards. Open space may be in the form of preserved historic areas, riparian buffers or other natural areas and such areas shall be deemed to meet the standard of SCC 18.53.030 if they are integrated into a pedestrian network.

(l) Historic Structures. Historic structures within the district shall be reused where practicable. Reuse shall be deemed practicable when, in light of reasonably foreseeable market conditions, changes and improvements can be made to the structure that (i) result in a structure with normal market usage for a lease rate or sales price within the typical expectations of the real estate industry and (ii) can be financed pursuant to terms typical of the real estate industry. Where such structures are on the National Register of Historic Places or are contributing buildings within a district on the National Register of Historic Places, such reuse shall be in conformance with the rehabilitation and adaptation standards of the U.S. Department of the Interior for the exterior of the structures. (Ord. 2005-36).


18.53.080 Design and architectural standards.

(1) Purpose of Development Standards. The overall purpose of these standards is to promote attractive, well-designed development that is built to a human scale; to promote and protect the appearance, character, historic and economic value of property; to encourage creativity and variety in different areas of the development; and to foster attractive streets and secure pedestrian environments while accommodating safe vehicular movement and access in the TND-I district.

(2) Commercial, Civic, and Mid-Density Residential Over Commercial Uses. These standards apply to uses allowed in the commercial/residential areas of the TND-I district. The mid-density residential may be located over ground level commercial uses and may be either rental or ownership units.

(a) Architecture. The overall intent is to place buildings, whenever possible, against the streets and sidewalks creating a very friendly pedestrian environment. Buildings will have articulated facades to reduce the overall scale of buildings and add visual interest. The addition of projections, recesses, covered arcades, display windows, awnings, canopies, different colors and textures, variety of quality materials, changes in roof height and configuration, and outdoor patios will contribute to the articulated intent. All building facades visible to the public shall be articulated. Roof-top mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view. Interesting architectural elements such as towers and entries shall be used to add orientation and interest.

(b) Parking. Parking shall conform to the TND-I requirements and be satisfied with parking lots and street parking. Parking lots in the commercial/residential areas will, whenever possible, be located behind buildings and, in some cases, may require parking decks. To avoid an overage of parking, and as allowed in the TND-I district, shared parking will be used for different uses by reason of the daily hours of operation. Parking lots shall be landscaped, and vehicles shall be screened from public roadway view. Mid-density residential over commercial uses shall adhere to the commercial requirements for off-street parking. 

(c) Loading and Service Areas. The design of loading spaces, service areas and utility equipment shall conform to the TND-I requirements and shall be screened from public roadway view. 

(d) Outdoor Lighting. Several lighting categories and light levels are anticipated in the TND-I district: pedestrian sidewalks and trails; parks, open spaces and plazas; parking lots; decorative purposes to accent areas; loading and service areas; landscape areas; signage, graphics, and art work; open public buildings or pavilions; building facades.

Lighting shall enhance the overall character of the neighborhood yet must be designed to provide adequate light levels for the intended purpose it is to serve. In addition to providing safety, utility, and security, lighting shall minimize glare to public roadways and adjacent properties, shall utilize cut-off fixtures, shall limit off-site light trespass, and limit atmospheric light pollution. The lighting shall conform to the TND-I requirements.

(e) Signage. A master signage plan and sign standards shall be submitted prior to specific site plan submissions.

(3) Mid-Density, Residential, and Civic Uses. These standards apply to uses allowed in the residential areas of the TND-I district. The mid-density residential area may include duplex dwellings, multifamily structures, patio homes, zero lot-line homes, and town homes, single-family detached in cluster arrangements, and shall comply with the density, lot size and building area requirements. These residential uses may be owned or rented. The overall nature of this mid-density residential area is to relate closely with the commercial uses within the core area and connect through a grid street and sidewalk network.

(a) Architecture. The overall intent is to orient buildings, whenever possible, to the street and sidewalks creating a very friendly pedestrian environment. Buildings shall have articulated facades to reduce the overall scale and add visual interest. 

(b) Parking. Parking shall conform to the TND-I district requirements and be satisfied with parking lots, street parking, street accessed individual garages or rear alley accessed individual garages or carports. Parking lots shall be landscaped, and vehicles shall be screened from public roadway view.

(c) Loading and Service Areas. Loading spaces, service areas and utility equipment shall conform to the TND-I district requirements and shall be screened from public roadway view. 

(d) Outdoor Lighting. Several lighting categories and light levels are anticipated in the TND-I district: pedestrian sidewalks and trails; parks, open spaces and plazas; parking lots; decorative purposes to accent areas; loading and service areas; landscape areas; signage, graphics, and artwork; open public buildings or pavilions; and building facades.

Lighting will enhance the overall character of the neighborhood yet must be designed to provide adequate light levels for the intended purpose it is to serve. In addition to providing safety, utility, and security, lighting shall be glare-free to public roadways and adjacent properties, shall utilize cut-off fixtures, shall limit off site light trespass, and limit atmospheric light pollution. The lighting shall conform to the TND-I requirements. 

(e) Signage. A master signage plan and sign standards will be submitted prior to specific site plan submissions.

(4) Low-Density Residential. These standards apply to uses allowed in the low-density residential areas of the TND-I district. The low-density residential area may include single-family detached homes or single-family cluster homes and shall comply with the density, lot size and building area requirements in a TND-I. The streetscape shall be an important element in the residential character focusing on a pedestrian-friendly environment with front-facing porches, curbs, planter strips, and sidewalks lining streets with a well-planned and integrated pattern of street trees. Home types shall be intermixed as they often were in historic communities, with large and small homes sharing the parks and streetscape. High-quality landscaping will compliment the architecture and blend the residential into its rolling site.

(a) Architecture. The city of Staunton has a rich architectural heritage which reflects the unique character of the area and the Shenandoah Valley. These architectural styles are well adapted to the steep hillsides and slopes. The exterior of all dwellings shall be compatible with adjacent structures and located to fit site conditions, respecting existing vegetation and topographic features. All buildings shall be designed to fit together and visually be defined as a community. 

(b) Parking. Parking shall conform to the Staunton City Code requirements with access from the street or rear alley.

(c) Lighting. Lighting will be low-scaled with a lower light level than the core and workplace areas. 

(d) Signage. A master signage plan and sign standards shall be submitted prior to specific site plan submissions.

(5) Building Materials and Colors. Exterior building materials, colors and accent design elements constitute a significant part of the visual impact of the buildings in a TND-I district. Therefore, they shall be aesthetically pleasing and compatible with the materials and colors used in adjoining buildings. Facade variations through the use of material, texture and color changes are encouraged. All sides of a building must be compatible materials with appropriate design consideration and consistent detailing.

(a) Dominant exterior building materials visible to the public shall be high quality materials including brick; decorative, colored block, as honed, polished or split-face units; architectural precast colored concrete or cast stone accents; natural or cultured stone; stucco or synthetic stucco (EIFS); anodized or coated aluminum storefront systems; wood or fiber-cement board trim and accents; painted or pre-finished steel or aluminum trim and accents; and glass fiber reinforced concrete accents or moldings. 

(b) Prohibited exterior building materials visible to the public include: highly reflective glass; plywood and wood composite panels; plain uncolored concrete; plain concrete masonry units, painted or unpainted; and steel or aluminum building panels or siding. 

(c) Colors. Dominant building facade colors shall be low-reflectance neutral or earth-toned colors. Building trim and accent areas may feature more intense earth-tone colors. The use of high intensity or fluorescent colors is prohibited.

(d) Accent design elements are encouraged and shall include: fabric awnings; bracket-supported awnings or canopies; metal projecting sunscreens; metal or wood trellises; blade signs projecting perpendicular to the face of the building; building-mounted decorative accent lighting; and contrasting material wainscot or water-table. (Ord. 2005-36).


18.53.090 Appeals.

To the fullest extent permitted by law, appeals of the decisions regarding the administration of the TND-I, traditional neighborhood development infill district, shall be made to the Staunton city council. (Ord. 2005-36).


Chapter 18.55 B-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT

Sections:

18.55.010    General description.

18.55.020    Uses permitted.

18.55.030    Area regulations.

18.55.040    Height regulations.

18.55.050    Off-street parking.

18.55.060    Uses permitted on review.


18.55.010 General description.

These districts are composed of land and structures occupied by or suitable for furnishing the retail goods, such as groceries and drugs, and the services, such as barbering and shoe repairing, to satisfy the daily household needs of the surrounding residential neighborhoods. Often located on one or more thoroughfares, these districts are small and are within convenient walking distance of most of the areas they will serve. The district regulations are designed to permit the development of the districts for their purpose and to protect the abutting and surrounding residential areas by requiring certain minimum yard and area standards to be met, standards that are comparable to those called for in residence districts. It is intended that additional local business districts will be created, in accordance with the amendment procedure set forth herein, as they are needed to serve new residential areas. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 8).


18.55.020 Uses permitted.

The following uses shall be permitted in the B-1 local business district:

(1) Living and/or sleeping quarters shall be a permitted use when constructed above the ground and basement floors. No living and/or sleeping quarters shall be permitted in any detached accessory building or structure on the same lot to the rear of any other building.

(2) Auction houses.

(3) Veterinary establishments; provided, that all animals shall be kept inside sound proof air-conditioned buildings.

(4) Banks.

(5) Bakeries employing not more than five persons and when products are sold only at retail on the premises.

(6) Barbershops, beauty parlors, chiropody, massages, or similar personal service shops.

(7) Catering and delicatessen business.

(8) Churches.

(9) Clubs and lodges.

(10) Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring or similar retail trades employing not more than five persons on the premises.

(11) Drugstore.

(12) Automobile service establishments including gasoline service stations and automatic car-washing establishments.

(13) Eating and drinking establishments.

(14) Food stores, fruit or vegetable stands.

(15) Funeral homes.

(16) Garden centers, greenhouses, and nurseries.

(17) Laundry and/or cleaning pick-up station, or self-service laundry and dry cleaning.

(18) Milk distribution stations, but not involving any bottling on the premises.

(19) Monument sales.

(20) Motels, motor courts and hotels.

(21) Offices, business or professional only.

(22) Personal or business service establishments.

(23) Pet shops.

(24) Public buildings and ground other than elementary and high schools.

(25) Prefabricated and shell house sales.

(26) Restaurants, tea rooms, drive-in eating stands.

(27) Shops for repair of bicycles, shoes, watches, locks, electrical equipment, or other similar commodities employing not more than five persons on the premises and not involving the conduct of any manufacturing on the premises.

(28) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to permitted uses not otherwise prohibited in this district which comply with Chapter 18.110 SCC.

(29) No wholesale or jobbing shall be carried on, and no merchandise shall be stored other than that to be sold at retail on the premises; provided, further, that not more than 30 percent of the floor area of any building shall be devoted to reserve stock storage purposes incidental to such primary use.

(30) Open storage uses which shall comply with the following provisions:

(a) All open storage and display of merchandise, material, and equipment shall be screened by adequate ornamental fencing or evergreen planting at the side and rear of the lot on which said open storage or display occurs; provided, however, that screening shall not be required in excess of seven feet in height.

(b) All of the lot used for parking of vehicles, for the storage and display of merchandise, and all driveways used for vehicle ingress and egress shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced by continued use.

(c) All servicing of vehicles carried on as an incidental part of the sales operation shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.

(d) Outdoor lighting, when provided, shall have an arrangement of reflectors and an intensity of lighting which will not interfere with adjacent land uses or the use of adjacent streets, and shall not be of a flashing or intermittent type.

(31) Stores or shops for the conduct of retail business which do not maintain gasoline dispensing services.

(32) Name plate and sign, as regulated in Chapter 18.140 SCC.

(33) Amusement and recreation establishments except open-air drive-in theaters.

(34) Stores for the conduct of retail business which are not gasoline service stations but which do maintain gasoline dispensing services incidental to their primary business provided they meet the requirements of Chapter 18.145 SCC.

(35) Elementary or high schools, public or private. Living or sleeping quarters shall be permitted in the same building with the school use.

(36) Colleges or universities, public or private.

(37) Co-location of telecommunication antenna and related equipment as regulated in SCC 18.185.020(4). (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 8).


18.55.030 Area regulations.

The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in this district:

(1) Front Yard. All buildings shall setback from the street right-of-way lines not less than 20 feet.

(2) Side Yard. On the side of a lot adjoining a residential district, there shall be a side yard of not less than 25 feet. There shall be a side yard setback from an intersecting street of not less than 25 feet. In all other cases a side yard for a commercial building shall not be required.

(3) Rear Yard. None, except when abutting a residential or professional district and then there shall be a minimum rear yard, alley, service court, or combination thereof, of not less than 25 feet in depth, and all of the service areas of all buildings shall be completely screened from public view with permanent ornamental screening materials.

(4) Maximum Lot Coverage. No building or buildings shall cover more than 50 percent of the lot area. (Ord. 2019-20. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 8).


18.55.040 Height regulations.

No building shall exceed two and one-half stories, or 35 feet in height, except as provided in Chapter 18.115 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 8).


18.55.050 Off-street parking.

Off-street parking is as regulated in Chapter 18.125 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 8).


18.55.060 Uses permitted on review.

The following uses may be permitted on review by the planning commission in accordance with provisions contained in Chapter 18.210 SCC:

(1) Group house.

(2) Medical care facility.

(3) The following uses may be permitted on review by the city council in accordance with provisions contained in Chapter 18.210 SCC; however, this subsection shall not be considered to be a use permitted on review for purposes in Chapters 18.50 and 18.55 SCC:

Living and/or sleeping quarters in detached accessory buildings and on the ground and basement floors of main buildings.

A proposed use under this chapter is to be considered on its own merits using the following criteria as a guide:

(a) The design of the existing building or the proposed building to be built.

(b) The historical significance of the structure on the lot or the historical significance of structures in the immediate vicinity.

(c) The amount of business usage that has at that time already developed in the immediate vicinity of the lot.

(d) The anticipated immediate new business development expected in the vicinity.

(e) Lot size, topography conditions.

(4) Day nurseries, private. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 8).


Chapter 18.60 B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT

Sections:

18.60.010    General description.

18.60.020    Uses permitted.

18.60.030    Area regulations.

18.60.040    Height regulations.

18.60.050    Off-street parking.

18.60.060    Off-street loading and unloading regulations.

18.60.070    Uses permitted on review.


18.60.010 General description.

These districts are composed of land and structures used to furnish a wider range of retail goods and services to satisfy all of the household and personal needs of the residents of a group or community of neighborhoods. Usually located on a thoroughfare or near the intersection of two thoroughfares, these districts are large and are within convenient driving distance of the group of neighborhoods they will serve. The district regulations are designed to permit the development of the districts for their purpose in an open, spacious arrangement by requiring certain minimum yard and area standards to be met, standards that are comparable to those called for in residence districts. To protect the abutting and surrounding residential areas, certain restrictions are placed on uses. It is intended that additional general business districts will be created in accordance with the amendment procedure set forth herein, as they are needed to serve groups of new neighborhoods. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 9).


18.60.020 Uses permitted.

The following uses shall be permitted in the B-2 general business district:

(1) Any use permitted in the B-1 local business district.

(2) Auto, manufactured home or truck parking, storage, service and repair shop, or sales lots; provided, that all manufactured homes are in a state of good repair and dismantled or junked cars or trucks unfit for operation on the highways shall not be stored therein. All cars or trucks stored shall have met the most recent state inspection and display the inspection certificate.

(3) Bakeries employing not more than 10 persons and where products are sold at retail on the premises.

(4) Cleaning and dyeing plants using not more than two units, neither of which shall exceed 36 inches by 54 inches in size.

(5) Contractors’ establishments, offices and display rooms where the business conducted on the premises is entirely within a completely enclosed building and where there is no storage of supplies or equipment on the premises outside the building.

(6) Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, or similar retail trades employing not more than 10 persons on the premises.

(7) Laundry employing not over 10 persons on the premises, excluding owners or drivers.

(8) Plumbing, heating, electric or paperhanging offices and display rooms, where the business conducted on the premises is entirely within a completely enclosed building and where there is no storage of supplies of equipment on the premises outside the building.

(9) Radio or television broadcasting stations, studios, or offices, excepting transmission towers.

(10) Repair services or businesses, including repairing of bicycles, guns, radios, television sets and other home appliances, typewriters, watches, clocks, and shoes; provided, that no equipment of over two horsepower shall be used and provided not over 10 persons are employed on the premises.

(11) Wholesaling from sample stocks only; provided, that no manufacturing or storage for distribution shall be permitted on the premises.

(12) Tire recapping and vulcanizing within a completely enclosed building and with no outdoor storage of tires, discarded rubber, or similar material.

(13) Processing and manufacturing establishments that are not objectionable because of smoke, odor, dust, or noise, but only when such processing and manufacturing is incidental to a retail business conducted on the premises and where not more than 10 persons are employed on the premises in the processing or manufacturing activities.

(14) Parking garages and parking lots.

(15) Commercial, job, and newspaper printing not employing more than 10 persons on the premises.

(16) Utility substations.

(17) Business and vocational schools not involving operations of an industrial character.

(18) Outdoor advertising as regulated in Chapter 18.140 SCC.

(19) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses.

(20) Co-location of telecommunication antenna and related equipment as regulated in SCC 18.185.020(4). (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 9).


18.60.030 Area regulations.

The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in this district:

(1) Front Yard. There shall be a first-story setback for all buildings on vehicular streets of not less than five feet.

(2) Side and Rear Yard. There are no specific side or rear yard requirements.

(3) Maximum Lot Coverage.

	STORIES	COVERAGE

	6	100%

	7-12	95%

	13-16	90%

	17 and over	85%

(Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 9).


18.60.040 Height regulations.

(1) Except as provided hereinafter in Chapter 18.115 SCC, no building or structure shall exceed six stories or 75 feet in height, whichever is less.

(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, a greater height may be allowed on review by the planning commission and city council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18.210 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 9).


18.60.050 Off-street parking.

Off-street parking is as regulated in Chapter 18.125 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 9).


18.60.060 Off-street loading and unloading regulations.

Off-street loading and unloading are as regulated in Chapter 18.135 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 9).


18.60.070 Uses permitted on review.

The following uses may be permitted on review by the planning commission in accordance with provisions contained in Chapter 18.210 SCC:

(1) Group care facility.

(2) Group house.

(3) The following uses may be permitted on review by the city council in accordance with provisions contained in Chapter 18.210 SCC; however, this subsection shall not be considered to be a use permitted on review for purposes in Chapter 18.55 SCC:

(a) Living and/or sleeping quarters in detached accessory buildings and on the ground and basement floors of main buildings.

(b) Multiple-family dwelling.

A proposed use under this chapter is to be considered using the following factors as a guide:

(i) The design of the existing building or the proposed building to be built.

(ii) The historical significance of the structure on the lot or the historical significance of structures in the immediate vicinity.

(iii) The amount of business usage that has at that time already developed in the immediate vicinity of the lot.

(iv) The anticipated immediate new business development expected in the vicinity.

(v) Lot size, topography conditions.

(vi) Compatibility of building design and residential use with nearby buildings and uses.

(vii) Availability of residential amenities such as sidewalks, play areas, and parking.

(viii) Safety considerations, including traffic hazards, security and environmental factors.

(ix) Usable open space available on the property.

(4) Day nurseries, private.

(5) Processing and manufacturing establishments that are not objectionable because of smoke, odor, dust, or noise when the processing and manufacturing activity is conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building and where there is no storage or supplies or equipment on the premises outside the building. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 9).


Chapter 18.65 B-3 PLANNED BUSINESS DISTRICT

Sections:

18.65.010    General description.

18.65.020    Uses permitted on review.

18.65.030    Area regulations.

18.65.040    Signs.

18.65.050    Repealed.


18.65.010 General description.

The B-3 planned business district is intended to permit the development of neighborhood business areas by one developer in those areas of the city where there are areas of sufficient size in heavily populated sections and where sanitary sewers, street access, and public water supply are adequately provided. Upon completion of development, the ownership and control of the exterior of the buildings, structures, and grounds shall remain under one ownership or control. Within this district, the location of buildings, design of buildings, parking areas, and other open spaces shall be controlled in such a manner that it will not be a detriment to the adjoining residential property or to the neighborhood in general. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 10).


18.65.020 Uses permitted on review.

Within the planned business district, no building, structure, or premises shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected or altered until and unless the same has been approved by the planning commission and by city council in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.210 SCC, and until and unless the following conditions have been complied with:

(1) Uses permitted will be the same as those permitted in the B-1 district under SCC 18.55.020 and shall also include those uses permitted on review in the B-1 district under SCC 18.55.060. There shall have been filed with the planning commission a written application for approval of a contemplated use within said district, which application shall be accompanied with the following information:

(a) A plot plan indicating the location of present and proposed buildings, driveways, parking lots, landscaping, screening, and other necessary uses.

(b) Preliminary architectural plans for the proposed building or buildings.

(c) A description of the business operations proposed in sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing excessive auto or traffic congestion or problems of noise, glare, odor, fire, or safety hazards, or other factors detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the area.

(d) Engineering or architectural plans for the handling of any of the problems of the type outlined in subsection (2)(c) of this section, including the handling of storm water and sewers and necessary plans for the controlling of smoke or other nuisances such as those enumerated under subsection (2)(c) of this section.

(e) Any other information the planning commission or city council may need to adequately consider the effect that the proposed uses may have upon the area, and/or the cost of providing municipal services to the area. (Ord. 2019-30. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 10).


18.65.030 Area regulations.

In this district the area regulations, maximum lot coverage, height regulations, and off-street parking shall comply with the requirements of the B-1 district. There shall be a 25-foot setback from all streets and all adjoining residential property. This setback shall act as a buffer between the business and residential uses. It shall be fully landscaped and maintained with grass and with trees or shrubbery of sufficient height and density to serve as a screen between the business zone and the residential zone. The buffer zone shall not constitute a site-distance obstruction at street intersections. The buffer zone shall be considered as part of the lot area but shall not be used for any business purpose such as buildings, parking lots, signs, or any accessory use.

The buffer zoning, upon completion of development of the project, shall be at or near the same grade or plane which existed prior to the development of the planned business district property, unless otherwise expressly reviewed and approved by the planning commission and by city council.

These restrictions shall not apply to that portion of the lot fronting on the major business thoroughfare or thoroughfares. Entrances to the property will be allowed from the arterial streets only. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 10).


18.65.040 Signs.

(1) For each shopping center, one ground sign having a maximum area of 100 square feet, maximum overall height of 30 feet, minimum distance from street line of 10 feet indicating the name of the shopping center. In lieu of the shopping center name, the one sign may designate a business use or a combination of business uses within the center.

(2) For each individual business, one sign attached to the building having a maximum area of one square foot for each linear foot of building frontage occupied by a single permitted use.

(3) All other regulations of Chapter 18.140 SCC shall apply. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 10).


18.65.050 Uses permitted on review.

Repealed by Ord. 2019-30. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 10).


Chapter 18.70 B-4 CULTURAL AND RECREATIONAL PLANNED BUSINESS DISTRICT

Sections:

18.70.010    General description.

18.70.020    Uses.

18.70.030    Buildings and improvements.

18.70.040    Area regulations.

18.70.050    Procedure.

18.70.060    Existing businesses and projects under construction.

18.70.070    Creation of B-4 district advisory board.

18.70.080    Building permit required.


18.70.010 General description.

The B-4 cultural and recreational planned business district is intended to promote and permit the development of businesses within certain areas of the city which will be in harmony with the special cultural and recreational uses of the property within the district. Within the district, the location of the buildings, design of buildings, parking areas, and screening, either natural or as designed, shall be controlled in such a manner that the uses will be compatible with each other and be harmonious so as to be nondetrimental to the existing cultural and recreational uses within the district, or to other property within the district developed hereunder. This chapter should not be interpreted as mandating nor attempting to mandate any particular style or architecture or development, but, for the public welfare, is intended to provide for orderly and harmonious development to preserve the character of the district and enhance the value of the property herein. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 11).


18.70.020 Uses.

Subject to the provisions of SCC 18.70.030 providing for review of plans, etc., the following uses are permitted:

(1) Uses Permitted.

(a) Banks.

(b) Bakeries employing not more than five persons and when products are sold only at retail on the premises.

(c) Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, or similar retail trades employing not more than five persons on the premises.

(d) Drug store.

(e) Eating and drinking establishments, including restaurants and tea rooms; provided, no drive-in service shall be permitted.

(f) Motels, hotels, and bed and breakfast establishments.

(g) Offices, business and professional only.

(h) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to permitted uses not otherwise prohibited in this district which comply with Chapter 18.110 SCC.

(i) Specialty shops catering to local and tourist markets.

(j) Art galleries, museums, tourist centers, community centers, libraries, and similar types of uses intended to promote cultural and/or recreational resources.

(k) Co-location of telecommunication antenna and related equipment as regulated in SCC 18.185.020(4).

(2) Uses Permitted on Review.

(a) Any other business use, not specifically set forth above, considered compatible with the above and the cultural and/or recreational use of the district.

(b) Automobile service establishments, including gasoline service stations and automatic car-washing establishments.

(c) Food stores, fruit or vegetables stands.

(3) General Restriction of Use. No wholesale or jobbing shall be carried on, and no merchandise shall be stored other than that to be sold at retail on the premises; provided, further, that not more than 30 percent of the floor area of any building shall be devoted to reserve stock storage purposes incidental to such primary use. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 11).


18.70.030 Buildings and improvements.

Within the B-4 cultural and recreational planned business district, no building or structure shall be erected, altered or expanded, nor shall the premises, including parking and landscaping, be altered or expanded, until the same has been reviewed by the planning commission and approved by city council as contained in Chapter 18.210 SCC and unless the following conditions have been complied with.

There shall have been filed with the planning commission a written application for recommendation to and approval of the city council of a contemplated use within said district, which application shall be accompanied with the following information:

(1) A plot plan indicating the location of present and proposed buildings, driveways, parking lots, landscaping, screening, and other necessary uses.

(2) Preliminary architectural plans for the proposed building or buildings.

(3) A description of the business operations proposed in sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing excessive auto or traffic congestion or problems of noise, glare, odor, fire, or safety hazards, or other factors detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the area.

(4) Engineering or architectural plans for the handling of any of the problems of the type outlined in subsection (3) of this section including the handling of storm water and sewers, and necessary plans for the controlling of smoke or other nuisances such as those enumerated under subsection (3) of this section.

(5) An overall signage plan, including drawings, for the proposed development.

(6) Any other information the planning commission or city council may need to adequately consider the effect that the proposed uses may have upon the area, and/or the cost of providing municipal services to the area.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this section and the provisions of SCC 18.70.050 shall not be applicable to any portion of a B-4 district that is subject to the provisions of review applicable under Chapter 18.85 SCC, now or hereafter adopted as a part of this title, nor shall the B-4 district advisory board created in SCC 18.70.070 have any duties or powers with respect to such area, the review procedures of the historic preservation zoning ordinance to stand in lieu of the provisions set forth herein. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 11).


18.70.040 Area regulations.

(1) Lot Area. The minimum lot size shall be sufficient for compliance with all provisions of this district, including but not limited to adequate emergency access, screening required, parking requirements, health and safety requirements, and to enhance and maintain the character of the district.

(2) Front Lot Line. No structure shall be built closer than 35 feet of the front lot line of the lot.

(3) Lot Width, Side Yards, and Rear Yard. No minimum lot width is required and no side or rear yard requirements, except to comply with subsection (1) of this section.

(4) Height Restriction. No building or structures of any type shall be erected within the district that exceed 35 feet in height above the average finished ground elevation adjacent to the front of such building or structure; provided, however, that the city council may, because of unique topographical features, permit a greater maximum height in order to promote the orderly and harmonious development of the district.

(5) Parking. Off-street parking shall be as regulated by Chapter 18.125 SCC. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the planning commission may recommend and council may approve a lesser requirement due to the special nature of the district.

(6) Off-Street Loading and Unloading. Off-street loading and unloading shall be as required by Chapter 18.135 SCC.

(7) Signs.

(a) For each individual business, one wall sign attached to the building having a maximum area of one and one-half square feet for each linear foot of building frontage occupied by a single permitted use.

(b) For each individual business, one freestanding sign for each street frontage, which sign shall not exceed 30 square feet, nor exceed the height of 30 feet.

(c) Signs permitted in SCC 18.140.060.

(d) All other regulations of Chapter 18.115 SCC, as applicable, shall apply. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 11).


18.70.050 Procedure.

(1) All applications made hereunder shall be in accordance with Chapter 18.210 SCC, except as specifically modified herein. The application shall contain the documents required by SCC 18.70.030. The senior planner shall obtain written comments on the proposed application from the fire department, health department, director of public works, recreation department, and building official and submit these with the application. The plot plan shall be prepared by and have the seal of an architect or engineer duly registered to practice in the state of Virginia. The application will not be deemed to be received until all the documentation set forth above has been filed with the senior planner.

(2) Upon receipt of the application, the senior planner shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.210 SCC, to ensure that the advertisement and notification requirements of that chapter are met, to effect the necessary public hearings before the planning commission and city council.

(3) The senior planner shall also obtain written comments upon the application from the B-4 district advisory board for presentation to the planning commission at or prior to the public hearing to be held upon the application.

(4) After the recommendation of the planning commission upon the application, the senior planner shall ensure that advertisement of the public hearing before city council upon the application is accomplished in accordance with this title.

(5) Following the public hearing before city council, city council shall indicate its approval or denial of the application. All approved plans, conditions, restrictions, and rules made a part of the approval of council shall constitute certification on the part of the applicant that the proposed use shall conform to such use and regulations.

(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of SCC 18.210.070, all applications made hereunder shall be decided within 90 days of the date of application and the applicant shall be provided with a written notice of approval or denial. (Ord. 2017-03. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 11).


18.70.060 Existing businesses and projects under construction.

Businesses in existence or projects under construction (pursuant to the authority of the zoning law applicable to the area at the beginning of such construction) within an area subsequently zoned under this B-4 classification shall not be subject to the requirements hereof unless an alteration or expansion of such use of construction is later requested. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 11).


18.70.070 Creation of B-4 district advisory board.

There is created hereby a B-4 district advisory board whose membership, term of office, and duties are as follows:

(1) The B-4 district advisory board shall be composed of seven members appointed by the city council.

(2) Of the members, at least one shall be appointed from a list suggested by the Historic Staunton Foundation; at least one from a list suggested by the Museum of American Frontier Culture; at least one from a list suggested by the tourist advisory board; at least one from a list suggested by the Augusta County Historical Society; and at least one shall be a graduate from an accredited school of architecture. A graduate from a certified school of architecture appointed from a list suggested by any one of the organizations set forth above shall be deemed to satisfy both requirements hereunder.

(3) Of the members of the B-4 district advisory board, first appointed, two shall be appointed for a term of one year, two for a term of two years, two for a term of three years, and one for a term of four years. Thereafter, members shall be appointed for terms of four years respectively. Any member, at the discretion of the city council, may be reappointed for a full term. No members shall serve for more than two consecutive four-year terms.

(4) Vacancies in the B-4 district advisory board shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made.

(5) All members of the B-4 district advisory board shall serve as such without compensation.

(6) The B-4 district advisory board, once constituted, shall hold an organizational meeting and elect a chairman and vice chairman, who shall serve as such for one year or until their successor is elected. The chairman shall convene meetings of the B-4 district advisory board (or the vice chairman in his absence) at such times and places as are necessary to perform the duties of the board.

(7) The B-4 district advisory board shall review the documents presented with the application for a use hereunder and shall consider, among other things, the general design of the buildings and structures, which shall be harmonious and compatible with the special cultural and recreational features of the B-4 district involved and shall make recommendations with respect thereto to the planning commission and/or the city council at or prior to the public hearings scheduled with respect to such application. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 11).


18.70.080 Building permit required.

Before a building or structure is constructed or any improvement made within this B-4 district, a building permit shall be obtained from the building official. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 11).


Chapter 18.75 I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT

Sections:

18.75.010    General description.

18.75.020    Uses permitted.

18.75.030    Area regulations.

18.75.040    Uses permitted on review.

18.75.050    Height regulations.

18.75.060    Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements.

18.75.070    Landscaping and screening.

18.75.080    Minimum distance for building construction from any residential or professional district.

18.75.090    Uses permitted on review.


18.75.010 General description.

These districts are composed of land and structures used for light manufacturing or wholesaling, or suitable for such uses, where the use and its operation do not directly adversely affect nearby residential and business uses. These districts are usually separated from residential areas by business areas or by natural barriers. The district regulations are designed to allow a wide range of industrial activities subject to limitations designed to protect nearby residential and business districts. (Ord. 2019-32. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 12).


18.75.020 Uses permitted.

Property and buildings in the I-1 light industrial district shall be used only for the following purposes:

(1) A retail or service use only when it directly serves or is auxiliary to the needs of industrial plants or employees thereof or when it is an adult business, which use shall be permitted solely in an I-1 light industrial zoning district.

(2) No residential use, except sleeping facilities required by caretaker or night watchman employed on the premises shall be permitted in the I-1 light industrial district.

(3) Any of the following uses:

(a) Business sign as regulated in Chapter 18.140 SCC.

(b) Building material sales yard and lumber yard, including the sale of rock, sand, gravel, and the like as an incidental part of the main business, but not including a concrete batch plant or a transit plant.

(c) Contractor’s equipment storage yard or plant, or rental of equipment commonly used by contractors.

(d) Freighting or trucking yard or terminal.

(e) Outdoor storage facilities for coal, coke, building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber; open storage of construction contractor’s equipment and supplies shall be screened by seven foot obscuring fence, wall, or mass plantings, or otherwise so located as not to be obnoxious to the orderly appearance of the district.

(f) Public utility service yard or electrical receiving or transforming station.

(g) Auction house, except for sale of livestock.

(h) Tire recapping or retreading.

(i) Co-location of telecommunication antenna and related equipment as regulated in SCC 18.185.020(4).

(4) Adult Businesses. In addition to all other requirements, any adult business shall be permitted solely in an I-1 light industrial zoning district and conform to the following requirements: 

(a) The business shall be located at least 500 feet away from any residential or agricultural-forestal zoning district, and at least 500 feet from the property line of any land used for any of the following:

(i) A dwelling;

(ii) A nursing home, assisted living facility, or similar institution;

(iii) An adult day care center;

(iv) A child day care center;

(v) A public or private school, college or university;

(vi) A public park;

(vii) A public or private library, museum or cultural center;

(viii) A church or other place of worship;

(ix) A hotel, motel or boardinghouse; and

(x) Any other adult business.

(b) Adult merchandise shall not be visible from any point outside the establishment.

(c) Signs or attention-getting devices for the business shall not contain any words or graphics depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in SCC 5.40.010.

(d) The business shall not begin service to the public or any outside activity before 7:00 a.m. local time. Hours of operation for any adult movie theater, adult nightclub or other business providing adult entertainment shall not extend after 1:00 a.m. local time. Hours of operation for any adult bookstore, adult video store, adult model studio, adult store or any other adult business except an adult motel shall not extend after 12:00 midnight local time.

(e) In any adult business other than an adult motel or adult movie theater, there shall be no viewing of videotapes, computer disks, CD-ROMs, DVD-ROMs, virtual reality devices, Internet sites or files transmitted over the Internet, or similar media characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in SCC 5.40.010, while on the premises.

(f) Adult merchandise shall be located in a conspicuously marked separate room or other area inaccessible to persons under 18 years of age with the room configured so that it remains open to plain view at all times.

(g) The interior of the enclosed premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures that at all times illuminate every place patrons are permitted access with an illumination of not less than two-foot candles measured at floor level.

(h) Wide angle mirrors must be used to provide the manager with continuous monitoring of all areas of the establishment.

(i) All owners, operators, managers, employees, associates and entertainers shall be at least 18 years of age.

(j) The owner or operator shall operate and maintain a security camera and videotape or digital file system designed and installed by a private security service business licensed by the commonwealth of Virginia. Surveillance cameras shall continuously monitor and record images of all entrances, exits, parking areas and all areas of the establishment where the adult business is conducted, except for the sleeping rooms of an adult motel. Such cameras shall provide clear imagery of the establishment’s premises, patrons and their vehicles and of any vehicles otherwise entering the premises. Videotapes or digital file systems recording activities in the areas under surveillance shall be preserved for a period of not less than four months. Authorized representatives of the Staunton police or the Staunton planning department shall have prompt access to recovery and possession or a complete and accurate copy of such videotapes or digital files upon request.

(k) The owner or operator shall provide adequate lighting for all entrances, exits and off-street parking areas serving the adult business, and all areas of the establishment where the adult business is conducted, except for the private rooms of an adult motel or the movie viewing areas in an adult movie theater. “Adequate lighting” means sufficient lighting for clear visual and security camera surveillance and recording of all images on the premises at all times one hour before dusk and one hour after dawn. 

Unless otherwise defined or required by the context, terms used in this section relating to adult businesses shall have the same meaning as defined in SCC 5.40.010. 

If any of the provisions of any subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this section shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this section.

Nothing in the provisions of this subsection shall be applied, construed or interpreted in any way as prohibiting or limiting the prosecution of alleged violation of any obscenity or child pornography laws.

(5) The following uses when conducted within a completely enclosed building:

(a) The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries, and food products.

(b) The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles of merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: aluminum, bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, shell, rubber, textiles, tin, iron, steel, wood (excluding sawmill), yarn, and paint not involving a boiling process.

(c) The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.

(d) The manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs, commercial advertising structures, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating ducts and equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like.

(e) The manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and rubber and metal stamps.

(f) Automobile assembling, painting, upholstering, rebuilding, reconditioning, body and fender works, truck repairing and overhauling, tire retreading or recapping, and battery manufacturing.

(g) The sale, storage, and sorting of junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials, machinery or equipment, but not including processing.

(h) Blacksmith shop and machine shop.

(i) Foundry casting lightweight nonferrous metal not causing noxious fumes or odors.

(j) Planing mill.

(k) Wholesale or warehouse enterprise.

(6) Buildings, structures, and uses accessory and customarily incidental to any of the above uses.

(7) Business and professional offices not involving on-premises retail or wholesale trade nor the maintenance of a stock of goods for display or sale. This use shall be limited to only fully enclosed buildings constructed prior to September 1, 2019. (Ord. 2019-32; Ord. 2007-31; Ord. 2007-29. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 12).


18.75.030 Area regulations.

The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in this district:

(1) Front Yard. All buildings shall set back from all street right-of-way lines not less than 25 feet.

(2) Side Yard. No building shall be located closer than 15 feet to a side lot line, unless said side lot line abuts a residential or professional district, in which case no building shall be located closer than 50 feet to that side lot line.

(3) Rear Yard. No building shall be located closer than 30 feet to a rear lot line, unless such rear lot line abuts a residential or professional district, in which case no building shall be located closer than 50 feet to that rear lot line.

(4) Coverage. Main and accessory buildings and off-street parking and loading facilities shall not cover more than 75 percent of the lot area. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 12).


18.75.040 Uses permitted on review.

The following uses may be permitted on review by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.210 SCC:

Other uses of the same general character and compatible with those uses permitted in SCC 18.75.020, Uses permitted, in this district. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 12).


18.75.050 Height regulations.

No building or structure shall exceed four stories or 45 feet in height, except as hereinafter provided in Chapter 18.115 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 12).


18.75.060 Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements.

Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements are as regulated in Chapters 18.125 and 18.135 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 12).


18.75.070 Landscaping and screening.

Landscaping and screening are as regulated in Chapter 18.175 SCC, Landscaping and Screening. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 12).


18.75.080 Minimum distance for building construction from any residential or professional district.

Notwithstanding any minimum setback, rear yard, or front yard requirements hereinabove set forth, no building may be constructed in this district within 50 feet of any residential or professional district. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 12).


18.75.090 Uses permitted on review.

Other uses of the same general character as those listed as uses permitted in this district. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 12).


Chapter 18.80 I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT

Sections:

18.80.010    General description.

18.80.020    Uses permitted.

18.80.030    Uses prohibited.

18.80.040    Uses permitted on review.

18.80.050    Area regulations.

18.80.060    Height regulations.

18.80.070    Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements.

18.80.080    Screening and landscaping.

18.80.090    Minimum distance for building construction from any residential or professional district.


18.80.010 General description.

These districts are composed of land and structures used for heavy manufacturing and related activities or suitable for such uses. Located for convenient access from existing and future arterial thoroughfares and railway lines, these districts are in many instances separated from industrial areas by business or light industrial areas or some type of artificial separation may be required. The district regulations are designed to permit the development of the district for almost any industrial uses, subject to the minimum regulations necessary for the mutual protection of the uses. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 13).


18.80.020 Uses permitted.

Property and buildings in the I-2 heavy industrial district shall be used only for the following purposes:

(1) Any uses permitted in the I-1 light industrial district.

(2) Any of the following uses:

(a) Emery cloth or sand paper manufacture.

(b) Gas (illuminating or heating) manufacture (power plant).

(c) Oiled rubber or leather goods manufacture.

(d) Petroleum, storage of.

(e) Sauerkraut or pickles, etc., manufacture.

(f) Sausage manufacture.

(g) Soda manufacture.

(h) Automobile wrecking and junk yards.

(i) Vinegar manufacture.

(j) Mining, extracting, filling or soil-stripping; provided, that standards for the treatment of the site during and after operations be designated by the planning commission.

(k) Co-location of telecommunication antenna and related equipment as regulated in SCC 18.185.020(4).

(3) Buildings, structures, and uses accessory and customarily incidental to any of the above uses. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 13).


18.80.030 Uses prohibited.

The following uses are prohibited:

(1) Abattoirs or slaughterhouses.

(2) Acid manufacture.

(3) Ammonia, bleaching powder, or chlorine manufacture.

(4) Apartment houses, except when adjoining a residential zone.

(5) Bag cleaning.

(6) Blast furnace.

(7) Boiler works.

(8) Brick, tile or terra cotta manufacture not requiring ovens.

(9) Candle manufacture.

(10) Celluloid manufacture.

(11) Coke ovens.

(12) Crematory or reduction plant.

(13) Creosote treatment or manufacture.

(14) Dextrin, glucose, and starch manufacture.

(15) Disinfectants, cattle dips, exterminators and insecticides manufacture, not including the compounding of the same.

(16) Distillation of bones.

(17) Dyestuff manufacture.

(18) Fat rendering.

(19) Fertilizer manufacture, not including compounding.

(20) Fireworks or explosives manufacture or storage, or the loading of explosives.

(21) Fish smoke or curing.

(22) Forge plant.

(23) Fuel manufacture.

(24) Gas (illumination or heating) manufacture or storage in excess of 1,000 cubic feet.

(25) Gelatin, glue, or size manufacture or process involving recovery from fish or animal material.

(26) Glass manufacture.

(27) Gunpowder manufacture or storage.

(28) Hotels and similar inhabitable places.

(29) Incineration or reduction of garbage, dead animals, outfall, or refuse other than by an authorized public agency.

(30) Iron, steel, brass, or copper works or foundry.

(31) Lampblack manufacture.

(32) Lime, gypsum, plaster of paris manufacture.

(33) Match manufacture.

(34) Oil, paint, turpentine, or varnish manufacture.

(35) Ore reduction.

(36) Potash or washing soda manufacture.

(37) Pulp mills.

(38) Petroleum products, refining, or storage.

(39) Printing ink manufacture.

(40) Pyroxylin plastics or celluloid manufacture, or explosive or inflammable cellulose or pyroxylin products manufacture.

(41) Rendering plant or other comparable processing of fish or animal material.

(42) Rolling manufacture.

(43) Salt works.

(44) Sawmill.

(45) Smelting or refining of metals.

(46) Soap manufacture.

(47) Sulphurous, sulfuric, nitric, or hydrochloric, or other corrosive or offensive acid manufacture or their use except as accessory to a permitted industry.

(48) Stockyards.

(49) Shoe polish manufacture.

(50) Tanning, curing, or storage of raw hides or skins, or leather dressing or coloring.

(51) Tar distillation or manufacture.

(52) Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture.

(53) Wool pulling or scouring. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 13).


18.80.040 Uses permitted on review.

(1) Batching plants for asphalt and Portland cement concrete.

(2) Livestock market and sales pavilions.

(3) Manufacture of cement, asphalt, lime, plaster, and plaster of paris.

(4) Feed mills.

(5) Other uses of the same general character as those uses listed as uses permitted in this I-2 heavy industrial district and those uses listed as uses permitted in the I-1 light industrial district. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 13).


18.80.050 Area regulations.

The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in this district:

(1) Front Yard. All buildings shall set back from all street right-of-way lines not less than 35 feet.

(2) Side Yard. No building shall be located closer than 15 feet to a side lot line, unless said side lot line abuts a residential or professional district, in which case no building shall be located closer than 75 feet to that side lot line.

(3) Rear Yard. No building shall be located closer than 30 feet to a rear lot line, unless said rear lot line abuts a residential or professional district, in which case no building shall be located closer than 75 feet to the rear lot line.

(4) Coverage. Main and accessory buildings and off-street parking and loading facilities shall not cover more than 80 percent of the lot area. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 13).


18.80.060 Height regulations.

No building or structure shall exceed four stories or 45 feet in height, except as hereinafter provided in Chapter 18.115 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 13).


18.80.070 Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements.

Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements are as regulated in Chapters 18.125 and 18.135 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 13).


18.80.080 Screening and landscaping.

Screening and landscaping are as regulated in Chapter 18.175 SCC, Landscaping and Screening. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 13).


18.80.090 Minimum distance for building construction from any residential or professional district.

Notwithstanding any minimum setback, rear yard, or front yard requirements hereinabove set forth, no building may be constructed in this district within 75 feet of any residential or professional district. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 13).


Chapter 18.83 ENTRANCE CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT

Sections:

18.83.010    Intent.

18.83.020    Purpose of the district.

18.83.030    Applicability.

18.83.040    Approval required.

18.83.050    Approval process.

18.83.060    Development plan review process.

18.83.070    Appeals.

18.83.080    Use limitations.

18.83.090    Design standards.

18.83.100    Severability.

18.83.110    Effective date.


18.83.010 Intent.

The entrance corridor overlay district is intended to implement the city of Staunton’s comprehensive plan’s goal of protecting the city’s natural, scenic, historic, architectural and cultural resources. This chapter meets the comprehensive plan’s goal by protecting and promoting the unique characteristics of the city’s natural and built environment leading into the historic districts through assuring site and building design reflecting the natural, scenic, historic, architectural, and cultural resources within view of each corridor. Establishing design standards within this chapter and providing design guidelines for each corridor ensures the compatibility of development, redevelopment, and adaptive reuse proposals with the resources identified in the comprehensive plan, promoting the general welfare of the community by creating attractive human-scaled environments; increasing commerce; improving property values; and increasing public awareness of the natural, scenic, historic, architectural, and cultural resources near and outside the historic preservation districts. 

Regulation and guidance of corridor development includes but is not limited to: reducing impacts from development on existing land forms and other natural resources; promoting corridor development design compatible with nearby historic, architectural and cultural resources; providing pedestrian and vehicular connections from parcel to parcel; improving pedestrian and vehicular connections within each parcel; reducing the prominence of parking lots on the corridors; increasing site plantings; establishing reciprocity between building and site design; fully integrating utilities into building and site structures; regulating the size, intensity, and placement of signs and lighting; and assuring provisions for storm water management are well integrated into site architecture. (Ord. 2008-09).


18.83.020 Purpose of the district. 

The entrance corridor overlay district is created for the purpose of providing special regulations in given designated areas of the city to accomplish the intended purposes set forth above. The entrance corridor overlay district shall be in addition to, and shall overlap and overlay, all other zoning districts so that any parcel of land lying in the entrance corridor overlay district shall also lie in one or more of the other zoning districts. All regulation of the underlying zoning districts shall be applicable except as modified by the provisions of this chapter. The provisions applicable to the entrance corridor overlay district shall apply to both modifications of existing structures and landscape as well as new construction within the entrance corridor overlay district. The provisions of the entrance corridor overlay district shall also apply to modifications and new construction by the Staunton city. (Ord. 2008-09).


18.83.030 Applicability. 

(1) General. The entrance corridor overlay district is created to preserve and protect corridors along arterial streets or roadways designated as corridors found by city council to be significant routes of travel as shown on the entrance corridor overlay district map, dated February 22, 2008, as maintained in the office of the department of planning and inspection. The entrance corridor overlay district is hereby established upon and along the designated roadways with the design standards contained herein. To the extent that any of the specific areas in the entrance corridor overlay district also are in the H-1 historic preservation district, the provisions of Chapter 18.85 SCC, H-1 Historic Preservation District, shall control. 

Where there is a conflict between the provisions or requirements of the entrance corridor overlay district and the provisions of any zoning district, the more restrictive provisions shall apply, except when adhering to the most restrictive would defeat the intent of this chapter.

(2) Corridors, Standards and Guidelines. The following arterial streets and highways are designated as corridors for purposes of this chapter and development of design guidelines for each corridor shall be phased with and be applicable and effective as of the date the particular corridor design guidelines are adopted:

(a) North Augusta Street;

(b) North Central Avenue;

(c) Churchville Avenue;

(d) North Coalter Street;

(e) Commerce Road;

(f) Frontier Drive;

(g) Greenville Avenue;

(h) North Lewis Street;

(i) Middlebrook Avenue;

(j) Richmond Avenue;

(k) Statler Boulevard;

(l) U.S. Route 262 and U.S. Route 275;

(m) West Beverley Street.

(3) The design standards within this chapter shall apply to the corridors upon adoption of this chapter; in addition to these design standards, design guidelines developed for each corridor shall apply upon their ratification. 

(4) Zoning Administrator. The zoning administrator or designee shall administer the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the design standards and design guidelines and shall promulgate appropriate design guidelines for each corridor for ratification by the planning commission and city council. The zoning administrator or designee may, from time to time, recommend areas for designation as an entrance corridor overlay district. The zoning administrator or designee shall be advisory to the planning commission, city council and board of zoning appeals in rezonings, special use permits, site development plans, subdivisions, variances and other matters within the entrance corridor overlay district.

(5) Exemptions. The following are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

(a) The construction or alteration of detached single-family dwellings and accessory structures on existing individual lots or parcels within the entrance corridor overlay district, provided the lots or parcels have been created and legally recorded prior to the date of the adoption of this chapter; 

(b) Agricultural and forestal buildings where no site plan review is required;

(c) Interior alterations to a building or structure having no effect on exterior appearance of the building or structure;

(d) General Maintenance. Activity where no change in design, material, or color is proposed for any built or planted element on the site;

(e) The construction of ramps and other modifications to serve the handicapped; and

(f) All federal and state government facilities. (Ord. 2008-09).


18.83.040 Approval required. 

No land disturbance, substantial removal of vegetation, building, or structure, including, but not limited to, grading activities, private roadways, parking lots, signs, outbuildings, fences, walls, landscaping, lamp posts, light fixtures and lighting arrangements, shall be constructed, altered or restored within the entrance corridor overlay district unless approved as set forth hereinafter except when deemed insubstantial, due to the scope and nature of the proposed change, by the zoning administrator or designee. (Ord. 2008-09).


18.83.050 Approval process. 

(1) Submission of Plan. Prior to commencing any activity set forth in SCC 18.83.040, the person, firm, or corporation proposing such activity shall submit a development plan to the zoning administrator or designee for the city of Staunton for review and approval. Applicants shall schedule and participate in an informal meeting with the zoning administrator or designee prior to submitting the plans.

(2) Minimum Requirements for Development Plan. Materials submitted with the application or on subsequent request by the zoning administrator or designee shall include clearly labeled plans, maps, studies, narratives, drawings, and reports depicting or presenting the following, with sufficient copies for necessary referrals and records, unless deemed unnecessary by the zoning administrator or designee due to the scope and nature of the proposed development:

(a) Surveyed property lines;

(b) Tree preservation plan (to scale) to include:

(i) Survey of existing topography and location of existing trees (over three inches in caliper), their species, and caliper and other vegetation per SCC 13.10.010(6)(a)(i)(E)(I);

(ii) Existing trees and other vegetation to remain;

(iii) Existing trees and other vegetation to be removed; and

(iv) Location, extent, and construction details of proposed protection for existing trees and other vegetation to remain;

(c) A site development plan (to scale) including but not limited to:

(i) Location of all buildings;

(ii) Location, size, and dimensions of all yards and setbacks; 

(iii) Location of all site improvements (to include parking areas, entrance drives, travelways, walkways, retaining walls);

(iv) Location of all utility pad fixtures and meters; 

(v) Provisions for stormwater management including all associated structures, channels, or other elements per SCC 13.05.050(2)(a)(i);

(vi) Location of all site signage;

(vii) Location of all overhead, surface, and underground utilities and equipment; and

(viii) Location of bordering public or private streets or roads and existing, proposed, and/or approved access points;

(d) A grading plan (to scale) including but not limited to the content of the site development plan as listed in subsection (2)(c) of this section and the following:

(i) Existing topographic conditions; 

(ii) Proposed grading; and

(iii) Top of wall and bottom of wall elevations for all retaining walls;

(e) A planting plan (to scale) per SCC 18.175.050 to include proposed grading;

(f) A lighting plan (to scale) including but not limited to the content of the site development plan as listed in subsection (2)(c) of this section and the following:

(i) Location of all proposed fixtures on the site and on the buildings; and

(ii) Lighting schedule including performance specifications and lamping for each fixture;

(g) A sign proposal.

(i) Descriptions of all site and building signage including sign type, materials, dimensions, and means of illumination including but not limited to the following:

(A) Wall Signs – Channel Letter Signs.

(I) Sign materials;

(II) Sign area and overall sign height from the ground;

(III) Sign length, width and depth;

(IV) Linear footage of business frontage;

(V) Color name(s) and number(s) of faces, trimcaps and returns;

(VI) Style and spacing of letters;

(VII) Text to be included on sign;

(VIII) Color name(s) and number(s) of graphics; 

(IX) Method of attachment (i.e., raceway or mounted directly to wall);

(X) Color name and number of raceway;

(XI) Color names and numbers can be any sufficiently established and verifiable standard color identification system; and

(XII) Accurate physical samples of all colors and materials proposed; 

(B) Wall Signs – Cabinet Signs.

(I) Sign materials;

(II) Sign area and overall sign height from the ground;

(III) Sign length, width and depth;

(IV) Linear footage of business frontage; 

(V) Style and spacing of letters;

(VI) Text to be included on sign;

(VII) Color name(s) and number(s) of text;

(VIII) Color name(s) and number(s) of graphics;

(IX) Description of frame structure; and

(X) Accurate physical samples of all colors proposed;

(C) Freestanding Signs.

(I) Sign materials;

(II) Overall sign height from the ground;

(III) Cabinet size;

(IV) Base size;

(V) Style and spacing of letters;

(VI) Color name(s) and number(s) of text;

(VII) Color name(s) and number(s) of graphics;

(VIII) Design details of the base;

(IX) Accurate physical samples of all colors proposed; and

(X) Color names and numbers can be any sufficiently established and verifiable standard color identification system. 

(h) Architect or artist’s renderings, photographs or computer simulation of all proposed structures depicting the front, side and rear elevations describing the architectural treatment of all structural exteriors, including proposed building materials, colors, and signs;

(i)  Other information as deemed necessary by the zoning administrator or designee.

(3) General Consideration for Review. In reviewing applications, the city of Staunton shall consider only those design features subject to public view and shall not make any requirements except for the purpose of preventing development which is incompatible with the guidelines established for each corridor subject to this review process. (Ord. 2008-09).


18.83.060 Development plan review process. 

All development plans shall be submitted and reviewed according to the following procedures:

(1) An application including a complete development plan per SCC 18.83.050 shall be submitted to the zoning administrator or designee.

(2) After submittal, the plan shall be reviewed and processed by the zoning administrator or designee for conformity to the design standards included in this chapter and the design guidelines developed for each corridor. Applicants shall be notified in writing of the zoning administrator’s decision of the development plan review, including a list of required revisions, if necessary. 

(3) A development plan meeting the requirements of this chapter may be reviewed by the planning commission under the following circumstances: 

(a) If the zoning administrator or designee finds that due to the scope, nature or location of the proposed development, planning commission review is necessary or desirable; or

(b) If the applicant and the zoning administrator or designee cannot reach a mutually agreeable understanding regarding any aspect of the development plan.

(4) Should planning commission review be deemed necessary, a complete development plan shall be submitted not less than 35 days before the planning commission meeting at which the applicant seeks planning commission review; applicants shall be notified in writing of the decision by the planning commission review. (Ord. 2008-09).


18.83.070 Appeals. 

(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the planning commission may appeal such decision to the Staunton city council; provided, that such appeal is filed in writing in the office of the director of the city planning and inspections department within 30 days from the date of the planning commission decision. 

(2) Any person aggrieved by any final decision of Staunton city council may appeal such decision by filing a petition in the circuit court of the city of Staunton, setting forth the alleged illegality of the action of city council, provided the petition is filed in the office of the clerk of the circuit court within 30 days after the final decision of the city council. The filing of the petition shall stay the decision of city council pending the outcome of the appeal to the court, except that the filing of the petition shall not stay the decision of city council if the decision denies the right to raze or demolish a historic landmark, building or structure. The court may reverse or modify the decision of city council, in whole or in part, if it finds upon review that the decision of city council is contrary to law or that its decision is arbitrary and constitutes an abuse of discretion, or it may affirm the decision of city council. (Ord. 2008-09).


18.83.080 Use limitations.

All uses shall be subject to the use limitations set forth in the underlying zoning district. (Ord. 2008-09).


18.83.090 Design standards.

(1) Area and Bulk Regulations. Buildings and structures shall be subject to regulations for lot area, lot width, street frontage, setback, height, yards, maximum or minimum building square footage applicable in the underlying zoning district in which located. 

(2) Access to Arterial Roads. When site conditions warrant, provisions shall be established for shared access to arterial roads for existing and future development. 

(3) Requirements for Driveways and Parking Lots.

(a) Parking lot layouts shall respond to or re-establish the topographic characteristics of the site.

(b) Parking lots shall not dominate the image of a site.

(c) Parking lots shall be designed to minimize impervious surfaces and mitigate stormwater runoff.

(d) Rip-rap, exposed concrete drainage pipes, and similar drainage structures shall not be located in public view.

(e) The number of access points to parking lots from a street shall relate to other existing curb cuts whenever possible.

(f) Minimum off-street parking requirements may be reduced at the discretion of the zoning administrator or planning commission.

(g) SCC 18.125.010 shall apply.

(h) Off-street parking requirements may be reduced by 10 percent for on-street parking within 200 feet of the subject parcel.

(i) Shared parking arrangements may be considered on a space-by-space basis within 200 feet of the subject parcel provided appropriate schedule arrangements can be justified and proof of a legal agreement outlining the conditions of the shared parking arrangement can be provided.

(j) When 50 percent or more of the required parking area is located below or above the building, one story may be added to the maximum total number of stories allowed.

(k) Any amount of parking area greater than required parking shall reflect alternative surface treatment designed to reduce total impervious surface, improve runoff quality, reduce runoff quantity, reduce impacts on local microclimates from heat reflection, and increase total area devoted to plantings thereby reducing impacts of parking areas on natural resources.

(l) Parking lots shall be interconnected on adjacent parcels whenever possible.

(m) Pedestrian access from the sidewalk into individual project sites, as well as within sites and between sites shall be provided.

(n) Roadway design shall be tailored by the zoning administrator or designee to fit the character and functional needs of specific corridors. Roadways shall incorporate traffic calming devices when appropriate as determined by the zoning administrator or designee. 

(4) Requirements for New Buildings, Redeveloped Buildings and the Proposed Adaptive Reuse of Existing Buildings.

(a) The design and construction of new buildings, redeveloped buildings, and the adaptive reuse of existing buildings shall be based on but not limited to the scale, mass, height, materials, color, texture, construction methodology, orientation, and manner of negotiating changes in elevation of nearby historic and cultural resources. 

(b) Trademark buildings and related features shall be modified to meet the design standards included within this chapter. 

(c) Prior to the submission of a proposed plan of demolition, alteration, or removal of existing buildings located in the entrance corridor overlay district, the applicant or his or her representative is encouraged to meet with the zoning administrator or designee concerning the proposed plan of action and submit preliminary studies, a written description, drawings, photographs, and plans of the concept of the proposed action for tentative review, comments, and recommendations.

(5) Planting Requirements. The requirements of Chapter 18.175 SCC, Landscaping and Screening, shall apply with the following exceptions: 

(a) Site plantings shall reflect design characteristics identified as desirable in the guidelines developed for each corridor. 

(b) New development along corridors must incorporate as much of the existing plants as possible.

(c) No grading or other earth disturbing activity, storage of materials, equipment, or refuse shall occur within the drip line of any trees or wooded areas or intrude upon any other existing features designated for preservation as provided for in the most recent edition of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook. 

(d) Plantings of major trees shall equal a minimum 10 percent of the parking and vehicular circulation area. Planting areas provided shall be a minimum of five feet wide.

(e) Plants shall not be used to screen poorly sited utilities; all utilities, site, and building equipment (including but not limited to loading docks, service entrances, dumpsters and other refuse containers) shall be built into the building envelope, be screened with architectural elements such as walls or extended parapets, or built into the site design.

(6) Requirements for Utilities.

(a) All utility lines, such as electric, telephone, CATV or other similar lines, shall be installed underground in the entrance corridor overlay district. This requirement shall apply to lines serving individual sites as well as within the project. 

(b) All utilities, site, and building equipment (including but not limited to loading docks, service entrances, dumpsters and other refuse containers) shall be built into the building envelope, be screened with architectural elements such as walls or extended parapets, or built into the site design. Plants shall not be used to screen poorly sited utilities.

(c) Extended parapets and other means of architectural screening shall be used to eliminate rooftop equipment from public view.

(d) Areas designated on approved plans for preservation of existing features shall be clearly and visibly delineated on the site prior to commencement of any grading or other earth disturbance, including trenching or tunneling, and no such activity, grading, or moving of heavy equipment shall occur within such area. The visible delineation of all such features shall be maintained until all construction activity has been completed. 

(7) Requirements for Signs, Billboards, and Other Advertising Structures. The requirements of Chapter 18.140 SCC, Signs, Billboards and Other Advertising Structures, shall apply with the following exceptions:

(a) Each parcel of property occupied by a building shall be permitted one freestanding sign, which shall not exceed 30 square feet on each face. Automobile service stations shall be permitted an additional twenty square feet on each face to advertise the price of fuel.

(b) Freestanding signs shall be mounted on bases a maximum of three feet high. If the specific location of the sign requires a base of more than three feet to provide adequate visibility, the planning commission may approve a taller base. No freestanding sign shall exceed 15 feet in height from grade. 

(c) Freestanding signs for shopping centers shall be allowed 10 square feet of area per business establishment. An additional 25 square feet shall be allowed to identify the shopping center as a whole. If individual businesses located within the shopping center are not included on the freestanding sign, the sign identifying the shopping center may be 45 feet in area. For the purposes of this chapter, shopping center shall be defined as: 

(i) Groups of two or more stores, personal service shops or restaurants connected by party walls, partitions, canopies or similar features; or

(ii) Some or all of the stores, personal service shops or restaurants located in separate buildings designed as a single commercial group sharing common parking areas, vehicular travelways, and walkways designed to encourage customer interchange between the buildings and present the appearance of a continuous commercial area.

(d) If the nearest point of a freestanding sign is located within five feet of the street right-of-way, its location must be approved by the city’s director of public works or designee, who will evaluate the location for site line and other traffic safety considerations.

(e) The following sign types shall be permitted in the entrance corridor overlay district:

(i) Externally illuminated signs provided the light source is directed downward; 

(ii) Internally illuminated channel letters; and

(iii) Internally illuminated cabinet signs if the background of the cabinet sign is opaque and appears black at night; 

(iv) Additional types of signs shall be considered. 

(f) No wall sign shall project beyond the surface of the building or above the roofline of the building; signs shall be appropriately scaled to the building or portion of the building served and should be coordinated with the architecture.

(g) Inflatable figures and/or signs (still or animated) are not permitted in the entrance corridor overlay district.

(8) Lighting Requirements for Site and Building Exteriors.

(a) Lighting shall be wholly contained within the site.

(b) Light poles shall not exceed 24 feet in height.

(c) Lighting shall be limited to that which is necessary for safety; lighting shall not be used as signage such as up-lighting or down-lighting building elevations, decorative light fixtures, moving or sweeping lights directed towards the sky among other types. (Ord. 2008-09).


18.83.100 Severability. 

In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be declared or adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections or sentences, which shall continue in full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid were not originally a part thereof. (Ord. 2008-09).


18.83.110 Effective date.

This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately upon adoption. (Ord. 2008-09).


Chapter 18.85 H-1 HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT

Sections:

18.85.010    Purpose.

18.85.020    Definitions.

18.85.030    Creation of an historic preservation commission.

18.85.040    Recommendation and designation of historic districts.

18.85.050    Application to commission for certificate of appropriateness.

18.85.060    Maintenance and zoning code provisions.


18.85.010 Purpose.

The intent of this chapter is to promote and protect the health, safety, comfort, recreation, prosperity, and general welfare of the community through the identification, preservation, and enhancement of buildings, structures, sites, neighborhoods, landscapes, places and areas which have special historical, cultural, artistic, architectural or archaeological significance as provided by Section 15.2-2201 and 15.2-2306 of the Code of Virginia, as amended.

It is hereby recognized that the deterioration, destruction or alteration of such buildings, structures, sites, neighborhoods, landscapes, places, and areas may cause the permanent loss of unique resources which are of great value to the people of the city of Staunton, the state of Virginia and the nation, and that the special controls and incentives are warranted to ensure that such losses are avoided when possible.

The purposes for establishing this chapter are:

(1) To preserve and improve the quality of life for residents of the city by protecting familiar and reassuring visual elements in the area.

(2) To promote tourism investment and business growth by protecting historical and cultural resources attractive to visitors and thereby supporting local business and industry.

(3) To stabilize and improve property values by providing incentives for the upkeep and rehabilitation of older structures and by encouraging desirable uses and forms of economic development.

(4) To educate residents on the local cultural and historic heritage as embodied in the historic districts and properties and to foster a sense of pride in this heritage.

(5) To promote local historic preservation efforts and to encourage the identification and nomination of qualified historic properties and districts to the National Register of Historic Places and the Virginia Landmarks Register.

(6) To prevent the encroachment of additions or new buildings and structures which are architecturally incongruous with their environs within areas of architectural harmony and historic character.

(7) To recognize and develop the historic areas as integral parts of the city so that succeeding generations may build with the quality and sensitivity of past generations. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 14).


18.85.020 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to this chapter:

(1) “Alteration” means any change, modification, or addition to a part of or all of the exterior of any building or structure.

(2) “Building” means any enclosed or open structure which is a combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy or use.

(3) “Building official” means that person appointed by the city manager as the individual who issues the permit for the construction, alteration, reconstruction, or demolition of all or part of any building.

(4) “Building permit” means an approval statement signed by the building official authorizing the construction, alteration, reconstruction, or demolition of all or part of any building.

(5) “Contributing properties” means properties so designated on the inventory map of historic districts and properties which is adopted as a part of this chapter, being generally those properties which by reason of form, materials, architectural details and relation to surrounding properties contribute favorably to the general character of the part of the historic district in which they are located.

(6) “Certificate of appropriateness” means the approval statement signed by the chairman of the historic preservation commission which certifies the appropriateness of a particular request for the construction, alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration, or demolition of all or a part of any building within an historic district, subject to the issuance of all other regional permits needed for the matter sought to be accomplished.

(7) “Demolition” means the dismantling or tearing down of all or part of any building and all operations incidental thereto.

(8) “Exterior architectural features” means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs, and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, details, features, or elements.

(9) “Exterior environmental features” means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property including trees, shrubbery, plantings, walks, fences, walls, signs, lights, and other appurtenances and elements.

(10) “Historic district” means a geographically definable area consisting of public and/or private property within the city, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. An historic district shall further mean an area designated by the city council as an historic district pursuant to the criteria established in SCC 18.85.040(2) and (3).

(11) “Historic property” means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council as an historic property pursuant to the criteria established in SCC 18.85.040(2) and (3).

(12) “Material change in appearance” means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of an historic property or any contributing or noncontributing building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within an historic district, such as:

(a) Reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of an historic building, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details, or elements.

(b) Demolition or relocation of an historic structure.

(c) Commencement of excavation for construction purposes.

(d) Change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way.

(e) The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within an historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps, and pavements, or other appurtenant features.

(f) New construction within an historic district.

(13) “New construction” means any construction within an historic district which is independent and exclusive of an existing building or structure or part thereof in the historic district.

(14) “Noncontributing properties” means properties so designated on the inventory map of historic districts and properties which is adopted as a part of this chapter, being generally those properties which by reason of age, condition, amount of alterations, form, materials, architectural details and relation to surrounding properties do not contribute favorably to the general character of the part of the historic district in which they are located.

(15) Object. An “object” is a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment.

(16) “Reconstruction” means any or all work needed to remake or rebuild all or a part of any building to a sound condition, but not necessarily of original materials.

(17) “Repairs” means any work or all work involving the replacement of existing material with equivalent material for the purpose of maintenance, but not including any addition, change or modification in construction.

(18) “Restoration” means any or all work connected with the returning to or restoring of a building, or part of any building, to its original condition through the use of original or nearly original materials.

(19) “Site” means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure.

(20) “Structure” means anything manmade that is a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 14).


18.85.030 Creation of an historic preservation commission.

(1) Creation of the Commission. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be city of Staunton historic preservation commission (hereinafter “commission”).

(2) Commission Members – Number. The commission shall consist of five voting members appointed by the city council and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. All members shall be residents of the city of Staunton.

(3) Commission Members – Qualifications. To the extent available in the city of Staunton, at least two members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions and at least one member shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of building construction or real estate or the general business community.

(4) Commission Members – Terms. Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may be reappointed for consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three years. The term of any member who is also a member of the planning commission shall be concurrent with his/her appointment to the planning commission. A new appointment shall be made by the city council for any unexpired term within 60 days after it becomes vacant.

(5) Commission Members – Conflict of Interests. No member shall participate in the selection, award, or administration of a contract, vote, participate or otherwise engage in any other conduct or action which would violate the terms of the applicable provisions of the Virginia State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Sections 2.2-3100 through 2.2-3127 of the Code of Virginia.

(6) Commission Members – Removal. Any appointed member of the commission may be removed from office by the city council for inefficiency, neglect of duties, or malfeasance. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be only for the unexpired term on the vacancy.

(7) Statement of the Commission’s Powers and Responsibilities. The commission shall have the following powers:

(a) To issue or deny certificates of appropriateness for any material change in appearance including construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration, demolition, or relocation of contributing or noncontributing properties within the historic districts and for individually designated historic properties with the exceptions of ordinary maintenance and repair items listed in SCC 18.85.060;

(b) To assist and advise the city council, the planning commission, and other city departments, agencies, and property owners in matters involving historically significant sites and buildings or other properties in historic districts. Upon request of the commission and with approval of the city manager, the departments, agencies, boards, commissions, and other offices of city government shall furnish to the commission such available information and render it such service as may be required for the exercise of the powers and performance of the duties and functions of the commission. All city departments and agencies responsible for individually designated historic properties or for properties within an historic district shall make application to the commission for review and recommendation for any project related to construction, reconstruction, substantial exterior alteration, demolition, or relocation;

(c) To continuously evaluate and recommend to the planning commission and the city council specific places, areas, neighborhoods, landscapes, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts;

(d) Adopt standards or guidelines for review and approval by the city council to supplement the standards set forth in this chapter;

(e) Conduct educational programs on historic properties and districts located within the city of Staunton and on general historic preservation activities;

(f) Prepare and submit an annual budget to the city council and seek out local, state, federal, or private funds for historic preservation with consent of the city council, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired;

(g) Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The commission shall not obligate the city of Staunton without prior consent and the commission shall ensure that these funds do not displace any appropriated governmental funds;

(h) Employ qualified persons, if necessary, to advise and assist the commission within the limits of funds that may be made available to the commission for the performance of its work;

(i) Review and make comments to the Virginia Department of Historic Resources concerning the nomination of districts and properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places and to the Virginia Landmarks Register with consent of the city council;

(j) Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council enter into agreements to do the same; and

(k) Perform other historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city of Staunton’s historic preservation program.

(8) Commission’s Power to Adopt Rules and Standards. The commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business such as bylaws and design guidelines and criteria without amendment to this chapter as approved by city council. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members.

(9) Records of Commission Meetings and Annual Report. A public record shall be kept of the commission’s resolutions, proceedings, and actions and the commission shall make an annual report with recommendations to the planning commission and the city council concerning the operation of the commission and the status of historic preservation within the city. (Ord. 2005-30. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 14).


18.85.040 Recommendation and designation of historic districts.

(1) Preliminary Research by Commission.

(a) Inventory Map of Local Historical Resources Established. The commission shall prepare and recommend for adoption as a part of this chapter an inventory map covering the areas to be considered for inclusion as historic districts and/or historic properties and based upon the criteria set forth in this chapter. This map, hereinafter called the inventory map, when adopted shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully described herein and shall be filed as a part of this chapter. All structures shall be considered as contributing or noncontributing structures for the purposes of this chapter. Structures or sites designated as properties which contribute to the historic character of the city shall be known as contributing properties for the purpose of this chapter. Structures or sites not designated as contributing properties shall be known as noncontributing properties. The inventory map may be amended from time to time in the same manner as the zoning district map. The commission shall compile and collect such information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city of Staunton with the assistance of Historic Staunton Foundation.

(b) Commission’s Power to Recommend Districts and Buildings to the City Council. The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and historic properties.

(c) Commission’s Documentation of Proposed Designation. Prior to the commission’s recommendation of an historic district or historic property to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of a completed National Register of Historic Places nomination or:

(i) A physical description;

(ii) A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance;

(iii) A map showing historic district boundaries and classification (i.e., contributing, noncontributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties;

(iv) A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and

(v) Representative photographs.

(2) Designation of an Historic District or Historic Property.

(a) Criteria for Selection of Historic District. An historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which:

(i) Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest;

(ii) Represent one or more periods, styles, or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the city, state, or region; and

(iii) Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city.

(b) Criteria for Selection of an Historic Property. An historic property is a building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, state, or region, for one of the following reasons:

(i) It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era;

(ii) It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style;

(iii) It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, state, or the region; or

(iv) It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city, state, or region.

(c) Boundaries of an Historic District or Historic Property. Boundaries of an historic district or an historic property shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and properties and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city of Staunton.

(3) Requirements for Adopting an Ordinance for the Designation of Historic Districts and Historic Properties.

(a) Application for Designation of Historic Districts or Property. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the planning commission, the commission, Historic Staunton Foundation, neighborhood associations, group of property owners, or individual property owners.

(b) Required Components of a Designation Ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall:

(i) List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property;

(ii) Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties;

(iii) Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city of Staunton, Virginia, and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation.

(c) Required Public Hearings for Designation. Requests for the designation of historic districts or historic properties or for the termination of any district or property designation previously created shall be made in the same manner provided in this title for the amendment, supplementation or changing zoning designations, and the procedure for such amendments or designations and the establishment of such district shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.2-2280 et seq., Chapter 22 of Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. Virginia Code Section 15.2-2285 contains the procedures for amending a local zoning code. It sets forth six basic steps for zoning amendments:

(i) The planning commission prepares the proposed amendment after consultation and a recommendation from the historic preservation commission;

(ii) The planning commission, after providing notice in accordance with Section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, holds a public hearing on the proposal;

(iii) The planning commission presents the proposal to the city council, with its recommendations;

(iv) The city council, after providing notice in accordance with Section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, holds a public hearing on the proposal;

(v) If the amendment is adopted, it must be enacted in the same manner as all other ordinances; and

(vi) Any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved by the decision may file an action contesting the city council’s adoption or failure to adopt a proposed zoning amendment within 30 days of the decision in the circuit court which has jurisdiction of the land affected by the decision.

(d) Recording Requirement for Historic Districts or Historic Properties. Following the creation of each historic district or historic property, a copy of the resolution creating such district or property, and a boundary description of such district, shall be filed by the senior planner with the clerk of circuit court for the city of Staunton.

(e) Notification of Adoption of Ordinance for Designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter for designation by the city council, the owners of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each building, structure, site, or object located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the commission which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated.

(f) Notification of Other Agencies Regarding Designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of Staunton of the ordinance for designation.

(g) Ordinance Relation to City Codes and Other Ordinances. Whenever the regulations of this chapter require more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute or ordinance, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or ordinance require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute or ordinance shall govern.

(4) Designation of Existing Historic Districts.

(a) Upon the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the following districts situated within the city of Staunton, Virginia, all of which are presently shown and registered with the Virginia Department of Historic Resources and the National Register of Historic Places and all of which are shown on the “Map of Staunton’s National Register Historic Districts,” a copy of which is on file at the city of Staunton’s Department of Planning and Inspections, are hereby designated as historic districts, including:

(i) The Newtown Historic District;

(ii) The Stuart Addition Historic District;

(iii) The Beverley Historic District;

(iv) The Gospel Hill Historic District;

(v) The Wharf Historic District.

(b) Upon the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the districts hereby created, as their boundaries are now shown on the “Map of Staunton’s National Register Historic Districts,” shall be overlaid onto the existing underlying zoning of such areas on the official zoning map of the city of Staunton. (Ord. 2017-03. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 14).


18.85.050 Application to commission for certificate of appropriateness.

(1) Approval of Material Change in Appearance in Historic Districts or Involving Historic Properties. After the designation by ordinance of an historic property or of an historic district, no material change including construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration, demolition, or relocation that affects the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or noncontributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required whether or not a building permit is required. Ordinary maintenance and repair items such as those listed in SCC 18.85.060 are exempt from review.

(2) Pre-Application Conference with Staff. Prior to the formal submission of a proposed plan of erection, demolition, alteration, or removal of buildings controlled by this chapter, the applicant or his or her representative is encouraged to meet with the designated staff of the commission concerning the proposed plan of action and submit unofficial preliminary studies, a written description, drawings, photographs, and plans of the concept of the proposed action for tentative review, comments, and recommendations.

(3) Submission of Plans to Commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by a written description, drawings, photographs, plans, and documentation as required by the commission and as further set forth on the application for the certificate of appropriateness. Upon the filing of a complete application and the payment of the application fee no later than the first Tuesday of the month, the application shall be considered at that month’s commission meeting. An application filed or application fee paid after such first Tuesday shall cause such application to be considered at the following month’s commission meeting. 

(4) Interior Alterations. In its review of applications for certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features.

(5) Technical Advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application subject to funds being available for such purposes.

(6) Public Meetings on Applications for Certificate of Appropriateness, Notices, and Right to be Heard. The commission shall hold a public meeting at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the meeting shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the proposed property. The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant and any other interested party an opportunity to be heard at the meeting.

(7) Commission Options. The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it.

The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, cultural, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts:

(a) Reconstruction, Alteration, New Construction, or Renovation. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building material, setback and landscaping and to the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, a copy of which is attached hereto as an appendix and hereby incorporated by reference.

(b) Relocation Criteria. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by:

(i) The historic, scenic, cultural, aesthetic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object.

(ii) The importance of the building, structure, site, or object to the ambiance of a district.

(iii) Whether there are definite plans for the property to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be.

(iv) Whether the building, structure, or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity.

(v) Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the scenic, cultural, aesthetic, historical, and architectural character of the building, structure, site, or object.

(c) Demolition Criteria. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, or objects shall be guided by:

(i) The historic, scenic, cultural, aesthetic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object.

(ii) The importance of the building, structure, site, or object to the ambiance of a district.

(iii) The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location.

(iv) Whether the building, structure, site, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city.

(v) Whether there are definite plans for reuse of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be.

(vi) Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, or object from collapse.

(vii) Whether the building, structure, site, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value.

(d) Applications for Demolition. In the case of an application for demolition, if preservation is found by the commission to be physically or economically unfeasible, the commission shall issue the certificate of appropriateness. If preservation is found to be both physically and economically feasible, the commission shall take or promote the taking of whatever public or private action that seems likely to lead to such preservation, either on the site on which the structure is located or on another site to which it might appropriately be moved. Where preservation is feasible but the applicant still seeks demolition, the following provisions of subsection (7)(a)(v), Right to Demolish, from the Code of Virginia may be undertaken while alternatives for preservation are sought.

(e) Right to Demolish. The owner of an historic property or the owner of a building, structure, site, or object in any historic district, shall, as a matter of right, be entitled to raze or demolish such building, or structure; provided, that:

(i) The owner has applied to the commission for such right. If the demolition request is denied by the commission, the owner may appeal this decision to the city council;

(ii) The owner has, for the period of time set forth in the same schedule hereinafter contained and at a price reasonably related to its fair market value, made a bona fide offer to sell such building, structure, site, or object, and the land pertaining therein to such city or municipality or to any person, firm, corporation, government, or agency thereof, or political subdivision or agency thereof, which gives reasonable assurance that it is willing to preserve and restore the building, structure, site or object, and the land pertaining thereto;

(iii) No bona fide contract, binding upon all parties thereto, shall have been executed for the sale of any such building, or structure, and the land pertaining thereto, prior to the expiration of the applicable time period set forth in the time schedule hereinafter contained. Any appeal which may be taken to the court from the decision of the city council, whether instituted by the owner or by any other proper party, notwithstanding the provisions heretofore stated relating to a stay of the decision appealed from, shall not affect the right of the owner to make the bona fide offer to sell referred to above;

(iv) No offer to sell shall be made more than one year after a final decision by the city council, but thereafter the owner may renew his request to the commission to approve the demolition of the historic landmark, building, or structure. The time schedule for offers to sell shall be as follows: three months when the offering price is less than $25,000; four months when the offering price is $25,000 or more but less than $40,000; five months when the offering price is $40,000 or more but less than $55,000; six months when the offering price is $55,000 or more but less than $75,000; seven months when the offering price is $75,000 or more but less than $90,000; and 12 months when the offering price is $90,000 or more.

(f) Undue Hardship. The commission shall have the power to reduce or suspend any of the requirements of this chapter, if the property presents special circumstances whereby the strict compliance of this chapter will produce an undue hardship or if the spirit of the chapter has been met and deviation has been deemed to be in the best interest of the city.

(g) Approval or Rejection of Application for Certificate of Appropriateness. The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness at the meeting when the item is heard as prescribed in subsection (3) of this section. Failure of the commission to act shall constitute approval, and the certificate of appropriateness shall be issued, unless the applicant agrees to an extension of time in writing. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance of approval or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by the United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission within 15 calendar days of the date of the decision.

(h) Necessary Action to be Taken by the Commission upon Rejection of Application for Certificate of Appropriateness.

(i) In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so.

(ii) In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building official or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued.

(i) Requirement of Conformance with Certificate of Appropriateness. All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. When a certificate of appropriateness has been issued, the building official may from time to time inspect the alteration or construction approved by such certificate and shall give prompt notice to the applicant of any work not in accordance with such certificate or violating any ordinances of the city. The building official may revoke the certificate or the building permit if violations are not corrected by the applicant in a timely manner.

(j) Certificate of Appropriateness Time Constraints.

(i) Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 12 months. On written request from an applicant, the commission may grant a single extension of its approval for a period of up to one additional year if, based upon submissions from the applicant, the commission finds that conditions on the site and in the area of the proposed project are essentially the same as when approval originally was granted.

(ii) Any certificate of appropriateness shall also expire and become null and void if such authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 12 months after being commenced. Any period or periods of time during which the right to use any such certificate or permit is stayed pursuant to this chapter shall be excluded from the computation of the 12 months.

(k) Recording of Applications for Certificate of Appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission’s proceedings in connection with said application.

(l) Acquisition of Property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein.

(m) Appeals.

(i) An appeal from a decision of the commission may be taken to the city council by the owner of the property in question or by any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved by said decision. This appeal must be filed within 30 days of the commission’s decision and the city council will hear such appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting to be held at least 14 days after the appeal is filed. In exercising its powers, the city council may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify, any order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the commission.

(ii) If the city council fails to approve the application, an appeal may be filed by the property owner or any aggrieved person, firm, or corporation with the Staunton Circuit Court within 30 days of the city council decision.

(n) Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, a certificate of appropriateness may be granted for signs by the director of planning without submission to the commission as a whole unless, in the discretion of the director, the application should be reviewed by the whole commission. Appeals from the decision of the director hereunder shall be processed as set forth in subsection (7)(m) of this section. (Ord. 2005-32; Ord. 1-8-98. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 14).


18.85.060 Maintenance and zoning code provisions.

(1) Ordinary Maintenance or Repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on an historic property or a building, structure, site or object within an historic district to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness.

Such actions shall include the following and any similar actions which in the opinion of the commission or its designated staff will have no more effect on the character of the district than those listed:

(a) Repainting resulting in the same or in a different color. (Original painting of masonry surfaces is not exempted from review.)

(b) Replacing broken window panes, missing roof shingles, or missing features with matching in-kind materials.

(c) Addition or deletion of storm windows and doors, window-box gardens, awnings, temporary canopies, window air conditioners, or similar appurtenances.

(d) Addition or deletion of television or radio antennas, skylights or solar collectors in locations not visible from a public street.

(e) Planting of grass, trees and shrubs, but not including landscape treatment which substantially alters the contour of a site or involves landscaping or construction of parking areas, fences, walls, walkways, pools, fountains and the like which materially affect the appearance of a site and which is visible from a public street.

(f) Any changes to a structure which are not visible from a public street.

Provided, however, that the commission or designated staff shall have authority to order that work be stopped and that an appropriate application be filed for review in any case where in his/her opinion the action may produce the loss or irreparable changes to character-defining features of the building or arresting and spectacular effects, violent contrasts of materials or colors and intense and lurid colors or patterns, or a multiplicity of incongruous details clearly inconsistent with the character of the present structures or with the prevailing character of the surroundings and the historic district.

(2) Failure to Provide Ordinary Maintenance or Repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect:

(a) The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings, structures, sites, and objects in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect.

Examples of such decay, deterioration or defects which, in the opinion of the commission, may result in the irreparable deterioration of any exterior appurtenance or architectural feature or produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the district as a whole or upon the life and character of the structure itself, include but are not limited to:

(i) The deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;

(ii) The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;

(iii) The deterioration of exterior chimneys;

(iv) The deterioration or crumbling of exterior plaster or mortar;

(v) The ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, and foundations, including broken windows or doors;

(vi) The peeling of paint, rotting, holes and other forms of decay;

(vii) The lack of maintenance of surrounding environment, e.g., fences, gates, sidewalks, steps, signs, accessory structures, and landscaping;

(viii) The deterioration of any feature so as to create or permit the creation of any hazardous or unsafe condition or conditions; or

(ix) Signs that are not in good condition may be removed by the building official if not repaired by the owner within six months of a written request.

(b) In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to begin corrective action of the situation and completion shall be done in a timely manner. Thereafter, each day during which there exists any violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as provided in Division IV of this title.

(c) In addition to the remedies set forth above and, at the direction of the city council, the commission may request that staff after due notice to the owner, to enter the property and make or cause to be made such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission and staff. If these costs are not paid by the owner within 60 days, a lien shall be placed against the property.

(3) Affirmation of Existing Building and Zoning Codes. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 14).


Chapter 18.90 HE-1 HIGHER EDUCATION DISTRICT

Sections:

18.90.010    General description.

18.90.020    Uses permitted.

18.90.030    Uses permitted on review.

18.90.040    Area regulations.

18.90.050    Height regulations.

18.90.060    Off-street parking.


18.90.010 General description.

Higher education districts are intended to provide appropriate areas for the development and operation of colleges and universities, including teaching facilities, academic and administrative support facilities, student, faculty and staff housing, athletic and recreation facilities, and other amenities and services related to the operation of institutions of higher education. The regulations for the district are designated to provide flexibility for uses which are harmonious within a college or university environment and result in minimal impact on the character of adjoining districts. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 15).


18.90.020 Uses permitted.

The following uses shall be permitted in the HE-1 higher education districts:

(1) Colleges and Universities, Public or Private. Uses and structures which are customarily a part of such permitted uses include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Classroom and laboratory buildings;

(b) Administrative, business, and faculty offices;

(c) Dormitories;

(d) Faculty, staff and student housing, except as otherwise provided;

(e) Student activity buildings;

(f) Athletic and recreation facilities;

(g) Dining facilities and kitchens;

(h) Libraries;

(i) Museums;

(j) Theaters and entertainment facilities;

(k) Book stores, snack bars and facilities for the sale of retail goods to satisfy the needs of members of the college or university community;

(l) Post office facilities;

(m) Physical plant facilities;

(n) Infirmaries and medical facilities.

(2) Any use permitted by right and as regulated in the R-4 residential district, except as provided in SCC 18.90.030.

(3) Bulletin boards, identification or directional signs not exceeding 20 square feet in area are permitted. Flashing or intermittent illumination is prohibited. Signs shall be attached to building or located not closer than one-half the required setback from the street rights-of-way and may have indirect illumination. Sports scoreboards shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and 20 feet in height. The provisions of SCC 18.140.020(1), (5), (6), and (7) shall apply to signs in HE-1 districts.

(4) Incidental and accessory uses and structures.

(5) Co-location of telecommunication antenna and related equipment as regulated in SCC 18.185.020(4). (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 15).


18.90.030 Uses permitted on review.

New buildings, conversion of existing buildings used as single-family residences to student housing, or conversion of existing buildings used as single-family residences to any use when conversion will materially alter the external appearance of the building, in every case if the building is located at any point closer than 75 feet to a public street or residential district, shall require a special use permit. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 15).


18.90.040 Area regulations.

The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in this district:

(1) Front Yard. All buildings shall set back from public street right-of-way lines not less than 25 feet. In all other cases, a front yard shall not be required.

(2) Side Yard. On the side of a building adjoining a residential district there shall be a side yard of not less than 25 feet. There shall be a side yard setback from an intersecting street of not less than 25 feet. In all other cases, a side yard of 10 feet shall be required for one-story buildings, which shall increase to 12 feet for two stories, 15 feet for three stories and 25 feet for four or more stories. There shall be a five-foot setback for accessory buildings.

(3) Rear Yard. None, except for buildings abutting a residential or professional district and then there shall be a minimum rear yard, alley, service court, or combination thereof, of not less than 25 feet for main buildings and a five-foot setback for accessory buildings.

(4) Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot area which may be covered by main buildings shall be 35 percent. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 15).


18.90.050 Height regulations.

No building shall exceed four and one-half stories in height, except as provided in Chapter 18.115 SCC, or as a use permitted on review by the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.210 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 15).


18.90.060 Off-street parking.

Parking spaces required on the grounds or campus of the college or university shall be two spaces per three teachers and employees normally engaged in or about the buildings or grounds of the college or university, plus one space per three students. The adequacy of parking spaces for guest parking at any new student activity center shall be approved by the planning commission. For purposes of application of the off-street parking requirements, the grounds or campus of a college or university shall include all property owned by a college or university and located within this district. The general provisions of SCC 18.125.020 shall apply to parking in HE-1 districts. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 15).


Chapter 18.95 A-1 AGRICULTURAL-FORESTAL DISTRICT

Sections:

18.95.005    Definitions.

18.95.010    Districts continued.

18.95.020    Districts designated and described – Additions to districts.

18.95.030    Required and permitted uses.

18.95.040    Overlay.

18.95.050    Private roads.

18.95.060    Other conditions.

18.95.070    Term review.

18.95.080    Severability.


18.95.005 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless otherwise provided herein:

“Agricultural production” means the production for commercial purposes of crops, livestock and livestock products, and other agricultural products, including the processing or retail sales by the producer of such products which are produced on the parcel or in the district. 

“Agricultural products” means crops, livestock and livestock products, including but not limited to: field crops, fruits, vegetables, horticultural specialties, cattle, sheep, hogs, goats, horses, poultry, furbearing animals, milk, eggs and furs. 

“Application” means the set of items an owner of land or owners of land, landowner or landowners must submit to the local governing body when applying for the creation of a district or an addition to an existing district. 

“District” means an agricultural-forestal area comprised of one or more parcels as designated for inclusion in a district as specified herein. 

“Forestal production” means the production for commercial purposes of forestal products and includes the processing or retail sales, by the producer, of forestal products which are produced on the parcel or in the district. 

“Forestal products” means, but is not limited to, saw timber, pulpwood, posts, firewood, Christmas trees and other tree and wood products for sale or for farm use. 

“Intensive agriculture facility” means any building or structure housing more than 10 animals or any dead animal disposal facility.

“Owner or owners of land” means any person who holds a direct or indirect fee simple interest in property or a direct or indirect controlling or other interest in an entity that holds a direct or indirect fee simple interest in land and other property but does not include the holder of an easement. 

“Person” means any individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, cooperative, trust, business trust, joint venture, or any other entity and any successor, representative, agent, agency, or instrumentality thereof. (Ord. 2010-29).


18.95.010 Districts continued.

Pursuant to the Agricultural and Forestal Districts Act of the Commonwealth of Virginia, there are hereby continued agricultural-forestal districts, subject to the terms, conditions, and restrictions set forth in this chapter and as otherwise provided by Sections 15.2-4300 through and including 15.2-4314 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, the provisions of which, except as specifically modified herein, to the extent permitted by law, are adopted and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 2010-29; Ord. 2004-38. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 16).


18.95.020 Districts designated and described – Additions to districts.

(1) Districts. The agricultural, or sometimes referred to as agricultural and forestal or agricultural-forestal, districts designated and the land included within the districts are the following:

(a) The Bell’s Lane Agricultural and Forestal District shall consist of the following land, to wit:

(i) 1,662.34 acres of land, more or less, situated in the city of Staunton, Virginia, bounded generally on the west by Commerce Road, on the north by State Route 262 (formerly State Route 275), on the east by Interstate 81, and on the south by Route 254, which includes the land identified by the city of Staunton assessor as parcel numbers 10140, 10143, 10146, 10149, 10152, 10169, 10176, 10182, 10187, 10369, 10375, 10410, 10413, 10418, 10420, 10423, 10430, 10438, 10442 and 11121, and as further shown on the map entitled “Ag-Forestal Districts” made by the engineering department of the city of Staunton, dated October 25, 2004, a copy of which map shall be on file with the department of planning and inspection and the city assessor’s office.

(ii) 26.19 acres of land, more or less, situated in the city of Staunton, Virginia, bounded generally on the east by Interstate 81 and on the south, west and north by the land of Lewis W. Moore, lying along the southeastern margin of Lewis Creek and encompassing the land identified by the city of Staunton as parcel number 10484.

(b) The Merrifield Agricultural and Forestal District shall consist of the following land, to wit:

(i) 218.441 acres of land, more or less, situated in the city of Staunton, Virginia, at the northwest quadrant of the intersection of U.S. Route 11 and State Route 262 (formerly State Route 275), and identified by the city of Staunton assessor as parcel number 10329 and shown on the aforementioned map as “Hereford,” and more particularly shown and described as Parcel A-2 on the “Survey Plat of Property of E. Monroe Bonfoey and Sarah D. Witz Bonfoey,” a copy of which plat is recorded in the clerk’s office of the circuit court of the city of Staunton, Virginia, in Deed Book 305, Page 858.

(ii) 147.202 acres of land, more or less, situated in the city of Staunton, Virginia, adjoining the land described in subsection (1)(b)(i) of this section and shown on the map aforementioned as “Bonfoey,” and more particularly shown and described on the plat, aforesaid, as Parcel A-1 (excluding 2.999 acres shown on said plat as Parcel B) and identified by the city of Staunton assessor as parcel number 10881.

(iii) 196.13 acres of land, more or less, situated in the city of Staunton, Virginia, known as “Cobble Hill,” identified by the city of Staunton assessor as parcel numbers 10007, 10008 and 10010 and shown on the map aforementioned as “Craske.”

(c) The M.O. Carr Agricultural and Forestal District shall consist of the following land, to wit:

(i) 40.67 acres of land, more or less, and shown on the map aforementioned as “Hardy” and identified by the city of Staunton assessor as parcel number 10012.

(ii) 35.167 acres of land, more or less, and shown on the map aforementioned as “Johnson” and identified by the city of Staunton assessor as parcel number 10472.

(iii) 10.54 acres of land, more or less, known as the “Thompson” property and consisting of two parcels identified and shown by the city as parcel number 9996, containing approximately 0.950 acres, and parcel number 10824, containing approximately 9.404 acres.

(d) The Middlebrook Agricultural and Forestal District shall consist of the following land, to wit:

221.266 acres of land, more or less, situated in the city of Staunton, Virginia, fronting approximately 6,500 feet along the southwestern city limits at the northwest corner of the intersection of Middlebrook Avenue and State Route 262 (formerly State Route 275), adjoining Montgomery Hall Park on the northeast, Augusta County on the southwest, CSX Railroad on the northwest and Middlebrook Avenue on the southeast, which includes the lands identified by the city of Staunton assessor as parcel numbers 10098, 10126, 10311, 10099, 10103, 10510 and 10097, and as further shown on the map entitled “Exhibit D.1. – Boundary Map,” a copy of which map shall be on file with the department of planning and inspection and the city assessor’s office. 

(2) Additions to Districts. No additional district shall be established and no land shall be added to a district unless the land as a parcel for which application is made totals at least 20 acres and the district already has a core of not less than 200 acres in one parcel or in contiguous parcels. The assessor for the city of Staunton shall specify an application form and, as necessary, other forms related to any proposed additional district and for proposed land to be added to a district consistent with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-16; Ord. 2020-01; Ord. 2015-02; Ord. 2010-29; Ord. 2009-06; Ord. 2009-05; Ord. 2004-38. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 16).


18.95.030 Required and permitted uses.

(1) Required Uses. Land included within the districts under this chapter shall be used solely for agricultural products, agricultural productions, forestal products, and forestal production, except as otherwise specifically limited or permitted, and shall continuously be so used to manifest active, bona fide agricultural and forestal production of a significant nature and degree. Not later than July 1st of each year, each owner of land in a district shall file with the assessor for the city of Staunton a fully complete affidavit as to each such parcel of land as identified separately within the district in SCC 18.95.020, in a form specified by the assessor, that verifies the use of the land within the district satisfies these conditions. Owners shall be permitted a 30-day period extension to file the affidavit as to each such parcel as identified separately within the district in SCC 18.95.020 upon satisfactory proof of payment within such 30-day extension period to the Staunton city treasurer of a late filing fee of $100.00 or 10 percent of the tax savings, whichever is greater, as to each separately identified parcel within the district. Owners shall be permitted an immediately successive 30-day period filing extension as to each such separately identified parcel within the district upon satisfactory proof of payment within such 30-day extension period to the Staunton city treasurer of a late filing fee of an additional $100.00 or 10 percent of the tax savings, whichever is greater, as to each. In no event, however, shall the total extension exceed two immediately successive 30-day periods, totaling 60 days. Absent timely filing of a properly completed affidavit and timely payment of late filing fee(s), if applicable, land included in a district shall be regarded as suspended from inclusion in the district for the following calendar year for purposes of qualification for an agricultural or forestal use-value assessment pursuant to Article 4 (Section 58.1-3229 et seq.) of Chapter 32 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. 

(2) Other Permitted Uses. Construction and placement of dwellings for persons who earn a substantial part of their livelihood from farm or forestry operations on the same property, or for members of the immediate family of the owner, and divisions of parcels for dwellings of such immediate family members shall be permitted subject to the following limitations and regulations:

(a) Any new dwelling permitted hereunder must be located on a platted lot approved in accordance with the provisions of SCC 17.10.070, Minor subdivision plats.

(b) Minimum lot area: one acre.

(c) Maximum lot coverage: 10 percent.

(d) Lots must abut at least 30 feet on a public or private street.

(e) All buildings on a lot must be set back at least 100 feet from the front lot line, 50 feet from the rear lot line, and 50 feet from the side lot lines.

(f) Dwellings shall not exceed 35 feet or two and one-half stories, whichever is greater. All other buildings or structures, unless exempted by Chapter 18.115 SCC, shall not exceed one story or 15 feet, whichever is greater.

(3) Nothing herein shall prohibit the carrying out of agritourism activities, as defined in Section 3.2-6400 of the Code of Virginia, or other activities in accordance with Section 15.2-2288.6 of the Code of Virginia, on the land within these districts, except to the extent such activities substantially impact the health, safety, or general welfare of the public as further identified by the city council in this code, or constitute a nuisance as defined in this code or in Section 15.2-900 of the Code of Virginia. (Ord. 2020-01; Ord. 2018-26; Ord. 2010-29; Ord. 2004-38. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 16).


18.95.040 Overlay.

These districts are overlay districts and upon termination of any of the districts or withdrawal of any parcel from a district, when permitted, the underlying zoning with its rules and regulations shall continue to be in effect. (Ord. 2020-01; Ord. 2010-29; Ord. 2004-38. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 16).


18.95.050 Private roads.

If, in the creation of a lot pursuant to SCC 18.95.030(2)(a), a private road is created, no city services such as, but not limited to, snow and ice removal and trash collection will be provided to such lot. In addition, emergency services such as fire and rescue may be limited. (Ord. 2020-01; Ord. 2010-29; Ord. 2004-38. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 16).


18.95.060 Other conditions.

(1) Land included in a district shall be regarded as suspended from inclusion in the district for the following calendar year for purposes of qualification for agricultural or forestal use-value assessment pursuant to Article 4 (Section 58.1-3229 et seq.) of Chapter 32 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia if, as of June 30th or December 31st, any owner of land is delinquent as to any amounts, including but not limited to taxes, fees, and charges, or any other sum for which the person has been determined to be liable to the city of Staunton even though the matter may be in contest. The city director of finance, treasurer, and commissioner of revenue shall certify to the assessor the name of any such person and shall, together with the city assessor, regard the land as suspended from inclusion in the corresponding district for the following calendar year for this purpose, to the fullest extent permitted by law.

(2) No land within a district shall be removed from the district except with the approval of the council of the city of Staunton, upon a showing of good and reasonable cause.

(3) During the term of the districts, no parcel of land within the districts shall, without the prior approval of the council of the city of Staunton, be developed to any more intensive use than existed at the date of the creation of these districts, other than uses resulting in more intensive agricultural or forestal production, and no parcel of common or related ownership within the districts may have thereon, at any particular time, more than 10 turkeys, 10 hogs, and 20 chickens.

(4) By having land in an existing or in an added district, any owner of land in a district accordingly deems and stipulates that the value of such land shall, for all purposes related to the acquisition of any easement interest in the land for a public use for water and/or sewer utility facilities or ingress and egress right-of-way to such facilities by the city of Staunton or its authorities as authorized by law, be the same value used for assessment pursuant to Article 4 (Section 58.1-3229 et seq.) of Chapter 32 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, to the fullest extent permitted by law.

(5) No intensive agriculture facility shall be closer than 500 feet from a nonagricultural district and 100 feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. (Ord. 2020-01; Ord. 2010-29; Ord. 2004-38. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 16).


18.95.070 Term review.

(1) A review of the Bell’s Lane Agricultural and Forestal District, the Merrifield Agricultural and Forestal District, the M. O. Carr Agricultural and Forestal District, and the Middlebrook Agricultural and Forestal District as identified in SCC 18.95.020, including any additions to any district, may be made by the council of the city of Staunton on the date 10 years measured from the effective date of the continuation of those districts as provided by, and in accordance with, Section 15.2-4311 of the Code of Virginia, as amended; except, however, a review is and shall be unnecessary prior to a new 10-year period which shall commence January 1, 2021, and expire December 31, 2030, with the next review, therefore, to occur in the year 2030 consistent with Section 15.2-4311 of the Code of Virginia.

 (2) Repealed by Ord. 2020-16.

 (3) Each district created hereunder shall be so reviewed on an individual basis, and the continuation of one or its termination shall not automatically continue or terminate any other district. (Ord. 2020-16; Ord. 2015-03; Ord. 2010-29; Ord. 2009-05; Ord. 2004-38. Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 16).


18.95.080 Severability.

If any of the provisions of any subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of the chapter. (Ord. 2010-29).


Chapter 18.100 I-3 PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT

Sections:

18.100.010    General description.

18.100.020    Uses permitted.

18.100.030    Area regulations.

18.100.040    Height regulations.

18.100.050    Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements.

18.100.060    Signage.

18.100.070    Screening of outdoor storage.

18.100.080    Uses prohibited.


18.100.010 General description.

The I-3 district is intended to permit industrial development where the use and its operation do not directly adversely affect nearby residential and business uses. The district regulations are designed to allow a wide range of industrial activities subject to limitations designed to protect nearby residential and business districts. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 17).


18.100.020 Uses permitted.

Within the planned industrial district, no building, structure, or premises shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected or altered until and unless the same has been approved by the planning commission and by city council in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 18.210 SCC, and until and unless the following conditions have been complied with.

Uses that may be permitted on review shall be the following:

(1) A retail or service use only when it directly serves or is auxiliary to the needs of industrial plants or employees thereof.

(2) Sleeping facilities required by caretaker or night watchman employed on the premises shall be permitted in the I-3 district.

(3) Any of the following uses:

(a) Outdoor storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber; open storage of construction contractor’s equipment, supplies, and manufactured goods.

(b) Offices, businesses, or professional.

(4) The following uses when conducted within a completely enclosed building:

(a) The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries, and food products.

(b) The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles of merchandise from the following previously prepared materials; aluminum, bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, shell, rubber, textiles, tin, iron, steel, wood (excluding sawmill), yarn, and paint not involving a boiling process.

(c) The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.

(d) The manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs, commercial advertising structures, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating ducts and equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like.

(e) The manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and rubber and metal stamps.

(f) Auction house, except for sale of livestock.

(g) Blacksmith shop and machine shop.

(h) Wholesale or warehouse enterprise.

(5) Buildings, structures, and uses accessory and customarily incidental to any of the above uses.

(6) There shall have been filed with the planning commission a written application for approval of a contemplated use within said district, which application shall be accompanied with the following information:

(a) A plot plan indicating the location of present and proposed building, driveways, parking lots, landscaping, screening, and other necessary uses.

(b) Preliminary architectural plans for the proposed building or buildings.

(c) A description of the business operations proposed in sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing excessive auto or traffic congestion or problems of noise, glare, odor, fire, or safety hazards, or other factors detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the area.

(d) Effects of those operations in producing excessive auto or traffic congestion or problems of noise, glare, odor, fire, or safety hazards, or other factors detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the area.

(e) Engineering or architectural plans for the handling of any of the problems of the type outlined in subsection (6)(c) of this section, including the handling of storm water and sewers and necessary plans for the controlling of smoke or other nuisances such as those enumerated under subsection (6)(c) of this section.

(f) Any other information the planning commission or city council may need to adequately consider the effect that the proposed uses may have upon the area, and/or the cost of providing municipal services to the area. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 17).


18.100.030 Area regulations.

The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in this district:

(1) Front Yard. All buildings shall set back from all street right-of-way lines not less than 35 feet.

(2) Side Yard. No building shall be located closer than 15 feet to a side lot line, unless said side lot line abuts a residential or professional district, in which case no building shall be located closer than 75 feet to that side lot line.

(3) Rear Yard. No building shall be located closer than 30 feet to a rear lot line, unless such rear lot line abuts a residential or professional district, in which case no building shall be located closer than 75 feet to that rear lot line.

(4) Coverage. Main and accessory buildings and off-street parking, drives, access roads, service areas and loading facilities shall not cover more than 75 percent of the lot area.

(5) Buffer Zone. Setback areas shall act as a buffer between adjacent residential and business uses. They shall be fully landscaped and maintained with grass, trees and shrubbery of sufficient height and density to serve as a screen between the planned industrial zone and the residential zone. The buffer zone shall not constitute a site-distance obstruction at street intersections. The buffer zone shall be considered as part of the lot area, but shall not be used for any business purpose such as buildings, parking lots, signs, or any accessory use. The buffer zone, upon completion of the development of any project, shall be at or near the same grade or plane which existed prior to the development of the planned industrial district property, unless otherwise expressly reviewed and approved by the planning commission and by city council. These restrictions shall not apply to that portion of the lot fronting on the major thoroughfares, however all other required landscaping shall apply. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 17).


18.100.040 Height regulations.

No building or structure shall exceed four stories or 45 feet in height, except as hereinafter provided in Chapter 18.115 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 17).


18.100.050 Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements.

Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements are as regulated in Chapters 18.125 and 18.135 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 17).


18.100.060 Signage.

Signage is as regulated in Chapter 18.140 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 17).


18.100.070 Screening of outdoor storage.

Outdoor storage facilities and areas shall be screened by a minimum seven-foot-tall obscuring fence, wall or mass plantings and designed in such a way as to contribute to the orderly appearance of the district. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 17).


18.100.080 Uses prohibited.

The following uses are prohibited:

(1) Abattoirs or slaughterhouses.

(2) Acid manufacture.

(3) Automobile assembling, painting, upholstering, rebuilding, reconditioning, body and fender works, truck repairing and overhauling, tire retreading or recapping and battery manufacturing.

(4) Ammonia, bleaching powder, or chlorine manufacture.

(5) Bag cleaning.

(6) Batching plants for asphalt and portland cement concrete.

(7) Blast furnace.

(8) Boiler works.

(9) Brick, tile or terra cotta manufacture not requiring ovens.

(10) Candle manufacture.

(11) Celluloid manufacture.

(12) Coke ovens.

(13) Crematory or reduction plant.

(14) Creosote treatment or manufacture.

(15) Dextrin, glucose, and starch manufacture.

(16) Disinfectants, cattle dips, exterminators and insecticides manufacture, not including the compounding of the same.

(17) Distillation of bones.

(18) Dyestuff manufacture.

(19) Fat rendering.

(20) Feed mills.

(21) Fertilizer manufacture, not including compounding.

(22) Fireworks or explosives manufacture or storage, or the loading of explosives.

(23) Fish smoke or curing.

(24) Forge plant.

(25) Foundry casting lightweight nonferrous metal not causing noxious fumes or odors.

(26) Freighting or trucking yard or terminal.

(27) Fuel manufacture.

(28) Gas (illumination or heating) manufacture or storage in excess of 1,000 cubic feet.

(29) Gelatin, glue, or size manufacture or process involving recovery from fish or animal material.

(30) Glass manufacture.

(31) Gunpowder manufacture or storage.

(32) Hotels and similar inhabitable places.

(33) Incineration or reduction of garbage, dead animals, outfall, or refuse other than by an authorized public agency.

(34) Iron, steel, brass, or copper works or foundry.

(35) Lampblack manufacture.

(36) Lime, gypsum, cement, asphalt or plaster of paris manufacture.

(37) Livestock market, auction or sales pavilion.

(38) Match manufacture.

(39) Oil, paint, turpentine, or varnish manufacture.

(40) Ore reduction.

(41) Planing mill.

(42) Potash or washing soda manufacture.

(43) Public utility service yard or electrical receiving or transforming station.

(44) Pulp mills.

(45) Petroleum products, refining, or storage.

(46) Printing ink manufacture.

(47) Pyroxylin plastics or celluloid manufacture, or explosive or inflammable cellulose or pyroxylin products manufacture.

(48) Rendering plant or other comparable processing of fish or animal material.

(49) Residential use.

(50) Rolling manufacture.

(51) Sale, storage, and sorting of junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials, machinery or equipment, but not including processing.

(52) Salt works.

(53) Sawmill.

(54) Smelting or refining of metals.

(55) Soap manufacture.

(56) Sulphurous, sulfuric, nitric, or hydrochloric, or other corrosive or offensive acid manufacture or their use except as accessory to a permitted industry.

(57) Stockyards.

(58) Shoe polish manufacture.

(59) Tanning, curing, or storage of raw hides or skins, or leather dressing or coloring.

(60) Tar distillation or manufacture.

(61) Tire recapping or retreading.

(62) Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture.

(63) Wool pulling or scouring. (Zoning ordinance Art. 4, § 17).


Chapter 18.105 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW

Sections:

18.105.010    Purpose.

18.105.020    Planned residential development.

18.105.030    Single-family attached dwelling and single-family semi-detached dwelling.

18.105.040    Cemetery.

18.105.050    Public and private utilities and services.

18.105.060    Private day nurseries and kindergartens.

18.105.070    Automobile wrecking and junk yards.

18.105.080    Modifications for condominium unit development.


18.105.010 Purpose.

In order to accomplish the general purpose of this title, it is necessary to give special consideration to certain uses because they are unique in nature, require large land areas, are potentially incompatible with existing development, or because the effects of such uses cannot definitely be foreseen.

The following uses shall be subject to compliance with the regulations in this chapter, and with the procedure for authorizing uses permitted on review as set forth in Chapter 18.210 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 1).


18.105.020 Planned residential development.

(1) General Description. The regulations established in this section are intended to provide optional methods of land development which encourage more imaginative solutions to environmental design problems. Residential areas thus established would be characterized by a unified building and site development program, open space for recreation, and the provision for commercial (in R-3 and R-4 districts only), religious, educational, and cultural facilities which are integrated with the total project by unified architectural and open space treatment. In order to accomplish these objectives, the customary district regulations may be modified; provided, that overall population densities do not exceed the densities of specific residential districts. A planned residential development shall be permitted in any R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and P-1 districts.

(2) Permitted Principal and Accessory Uses and Structures.

(a) The uses permitted in a planned residential development shall only be those uses permitted in the particular zoning district wherein the planned residential development is located, and the intensity of use for the planned residential development must not exceed the intensity of use for the particular zoning district involved.

(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2)(a) of this section, facilities for a homeowners association to provide for maintenance facilities and other activities by the homeowners association for the purposes of the planned residential development only and community facilities usage such as churches and other religious institutions, and nonprofit clubs such as country clubs, swimming, and/or tennis clubs may be permitted.

(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2)(a) of this section, recreation usage within the planned residential development may include such facilities as would be consistent with the basic district for the planned residential development. Any structure involved in such usages shall have a 25-foot setback from all property lines. The amount of land set aside for permanent usable open space and recreational use shall be 15 percent of the gross development area.

(d) Additional permitted uses and regulations for planned residential development in R-3 and R-4 districts:

(i) The number of dwelling units permitted shall be determined by dividing the net development area by the minimum lot area per family required by the district or districts in which the area is located. Net development area shall be determined by subtracting the area set aside for churches, schools, commercial use, and street rights-of-way from the gross development area. The area of land set aside for common open space or recreational use shall be included in determining the number of dwelling units permitted. Where an area of 50 acres or more is being developed, a maximum of 20 percent of dwellings located within the area included in the development may be multiple dwellings. In all areas under 50 acres, a maximum of 15 percent of the dwellings may be multiple-family.

(ii) For each 100 dwelling units in the development plan, and notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2)(a) of this section, one acre may be set aside for commercial uses permitted in the B-1 district provided that such commercial use shall be planned and gauged primarily for the service and convenience of the residents within the planned residential development and the people working therein and shall only be authorized to the extent that such uses are not available to such residents in reasonable proximity to the planned residential development.

(3) Area Regulations. The minimum lot size requirements for the applicable district shall not apply to planned residential development; provided, that the overall density of dwelling units is no greater than that permitted by the requirements for the applicable district. Each lot need not front on a dedicated street; provided, that each lot has vehicular and pedestrian access to a dedicated street through a prescribed easement or common area. All buildings shall be set back from street right-of-way lines and from the periphery of the project subject to the approval of the planning commission.

(4) Intensity of Use. The intensity of use shall not exceed the number of families per gross acre for the entire project as applied for the applicable zoning district.

(5) Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking is as regulated in Chapter 18.125 SCC.

(6) Administrative Procedure for a Planned Residential Development. In addition to the administration requirements set forth in Chapter 18.210 SCC, and the additional notice requirements set forth in subsection (6)(e) of this section, a planned residential development shall not be permitted until the following conditions have been complied with.

There shall have been filed with the planning commission a written application for approval, which application shall be accompanied with the following information:

(a) The application must be accompanied by an overall development plan showing the use or uses, dimensions, and locations of proposed sites, and other open spaces, with such other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the contemplated arrangement or use which makes it desirable to apply regulations and requirements differing from those ordinarily applicable under this title. The applicant shall obtain written comments on the proposed development plan from the fire department, health department, affected utility companies, building official, and recreation department and submit these with application. The application must also be accompanied by the proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants for governing the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned development, prescribed easements and any common areas that are not to be dedicated to and accepted by the city of Staunton which must be recorded with or prior to the first lot conveyance.

The proposed development plan shall be prepared by and have the seal of an architect or engineer duly registered to practice in the state of Virginia.

(b) The planning commission shall review the conformity of the proposed development and shall recognize principles of civic design, land use planning, and landscape architecture. The planning commission may impose conditions regarding layout, circulation, and performance of the proposed development, and may require that appropriate deed restrictions be filed. The planning commission shall also review provisions for surface water drainage, storm sewers, and the specifications of the streets serving the subject development and may impose conditions regarding the same prior to its recommendations with respect to the subject project.

(c) The tract or parcel of land involved must be either in one ownership or the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of all the property included or filed by any governmental agency.

(d) The proposed development must be designed to produce an environment of stable and desirable character not out of harmony with its surrounding neighborhood, and must provide standards of open space and areas for parking adequate for the occupancy proposed. It must include provisions for recreation areas to meet the needs of the anticipated population.

(e) In addition to the notice requirements set forth in Chapter 18.210 SCC, written notice shall be given before the public hearing conducted by the planning commission to the owner or owners, their agent, or the occupant, of all abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected. Notice sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of such owner, as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books, shall be deemed adequate compliance with this requirement.

(f) Upon the abandonment of a particular project authorized under this chapter, or upon the expiration of two years from the authorization hereunder of a planned development which has not by then been completed or commenced and an extension of time for completion granted, the authorization shall expire and the land and structures thereon may be used without such approval for any other lawful purpose permissible within the area regulations of the district in which the planned development is located.

(7) Recordation of Plat. Upon the approval of the proposed development plan by the city council of the city of Staunton, a plat of the development shall be recorded and shall show building lines, common land, streets, easements, and other applicable features required by the title regulating the subdivision of land. No building permit shall be issued until the final plat of the proposed development is approved and recorded. (Ord. 2020-17. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 1).


18.105.030 Single-family attached dwelling and single-family semi-detached dwelling.

Single-family attached dwellings and single-family semi-detached dwellings are permitted in the R-3 and R-4 districts, provided they comply with the following specifications:

(1) Each dwelling unit shall be located on a separate lot fronting on a street.

(2) Development involving new or additional streets, or any public dedication of land, shall be subject to review and approval in accordance with the subdivision provisions prescribed in SCC Title 17.

(3) Area Regulations.

(a) Setback. The minimum front setback shall be 25 feet.

(b) Side Yard.

	Interior attached dwellings	None required

	End dwellings	15 feet

	End dwelling adjoining another zoning district	25 feet

(c) Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.

(d) Lot Size. Minimum lot widths shall be:

	Attached dwelling	20 feet

	End attached dwelling or semi-detached dwelling	35 feet

	Minimum lot depth	100 feet

(e) Lot Size. Minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet.

(4) Height Regulations. No attached or semi-detached dwelling unit shall exceed the height of two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height, except as provided in Chapter 18.115 SCC.

(5) Off-Street Parking. The off-street parking shall be as regulated in Chapter 18.125 SCC. The required parking may be provided in common parking garages or areas within 200 feet of the group served.

(6) Other Requirements.

(a) There shall be not more than six dwelling units in any group of attached dwelling units and no more than three abutting dwellings or any group shall have the same front setback and the same, or essentially the same, architectural treatment of facades and roof lines. The minimum structural offset after any four abutting dwellings shall be two feet.

(b) Accessory buildings shall be permitted as prescribed in an R-3 district, Chapter 18.30 SCC. (Ord. 2010-09; Ord. 2006-13. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 1).


18.105.040 Cemetery.

(1) The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development of a system of collector and larger streets in the vicinity of such site. In addition, such site shall have direct access to a thoroughfare.

(2) Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than 20 acres.

(3) All other structures including, but not limited to, mausoleum, permanent monument, or maintenance building shall be set back not less than 25 feet from any property line or street right-of-way line.

(4) All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than 25 feet from any property line or street right-of-way line.

(5) All required yards shall be landscaped and maintained. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 1).


18.105.050 Public and private utilities and services.

Where permitted, public and private utilities and services shall be subject to the following requirements:

(1) Health Department Report. Application for permission to operate waterworks and/or sewage treatment plants shall be accompanied by a report and a recommendation from the health department. Such recommendations as to design and construction, type of treatment, source of water, standards for testing and sampling, and standards for the quality of effluent, shall be incorporated into and made a part of the application.

(2) Lot Area and Location. The required lot area and location shall be specified as part of the application and shall be determined in relation to the proposed use, the intensity of such use, and the effects of such use upon the environment.

(3) Fencing and/or Screening. Where findings indicate that a hazard may result or that interference with the development or use and enjoyment of surrounding residential properties may ensue, fencing or screening with an evergreen hedge or other shielding material may be required in a manner consistent with such findings. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 1).


18.105.060 Private day nurseries and kindergartens.

(1) A fenced play area shall be provided.

(2) In addition to the requirements above, the facilities, operation, and maintenance shall meet the requirements of the county health department. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 1).


18.105.070 Automobile wrecking and junk yards.

(1) Location. Because of the tendency for salvage yards to promote the breeding of vermin, no such operation shall be permitted closer than 300 feet from any established residential district.

(2) Screening. All outdoor storage of salvage and wrecking operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed opaque fence or wall, excepting driveway areas, from eight to 12 feet in height. Storage between the street and such fence or wall is expressly prohibited. Any fence or wall erected for screening purposes shall be properly painted or otherwise maintained in good condition until a screen of evergreen plantings are large enough to shield the premises from view, from the street, and from surrounding property.

(3) Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking is as regulated in Chapter 18.125 SCC.

(4) Ingress and Egress. The number of vehicular access driveways permitted on any single street frontage should be limited to:

(a) One driveway where the parcel to be used has a maximum street frontage of 100 feet or less.

(b) Two driveways where the street frontage exceeds 100 feet. Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be limited to a maximum of 40 feet in width, exclusive of curb returns. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 1).


18.105.080 Modifications for condominium unit development.

(1) Condominium Unit Subdivisions. It is the intent of this chapter to permit the development of housing development known as condominium units. For purposes of application of these regulations, a condominium unit shall be constructed to be a subdivision of real estate and all platting requirements of this chapter, except as modified in this division, shall apply to such projects.

Condominium unit subdivision shall include a condominium as defined in the Code of Virginia and it shall also include any similar type development not technically within the definitions of the Code of Virginia, but substantially conforming to condominium type development and usage.

(2) Special Regulations for Condominium Unit Subdivision. The following special regulations shall apply to any condominium unit subdivision platted under this chapter:

(a) In considering its relation to zoning, the condominium development shall be subject to all applicable zoning regulations for the specific housing types planned in such developments. A condominimum unit development shall not exceed the maximum intensity of use permitted in the zoning district in which the development is located.

(b) All structures within such development shall be planned so as not to impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent properties.

(c) Off-street parking as prescribed for the applicable use under Chapter 18.125 SCC shall be provided.

(d) Unless a dwelling unit is located on a separate lot fronting on a street, the dwelling unit must have vehicular and pedestrian access to a dedicated and accepted street through a prescribed easement or common area constituting part of the common element. All buildings shall be set back from street right-of-way lines and from the periphery of the project as prescribed for the zone in which the project is located.

(e) The horizontal property plan must be approved by the planning commission and city council under the procedure for uses permitted on review. The application must also be accompanied by the proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants for governing the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the condominium development and any common areas that are not to be dedicated to the city of Staunton. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 1).


Chapter 18.110 ACCESSORY USES

Sections:

18.110.010    Purpose.

18.110.020    General provisions.

18.110.030    Permitted accessory structures.


18.110.010 Purpose.

The uses of land, buildings, and other structures permitted in each of the districts established by this title are designated by listing the principal uses permitted. In addition to such principal uses, this chapter shall regulate uses customarily incidental to any principal use permitted in the district. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 2).


18.110.020 General provisions.

Each permitted accessory use shall:

(1) Be customarily incidental to the principal use established on the same lot.

(2) Be subordinate to and serve such principal use.

(3) Be subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to such principal use.

(4) Contribute to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of users of such principal use. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 2).


18.110.030 Permitted accessory structures.

Accessory uses shall be permitted as specified above and such accessory uses shall be applicable to the principal use and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(1) For dwellings:

(a) Shelter for house pets, but not exceeding two shelters to house not more than two adults and dependent animals per dwelling.

(b) Enclosures and shelter for chickens, but not exceeding one pen and one coop to keep not more than six chickens, as defined and provided in Chapter 18.153 SCC.

(c) Children’s playhouse and playground equipment.

(d) Incinerator, incidental to the principal use only.

(e) Private greenhouse, vegetable, fruit, or flower garden, from which no products are sold or offered for sale.

(f) Private garage or carport.

(g) Private swimming pool and bathhouse.

(h) Shed for the storage of maintenance or recreation equipment used on the premises.

(2) For church, chapel, temple, or synagogue:

(a) Parish house, or residence for the clergymen of the congregation.

(b) Religious education building.

(3) For educational institutions:

(a) Convent or lay teacher’s quarters.

(b) Dormitories.

(c) Power or heating plants.

(d) Stadiums, gymnasiums, field houses, game courts, or fields.

(4) For golf and country clubs:

(a) Dwelling for caretaker.

(b) Maintenance equipment storage shed.

(c) Pro shop.

(d) Lounge and dining area.

(e) Refreshment facilities used primarily for members or participants at such clubs.

(5) For hospitals and health institutions:

(a) Staff quarters.

(b) Laundry, incidental to the principal use only.

(c) Medical and nursing instruction.

(d) Chapel.

(6) For industrial uses in the industrial districts:

(a) Offices.

(b) Restaurants or cafeterias.

(c) First aid clinics or dispensaries.

(d) Watchmen’s quarters.

(e) Research or pilot structures. (Ord. 2015-09. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 2).


Chapter 18.115 HEIGHT

Sections:

18.115.010    Exceptions.


18.115.010 Exceptions.

The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or qualify and supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations set forth in Division II of this title:

(1) In measuring heights, a habitable basement or attic shall be counted as a half story.

(2) The following structures or parts thereof are hereby exempt from the height limitations set forth in the zoning districts:

(a) Agricultural buildings: barn, silo, windmill, but not including dwellings.

(b) Chimneys, smokestacks, penthouse, spires, flagpoles, ventilators, skylights, derricks, conveyors, and cooling towers.

(c) Radio and television antennas and towers, observation towers, and transmission towers.

(d) Water tanks and standpipes.

(e) Other similar and necessary mechanical appurtenances pertaining to and necessary to the permitted uses of the districts in which they are located; provided, that they are not used for human occupancy.

(3) Churches, schools, hospitals, sanatoriums, and other public and semi-public buildings may exceed the height limitations of the district if the minimum depth of the front, side, and rear yards required in the district is increased one foot for each two feet by which the height of such public or semi-public structure exceeds the prescribed height limit. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 3).


Chapter 18.120 YARD, BUILDING SETBACK, AND OPEN SPACE EXCEPTIONS

Sections:

18.120.010    Setback exceptions.


18.120.010 Setback exceptions.

The following requirements provide exceptions or qualify and supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations set forth except in Division II of this title.

(1) No yard, open space, or lot area required for a building or structure shall, during its life, be occupied by any other building or structure except:

(a) Awnings and canopies, as provided for in the building code and SCC 12.05.110.

(b) Bay windows and chimneys, not to exceed two feet.

(c) Driveways, curbs, sidewalks, and steps; provided, however, steps or stairs to a dwelling, nonenclosed, not to exceed six feet.

(d) Fences, walls, and hedges, subject to the regulations as set forth in this chapter.

(e) Garbage disposal equipment, nonpermanent.

(f) Landscape features, planting boxes, and recreational equipment.

(g) Overhanging roof, eave, gutter, cornice, or other architectural feature, not to exceed three feet. Open fire escapes may extend into any required yard not more than six feet.

(h) Parking space subject to the regulations set forth in Chapter 18.125 SCC.

(i) Signs, subject to the regulations set forth in Chapter 18.140 SCC.

(j) Terraces (open) and porches (nonenclosed) not to exceed six feet.

(k) Trees, shrubs, flowers, and other plants subject to the vision requirements in this chapter.

(2) On any corner lot where a front and side yard is required, no wall, fence, sign, structure, or any plant growth which obstructs sight lines at elevations between two and one-half feet and 10 feet above the crown of the adjacent roadway shall be placed or maintained within a triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior side lot lines a distance of 15 feet along the front and side lot lines and connecting the points so established to form a right triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersections.

(3) The following regulations shall apply to fences and walls in residential districts, or in any other district when constructed, placed, and/or used for residential purposes:

(a) The height of a fence or wall shall be measured from the elevation at the base of the fence or wall, on the side away from the principal structure, vertically to the highest point of the fence or wall, including any posts or decorative caps. In the case of fences on top of retaining walls or immediately adjacent to retaining walls, the height of the fence shall be measured from the top of the wall.

(b) In any required front yard, except as provided in subsection (2), (3)(d), or (3)(e) of this section, no fence or wall shall be permitted above the height of three and one-half feet, except as to retaining walls on lots with a grade in excess of 15 percent.

(c) In any required side or rear yard, no fence or wall shall be permitted above the height of eight feet.

(d) Only for the purposes of this section, on any lot having frontage on more than one street, the orientation of the front or main door of the principal structure, as determined by the address assigned by the city, shall establish a primary front yard and all other front yards shall be considered secondary front yards. In secondary front yard(s), no fence or wall shall be permitted above the height of three and one-half feet unless the fence or wall is set back at least half the required front setback for the lot.

(e) On any through lot, as to any secondary front yard(s), as established in subsection (3)(d) of this section, no fence or wall shall be permitted above the height of three and one-half feet unless the fence or wall is set back the full front setback required for the lot, or the average setback established by the adjacent existing dwellings or structures in the block, whichever is greater. 

(4) The following provisions also apply to certain conditions with respect to the use of lots and access points:

(a) If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersecting streets are improved with buildings all of which have effectively established an average setback line which is less than the specified setback for that district, then no building on that side of the street shall be required to have a front yard greater than the average front yard of the existing buildings. However, when there are buildings on the adjacent lots on both sides, the front yard shall not be required to be greater than the average of the front yards of the buildings on the adjacent lots. Only front yards that are front facing based on the orientation of the principal structure, and the address assigned by the city, shall be a factor in these calculations.

(b) Lots having frontage on more than one street shall provide the required front yards along those streets. On a corner lot in a residential district (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and P-1), the front yard shall be designated by the orientation of the front or main door of the principal structure, as determined by the address assigned by the city, unless the front yard is designated on the recorded subdivision plat. The rear yard shall be opposite the front yard. The other yard abutting a street shall be a side yard and shall not be less than one-half of the front yard setback of the underlying district for single-family dwellings and accessory buildings, unless the lot meets the small lot exception granted under subsection (4)(d) of this section. Terraces and porches shall not encroach into this side yard setback notwithstanding the exceptions in subsection (1) of this section.

(c) Division of a Lot. No recorded lot shall be divided into two or more lots unless such division results in the creation of lots, each of which conforms to all of the applicable regulations of the district in which the property is located. No reduction in the size of a recorded lot below the minimum requirements of this title shall be permitted.

(d) Dwellings on Small and/or Narrow Lots. Where there are existing recorded lots which do not meet the minimum lot area and/or width requirements, single-family dwellings may be constructed (provided the building front yard setback is 15 feet or the average setback established by dwellings or structures existing at the start of construction, whichever is greater) and as long as a side yard shall be not less than four feet and the sum of the side yards shall be not less than 10 feet and as long as all other requirements, except lot size and lot width, are met.

(e) Principal Uses Without Buildings. Where a permitted use of land involves no structures, such use, excluding agricultural uses, shall nonetheless comply with all yards and minimum lot area requirements applicable to the district in which located, as well as obtain any other license or permit applicable to that particular use.

(f) No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at least one street for at least 30 feet. A street shall form the direct and primary means of ingress and egress for all dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist, shall form only a secondary means of ingress and egress.

(g) An attached or detached private garage which faces on a street shall not be located closer than 25 feet to the street right-of-way line.

(h) Accessory buildings shall not be located in any required front yard. (Ord. 2019-09; Ord. 2011-07; Ord. 2009-22; Ord. 2009-20; Ord. 2004-06. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 4).


Chapter 18.125 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

18.125.010    Off-street parking requirements – General.

18.125.011    Exceptions to off-street parking requirements.

18.125.020    Off-street parking lot layout, construction, and maintenance.


18.125.010 Off-street parking requirements – General.

In all districts there shall be provided, at any time any building or structure is erected or enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street parking spaces for automobiles in accordance with the following requirements:

(1) Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either on the same lot, or within 400 feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot, along a public sidewalk and without crossing any major thoroughfares. Churches may establish joint parking facilities not to exceed 50 percent of the required spaces, with institutions and agencies that do not have a time conflict in parking demand.

(2) Residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking lot, driveway, garage, or combination thereof, and shall be located on the lot they are intended to serve.

(3) For uses not specifically mentioned herein, off-street parking requirements shall be interpreted by the planning commission.

(4) Any area once designed as required off-street parking shall not be changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities are provided elsewhere.

(5) Off-street parking existing at effective date of these regulations in connection with the operation of an existing building or use, shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or use.

(6) Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking, in which case the required number of parking spaces shall be not less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately.

(7) The required off-street parking shall be for occupants, employees, visitors, patrons, and shall be limited in use to motor vehicles. The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, or the repair of vehicles on such parking area is prohibited.

(8) Every company car, truck, tractor, and trailer normally stored at the plant site shall be provided with off-street parking space in an area reserved for the use as determined by the planning commission.

(9) In cases of dual functioning of off-street parking where operating hours do not overlap, the planning commission may grant an exception.

(10) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be determined in accordance with the following:

 

Table of Parking Spaces Required  

	USES	PARKING SPACES REQUIRED

	Automobile wrecking, junk, or salvage yard which offers for sale to the public any new or used merchandise	One space for each two employees, plus one space for each 10,000 square feet of lot area, or two spaces for each 100 square feet of floor area, whichever is the greater.

	Banks, business, or professional offices	One per 300 square feet of usable floor area, plus one per each three employees.

	Barbershop or beauty parlor	Two per barber or beauty shop chair.

	Boarding or rooming house	One space for the resident family. One space for each two guests.

	Bowling alleys	Five per alley.

	Churches	One per four seats, or one per 30 square feet of usable floor area of auditorium, whichever is greater.

	Commercial recreation uses	One per three patrons, based on the design capacity of the facility.

	Commercial or trade schools	One per three students plus two per three employees.

	Country club	One per five members.

	Dormitories, fraternity, or sorority	One per each three permanent residents.

	Dwellings (single- and two-family)	One per dwelling unit.

	Dwellings (multifamily and attached)	Two spaces per dwelling unit.

	Establishments for sale and consumption on the premises of beverages, food, or refreshments	One per three employees, plus one per 100 square feet of usable floor space, or one per three fixed seats, whichever is the greater.

	Gasoline service station	One parking space for each employee, plus two spaces for each service bay.

	Governmental office building	One per 300 square feet of usable floor area, plus one per each three employees. Every governmental vehicle shall be provided with a reserved off-street parking space.

	Group house	One space for each three individuals, plus one space for each supervisor, plus one space for each two employees.

	Housing for elderly and/or physically handicapped	One for each two dwelling units per each unit actually housing elderly and/or physically handicapped and two spaces per dwelling unit housing individuals not elderly or handicapped.

	Hospitals	One per three patient beds, exclusive of bassinets, plus one space for each two employees including nurses on the maximum working shift, plus adequate area for parking emergency vehicles.

	Hotel, motel, etc.	One per each room or suite. When a restaurant is included that may serve the outside public, parking shall be calculated at the same rate as “Establishments for sale and consumption on the premises of beverages, food, or refreshments.”

For conference or meeting facilities, add one additional space for every four persons based on the design capacity of the conference or meeting area.

	Industrial establishments	One per two employees on the combined two largest successive shifts, plus adequate parking space for customer and visitor vehicles as determined by the planning commission.

	Library	One for each 400 square feet of floor space.

	Manufactured home	Two spaces per stand or lot.

	Medical clinics	Three patient parking spaces per staff doctor, plus one per staff doctor, plus two per three other employees.

	Mortuaries or funeral parlors	Five spaces per parlor or chapel unit, or one per four seats, whichever is greater.

	Private clubs, lodge, or union headquarters	One per three members based on the design capacity of the facility.

	Retail stores, supermarkets, department stores, and personal service establishments except as otherwise specified herein	One per 100 square feet of retail floor space.

	Schools shall be provided with parking spaces per the following schedule:

	Elementary, junior high, and the equivalent private or parochial schools	Two spaces per three teachers and employees normally engaged in or about the building or grounds, plus one space for each 150 square feet of seating area, including aisles, in any auditorium.

	Senior high schools and the equivalent private or parochial schools	Two spaces per three teachers and employees normally engaged in or about the building or grounds, plus one space per five students or one space for each 150 square feet of seating area, including aisles, in any auditorium, gymnasium, or cafeteria intended to be used as an auditorium, whichever is the greater.

	Kindergartens, day schools, and the equivalent private or parochial schools	Two parking spaces per three teachers and employees normally engaged in or about the building or grounds plus one off-street loading space per eight pupils.

	Shopping centers	Five and one-half parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area; provided, however, that if more than two-thirds of the gross retail and customer service area for all business establishments is devoted to or occupied by retail food stores and department stores, the parking requirements shall be as provided for supermarkets and department stores. Hardware and furniture stores and all other retail and personal service establishments except as otherwise provided: one space for each 200 square feet of retail space.

	Special care facility	One space for each four patient beds plus one space for each staff doctor plus one space for each two employees including nurses.

	Stadiums and sports arenas	One per eight seats or 12 feet of benches.

	Supermarkets and department stores	One parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area used for retail sales for the first 5,000 square feet and one space for each 200 square feet of retail area above 5,000 square feet.

	Swimming pools	One per 30 square feet of water area.

	Theaters, auditoriums, and places of assembly without fixed seats	One per three people based on the design capacity of the structure.

	Wholesale establishments and business services	One for every 50 square feet of customer service area, plus two per three employees based on the design capacity of the largest shift.

(Ord. 2019-15; Ord. 2017-10; Ord. 2009-12; Ord. 2004-23. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 5).


18.125.011 Exceptions to off-street parking requirements.

The requirements of SCC 18.125.010 shall not be applicable to the following:

(1) Any lot or parcel in the core business district, beginning at the intersection of Baldwin Street and Lewis Street, thence with Baldwin Street to Central Avenue, thence with the line (center line) of existing Baldwin Street to New Street, thence with New Street to Frederick Street, thence with Frederick Street to Coalter Street, thence with Coalter Street to its intersection with the C&O Railroad, thence with the C&O Railroad to its intersection with Middlebrook Avenue, thence with Middlebrook Avenue to its intersection with Lewis Street, thence with Lewis Street to Baldwin Street to the point of beginning.

(2) All that certain lot of parcel of land, with all improvements thereon and appurtenances thereto belonging, situate in the city of Staunton, Virginia, known by present house numbering as 300 Church Street and described as containing 1.435 acres and being in all respects the same property shown on plat entitled “Plat Showing Smith Fuel Company Lands, Church Street, Staunton, Virginia,” dated January 20, 1970, made by Higgs and Shumate, Engineers – Surveyors, said plat being recorded in the clerk’s office of the circuit court of the city of Staunton, Virginia, in Deed Book 173, page 225, less however, that portion containing 0.002 acre, more or less, which was conveyed to the commonwealth of Virginia by deed dated October 13, 1988, recorded in Deed Book 290, page 512.

(3) All those two certain lots or parcels of land, together with all improvements thereon, and all rights, privileges and appurtenances thereunto belonging, situate in the city of Staunton, Virginia, more particularly described as Lot 6 (PIN 1611) and Lot 7 (PIN 1612), Block ZZ and designated by present street numbering as 220 and 222 S. Washington Street, Staunton, Virginia.

(4) Any lot or parcel, in addition to that permitted in subsections (1), (2), (3) of this section, with existing commercial buildings and zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, or P-1, with new or continuing business uses, where any of the following conditions already exist exclusive of adjacent unaccepted alleyways and/or streets:

(a) Slopes greater than 15 percent;

(b) Front yard less than 25 feet, side yard(s) less than 40 feet and a rear yard less than 40 feet; or

(c) The new or continuing business use occupies only the existing structure(s) without any additions or conversion of unfinished space for business use. Existing parking lots shall be maintained and not be reduced except in conformance with this chapter. (Ord. 2019-15; Ord. 2009-12).


18.125.020 Off-street parking lot layout, construction, and maintenance.

Where the required off-street parking requires the building of a parking lot, and wherever a parking lot is built, such parking shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following regulations:

(1) Except for parcels of land devoted to one- and two-family uses, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed, constructed, and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street to obtain egress.

(2) Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet in width and 18 feet in length and shall be a specifically designated stall.

(3) In any determination of parking requirements as set forth in this chapter, where the resultant figure contains a fraction, any fraction less than one-half or more shall be counted as one parking space.

(4) Clearly defined driveways used for ingress and egress shall be designed in general conformance with the standards of the Virginia Department of Transportation.

(5) All areas devoted to permanent off-street parking as required under this chapter shall be of a sealed-surface construction, and maintained in such a manner that no dust will result from continuous use.

(6) The parking lot shall be drained to eliminate surface water.

(7) For any parking lot, except on parcels of land devoted to single-family dwellings or no more than one two-family dwelling, there shall be a minimum setback of five feet from any property line. The minimum setback may be greater in cases where Chapter 18.175 SCC requires a larger planting or screening area. In cases of shared parking or where parking lots are connected, side and rear setbacks may be reduced or eliminated at the discretion of the zoning administrator.

(8) Plans for the layout of a parking lot must be approved by the zoning administrator, based on the Infrastructure Design and Construction Standards of the City of Staunton, maintained in the office of the city engineer. (Ord. 2018-01. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 5).


Chapter 18.130 STORAGE AND PARKING OF TRAILERS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES

Sections:

18.130.010    Commercial vehicle and trailer storage and parking; maximum number and size and limitations on time. 


18.130.010 Commercial vehicle and trailer storage and parking; maximum number and size and limitations on time. 

Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel boat, camping and hauling, shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot used for residential purposes in accordance otherwise with applicable law except in accordance with the following provisions and as provided in Chapter 18.155 SCC:

(1) For each family living on the premises, not more than one commercial vehicle, which does not exceed 16,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating and a vehicle height greater than eight feet, shall be permitted. Vehicle height shall be the distance, measured vertically, from the ground to the highest point of the vehicle, including any features such as toppers, racks, cargo boxes, or any other feature that performs a similar function, or mechanical and electrical equipment. 

(2) For each family living on the premises, not more than one camping or travel trailer or hauling trailer or boat trailer shall be permitted and said trailer shall not exceed 24 feet in length, or eight feet in width; and further provided, that such trailer shall not be parked or stored for more than 48 hours unless it is located behind the front yard building line. A camping or travel trailer shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area. (Ord. 2012-09. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 6).


Chapter 18.135 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

18.135.010    Off-street loading zones.


18.135.010 Off-street loading zones.

In all districts, and on the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse goods, display, a department store, a wholesale store, a market, a hotel, a hospital, or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading services adjacent to the opening used for loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets or alleys.

Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall be provided as follows:

(1) One off-street loading and unloading space shall be provided for buildings up to and including 20,000 square feet of floor area, plus one additional off-street loading and unloading space for each additional 20,000 square feet of floor area up to and including 100,000 square feet.

(2) There shall be provided one additional off-street loading and unloading space for each additional 40,000 square feet of floor area in excess of 100,000 square feet.

(3) Where trailer trucks are involved, such loading and unloading space shall be an area 12 feet by 40 feet, with a 14-foot height clearance, and shall be designed with appropriate means of truck access to a street or alley as well as adequate maneuvering area.

(4) All areas devoted to permanent off-street loading and unloading, as required under this chapter, shall be of a sealed-surface construction and maintained in such a manner that no dust will result from continuous use. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 7).


Chapter 18.140 SIGNS, BILLBOARDS, AND OTHER ADVERTISING STRUCTURES

Sections:

18.140.010    General provisions.

18.140.020    General regulations.

18.140.030    Residential district regulations.

18.140.040    Business district regulations.

18.140.050    Industrial district regulations.

18.140.060    Permitted signs.

18.140.070    Unsafe and unlawful signs.

18.140.080    Permits and fees.


18.140.010 General provisions.

These conditions are established as a reasonable and impartial method of regulating advertising structures in order to ensure safe construction, light, air, and open space, to reduce hazards at intersections, to prevent the accumulation of trash, to preclude the establishment of structures which would afford hiding places for immoral or criminal activities, and to protect property values of the entire community.

The regulations for signs, billboards, and other advertising structures are indicated below. The interpretation of nomenclature in this chapter shall be as defined in Chapter 18.10 SCC. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 8).


18.140.020 General regulations.

In any zoning district where signs are permitted, the following general regulations shall apply:

(1) No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where by reason of its position, wording, illumination, size, shape, or color it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal, or device.

(2) No sign shall contain or make use of any word, phrase, symbol, shape, form, or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.

(3) No sign having flashing, intermittent, or animated illumination shall be permitted.

(4) No illumination sign shall be permitted within 50 feet of property in any residential district unless the illumination of such sign is so designed that it does not shine or reflect light onto such property.

(5) No billboard or ground sign shall be erected to exceed 20 feet above the ground level or 50 feet in length. The bottom coping of every ground sign shall be at least three feet above the ground or street level.

(6) All roof signs shall be so constructed as to leave a clear space of not less than six feet between the roof level and the lowest part of the sign. No portion of any roof sign structure shall project beyond an exterior wall. No roof sign shall be at any point over 24 feet above the roof level. Roof signs shall not exceed the height limit of the zoning district.

(7) No part of any wall or projecting sign that is attached to a building shall be erected to a height greater than such building, unless the building and sign are architecturally integrated and designed as a unit.

(8) Billboards and other similar outdoor advertising structures shall be erected or placed in conformity with the side and rear yard requirements of the district in which located. However, no billboard shall be erected or placed closer than within 100 feet of any residential district, and it shall be set back from the established right-of-way line of any street or highway at least as far as the required front yard depth for a principal use in such district; and for every square foot by which such billboard exceeds 100 square feet such setbacks shall be increased by one-half foot, but not to exceed 300 feet.

(9) No advertising sign shall be located in any area designated by the planning commission as one of scenic beauty or historical interest.

(10) No building walls shall be used for display of advertising, except that pertaining to the use on the premises.

(11) Temporary Signs.

(a) All temporary signs must be mounted on a building, with the exception of sandwich board signs, which are further regulated in this chapter. 

(b) Temporary signs shall be included when determining the total area of signs erected or displayed on a property. 

(c) In no case shall more than one temporary sign be located on any building storefront. 

(d) No temporary signs may exceed 30 square feet in area, with the exception of sandwich board signs, which are further regulated in this chapter. 

(e) Temporary signs shall not be erected or otherwise fixed on any pole, tree, stone, fence, building, structure, or any object within the right-of-way of any street. No temporary sign shall be erected at the intersection of any street in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device.

(f) A temporary sign shall not be suspended across public streets or other public places, except as permitted by the planning commission.

(g) With the exception of sandwich board signs which are further regulated in this chapter, no sign shall be placed in any public right-of-way, except publicly owned signs, such as traffic control signs, directional signs, and subdivision identification signs.

(12) Motor Vehicle Signs. Signs displayed on motor vehicles operated or parked on public or private property when visible from any public street shall be permitted, provided the following requirements are met: 

(a) The motor vehicle is primarily used for purposes other than the display of advertising; 

(b) Motor vehicle signs may not include any illumination, including flashing, pulsating, rotation, or blinking signs; 

(c) Motor vehicle signs may not include electronic changeable copy signs, including signs containing light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices used to change the advertising displayed by such signs. 

(13) Signs erected and overhanging any sidewalk must be placed at least 10 feet above the sidewalk and may extend over the sidewalk a distance equal to one-half the width of the sidewalk, but in no case exceeding 10 feet.

(14) Pole signs shall be not over 30 square feet in area and shall be located not closer than 10 feet to any street right-of-way line and five feet from any other property line.

(15) Professional signs for home occupations, where permitted, shall not exceed two square feet in area, provided, such sign is either a wall or ground sign located not closer than 20 feet to the street right-of-way.

(16) The area of a sign shall be determined by the smallest circle, triangle, or rectangle that can be used to enclose the sign, exclusive of supporting members that bear no message. A sign designed to be viewed from two opposite directions shall be considered as one sign; provided, that the two sign faces shall not be more than two feet apart if parallel, nor form an angle of more than 90 degrees if angular. When more than one sign is permitted on a lot, the net sign area shall be the sum of those signs designed to be viewed from one direction, and such signs shall not be less than 20 feet apart. 

(17) A zoning permit is required prior to erecting any permanent sign. (Ord. 2010-04. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 8).


18.140.030 Residential district regulations.

In residential districts, the following regulations shall apply:

(1) For Single-Family, Two-Family, and Multifamily Dwellings. Name plates not to exceed one square foot in area, shall be permitted for each dwelling unit; such name plates shall indicate nothing other than name and/or address of the occupants or premises.

(2) For Multifamily and Group Dwellings. Identification signs, not to exceed nine square feet in area, shall be permitted; such sign shall indicate nothing other than name and/or address of the premises, and the name of the management. Such sign shall be attached flush with the principal building and may have indirect illumination.

(3) Announcement of Church, School, or Public Building. Bulletin boards or identification signs, not to exceed 20 square feet in area shall be permitted; such bulletin boards or identification signs shall indicate nothing other than name and/or address of the premises, and schedule of services or other information relevant to the operation of the premises. Such sign shall be located not closer than one-half the required setbacks and may have indirect illumination.

(4) Only one sign per street frontage shall be permitted.

(5) Flashing or intermittent illumination is prohibited.

(6) Billboards and other advertising structures are prohibited. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 8).


18.140.040 Business district regulations.

In business districts, the following regulations shall apply:

(1) Sandwich Board Signs.

(a) In any district zoned for business or professional use one sandwich board sign is permitted per storefront and shall be exempt from the provisions of Chapters 18.83 and 18.85 SCC. A sandwich board sign shall be considered to be a type of temporary sign and no sign permit is required. Sandwich board signs in the downtown business district shall be regulated as provided in subsection (4)(d) of this section. 

(b) Location.

(i) A sandwich board sign shall be located within the same parcel boundaries as the business it advertises;

(ii) Sandwich boards may be located in a pedestrian right-of-way only when the primary face of the building is less than five feet from the pedestrian right-of-way and must provide at least a 36-inch wide clearance for pedestrian travel; 

(iii) Sandwich boards located on any public pedestrian right-of-way shall be placed with the base of the sign perpendicular to and in full contact with the building face.

(c) Size. Sandwich boards shall be no larger overall than four feet in height and two feet in width. 

(d) Such sign shall have no illumination of any kind and may be displayed only during the hours the business is open to the public.

(e) Sandwich board signs may advertise products, sales, grand openings, or address any other advertising purpose solely for the business in front of which the sign is located. 

(2) For Public Recreation Uses, Community Facilities, Hospitals, and Clinics. Bulletin boards or identification signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.

(3) For Gasoline Service Stations. Two pole signs not exceeding 30 square feet each in surface area. Other business signs, the aggregate area of which does not exceed one square foot for each one linear foot of lot adjoining a public street.

(4) For other permitted principal uses, business signs shall be permitted as incidental uses, not to exceed the number of signs nor to exceed the net area for all such signs permitted as follows:

(a) P-1 Professional District. For any use, bulletin boards or identification signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area. Only one sign per street frontage shall be permitted. Flashing or intermittent illumination is prohibited. Such sign shall be attached to the building or located not closer than one-half the required setback from the street right-of-way and may have indirect illumination.

(b) B-1 Local Business District. Business signs not to exceed one square foot per five square feet of usable floor area or two square feet per one linear foot of street frontage, whichever is the greater. No sign or portion of any sign shall be erected upon or overhang any public property. No ground signs shall be located within 10 feet of any property line.

(c) B-2 General Business District. Business signs not to exceed two square feet of surface for each one linear foot of lot fronting on a public street, but in no case shall the surface area be limited to less than 50 square feet. All signs shall be mounted either on buildings or on sign display devices affixed permanently to the ground. All ground signs shall be located not closer to any property line than one-half the required setbacks.

(d) Special Regulations for the Downtown Business Area.

(i) Purpose.

(A) Signs constitute a separate and distinct use of the land upon which they are placed and affect the use of adjacent streets, sidewalks and other public places and adjacent private places open to the public. The unregulated construction, placement and display of signs constitute a public nuisance detrimental to the health, safety, convenience and welfare of the residents of the city.

(B) The purpose of this subsection (3)(d) is to establish reasonable and impartial regulations for all exterior signs and those interior signs designed to attract the attention of persons located outdoors in order to: reduce the traffic hazards caused by such unregulated signs which may distract and confuse, and impair the visibility of, motorists and pedestrians; ensure the effectiveness of public traffic signs and signals; protect property values by ensuring the compatibility of property with that surrounding it; provide an attractive visual environment; protect the character and appearance of the district; attract tourists to the city; protect the public investment in streets, highways and other public improvements; and protect and improve the public health, safety, and general welfare.

(C) The regulations contained in this subsection (3)(d) advance these significant governmental interests and are the minimum amount of regulation necessary to achieve them.

(ii) Downtown Business Area Defined. The downtown business area is defined as embracing the properties abutting on Lewis Street beginning at its intersection with West Beverley Street and extending to the intersection of Lewis Street with Middlebrook Avenue, thence along Middlebrook Avenue to its intersection with South New Street Extended, thence along South New Street Extended to its intersection with Greenville Avenue, thence along Greenville Avenue to its intersection with North Coalter Street to its intersection with East Frederick Street, thence along East Frederick Street to its intersection with North New Street, thence along North New Street to Churchville Avenue, thence along Churchville Avenue to its intersection with Lewis Street, thence along Lewis Street to its intersection with Beverley Street, the point of beginning, as well as all properties within the area herein delineated.

(iii) Definitions. For purposes of this subsection (3)(d), the interpretation of nomenclature contained herein shall be as defined in Chapter 18.10 SCC.

(iv) General Requirements. In addition to the regulations applicable to the underlying zoning of a parcel situated in the downtown business area (except as specifically modified or changed hereby), these general requirements are applicable to the properties within the downtown business area:

(A) No person, firm or corporation shall erect, alter, repair or relocate any sign within the area without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the city’s historic preservation commission (HPC) or the senior planner (in cases where the senior planner is given authority to issue such certificate without referral to the HPC). A sign permit shall not be required for routine maintenance or a change in copy that results in no alteration to the sign structure.

(B) A building permit is required for the erection of a sign over 2.5 square feet in area. A window sign, if authorized herein, does not require a building permit.

(C) No sign shall project above the building part to which it is attached.

(D) All signs must meet the requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (USBC).

(E) No sign otherwise permitted herein, that lies on, over or across any street, road, highway, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way may be erected, displayed, constructed, repaired or altered unless the owner obtains a policy of general public liability insurance with a company authorized to do business in the state of Virginia (approved by the city manager). Said policy shall name the city as an “additional insured” and shall protect and hold harmless the city, its agents and employees from and against any suit, action, claim, cause of action, damages, losses, liability and expenses (including without limitation, litigation expenses and attorney’s fees) resulting from, arising out of, or incidental to the construction, alteration, reconstruction, maintenance, repair, removal, falling or collapse of the sign. The minimum bodily injury protection in said policy shall be $300,000 per person and $600,000 per occurrence, and the minimum property damage protection in said policy shall be $150,000 per occurrence. Said policy shall contain a provision that the policy shall not be canceled or changed unless the city is given 30 days’ notice prior to said cancellation or change. Failure to maintain the policy in full force and effect shall be due cause for the city, acting through its senior planner, to order removal of such projecting sign immediately.

(F) The senior planner may remove any sign in violation of the requirements of this chapter, not removed by the owner after notice to do so by the senior planner, and shall impound the sign within 24 hours of such removal. The senior planner shall notify the owner and the business subject of said sign in writing, if ownership is readily determinable, of the location at which the sign is being stored and of the owner’s right to retrieve the sign upon payment of the impound fee ($100.00), plus a storage fee ($10.00) per day for each day or fraction of a day of storage. If the owner of the sign in violation cannot be readily ascertainable, the business, subject of said sign, shall be so notified. Signs not so retrieved within a period of 30 days of the mailing of such notice may be destroyed by the city, and the impound fee and storage charge may be recovered against the owner of the sign and the business subject of said sign, jointly and severally.

(v) Permit/Certificate of Appropriateness.

(A) The application for a certificate of appropriateness (required by subsection (3)(d)(iv)(A) of this section) shall contain (1) the location of the sign structure, (2) the name and address of the owner of the sign and of the person, firm or corporation of the sign contractor (if any), (3) a drawing showing the design and copy to be displayed upon the sign, and (4) such other information as the senior planner and/or the building official may require to ensure compliance with this code and/or other ordinances of the city. The application shall be made to the senior planner.

(B) The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $15.00, or such other fee as fixed by the governing body from time to time.

(C) A certificate issued hereunder shall become null and void if the work for which the certificate was issued has not been completed within six months of the date of issuance of the certificate, unless, however, the certificate allows a longer time for completion.

(vi) Signs Permitted in the Downtown Business Area.

(A) The following types of signs are permitted in the downtown business area (subject to the granting of a certificate of appropriateness):

(1) Flat wall signs;

(2) Projecting signs;

(3) Freestanding signs;

(4) Awning signs;

(5) Marquee signs;

(6) Window signs;

(7) Flag;



(8) Banner;

(9) Church signs.

(B) The total sign area for a business shall be computed on a ratio of one square foot of sign for each lineal foot of building face occupied by the business, except that no sign on, or attached to, a particular building face shall exceed 30 square feet in area. “Building face” as used herein means that face of the building that fronts upon a street (or sidewalk) and/or an improved alleyway. Sign area shall be calculated as the area within a parallelogram, triangle, circle, semicircle or other regular geometric figure including all letters, figures, graphics or other elements of the sign, together with any material or framing that is an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. The sign area shall not include decorative bar-iron cresting above the sign and/or decorative bar-iron brackets below the sign if the bar-iron is no larger than three-quarters of an inch by one and one-half inches in cross section. Double-faced signs (two sign faces parallel, back to back, and not more than two feet from each other) shall be counted as one sign. V-signs (two sign faces on an angle, not parallel) with an angle greater than 60 degrees, shall be prohibited. The supporting framework of the sign shall not be included in determining sign area unless such supporting framework forms an integral part of the sign display, as determined by the zoning administrator. If the sign is located on a decorative fence or wall, when such fence or wall otherwise meets these or other ordinances or regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself, the fence or wall shall not be included in the sign area.

(1) The content or advertising message carried by permitted signs shall pertain to (a) the business located on the same premises as the sign, (b) any otherwise lawful noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a business operated for profit, or (c) a commodity or service for sale.

(2) For signs with changeable message panels or zip tracks, the changeable message area of the sign shall not exceed 25 percent of the total sign area, except for gasoline price signs, which shall not exceed 75 percent of the total sign area.

(C) Church signs not exceeding 40 square feet in area are permitted provided that only one such sign may be erected or displayed on any street frontage. Church signs must be set back at least 10 feet from the lot line facing a street except when the required building setback line is less than 10 feet from a particular lot line.

(vii) General Regulations.

(A) Size.

(1) The total sign area for the face of any building, however allocated among sign types (flat wall, projecting, freestanding, awning, window, and/or marquee), shall be computed on the ratio of one square foot of sign for each lineal foot of building face not to exceed 75 feet, except that no sign attached to a building face shall exceed 30 square feet in area.

(2) Projecting or freestanding signs shall have no more than two sides and shall have a maximum size per side of nine square feet for building faces with fewer than 30 lineal feet of frontage, and a maximum of 15 square feet per sign face for building faces with 30 or more lineal feet of frontage. The larger sign size is restricted to buildings with single occupants or, for buildings with multiple occupancy, to one projecting sign shared by all. The size of freestanding signs to be keyed on the size of the lot: smaller than 50 lineal feet equal no more than six square feet. Lots between 50 and 100 lineal feet equal nine square feet and greater than 100 equal 30 square feet.

(3) The total area of window signs, including those advertising sales, in any one window shall not exceed 20 percent of the area of the window. The total area of window signs shall be included in determining the total area of signs erected or displayed.

(4) In the absence of a building, the total sign area shall not exceed nine square feet per side.

(5) Freestanding signs shall be mounted on bases a maximum of three feet high. No freestanding sign shall exceed 12 feet in height from grade.

(B) Number.

(1) Two signs shall be allowed per building face, with not more than one projecting, freestanding, or marquee sign allowed per face.

(2) More than one projecting sign may be hung per bracket, provided other requirements relating to height are met.

(C) Location.

(1) Flat wall signs may be located anywhere on the surface of the building. No portion of a wall sign shall project above the cornice, roofline, or coping.

(2) Signage shall not conceal or obstruct significant architectural features of a building.

(3) Projecting signs, which shall all be approved by the historic preservation commission, shall extend no closer than one foot to the curb line and a minimum clearance of eight feet above a public sidewalk, and shall not project over a public street or vehicular alley. Projecting signs shall have no more than one bracket for every full 15 feet of building frontage. Neither the bracket nor any portion of a projecting sign may be placed more than 20 feet above the front sidewalk, or in the absence of a sidewalk, above the street. Liability insurance policy shall be maintained in accordance with subsection (3)(d)(iv)(E) of this section. Sign placement shall take into consideration historical placement of signs. Historic signs whether they are flat, freestanding, or projecting may be approved; provided, that the application presents evidence of a local historical precedent. Any sign projecting over city right-of-way must be approved by the city manager.

(4) Freestanding signs shall be placed behind the property line. No freestanding sign shall be located within 50 feet of another freestanding sign, measured from the nearest point of each sign to the other. More than one business may be identified on each freestanding sign.

(5) Signs may be on the faces of a marquee or awning and may not project below the lower edge of the marquee or awning. The bottoms of marquee signs shall be not less than eight feet above the sidewalk or grade at any point.

(D) Content. Signs allowed shall be identification signs only for businesses on the premises, except as otherwise permitted herein. At the closing of a business, all related signage shall be removed.

(E) Illumination. Only external illumination of signs is permitted, but in accordance with the restrictions set forth below:

(1) The light from any illuminated sign shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed that the light intensity or brightness will not be objectionable to the surrounding area.

(2) No sign shall have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights or any other illumination device that has a changing light intensity, brightness, or color. Beacon lights shall not be permitted.

(3) No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices.

(4) Neither direct nor reflected light from primary light sources shall create a traffic hazard to operators of motor vehicles on public thoroughfares.

(5) No exposed reflective bulb, strobe light, or incandescent lamp that exceeds 15 watts shall be used on the exterior surface of any sign so as to expose the face of the bulb, light, or lamp to any public street or adjacent property.

(6) Awnings must not be illuminated.

(F) Decorative Flags. Wall-mounted decorative flags, each shall not exceed 15 square feet in area. Decorative flags shall display only the logo of a business or a decorative design related to the business and shall not display the words or phrases related to business activity on the premises. A national, state, or local government flag shall also be limited to 15 square feet, one per building. All flags shall not project above the highest point of the roof of the building, nor shall it be attached to or mounted on top of a roof. The area of the decorative flags shall be deducted from the building-mounted sign area allowed by subsection (3)(d)(vii)(A)(1) of this section.

(G) Gasoline Pump Island Signs. Nonilluminated gasoline pump island signs shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions:

(1) Two “self serve” or “full serve” signs per pump island not to exceed two and one-half square feet each (no historic preservation commission approval or sign permit shall be required).

(2) One fuel price or promotional information sign mounted/incorporated into each fuel pump not to exceed one square foot (no historic preservation commission approval or sign permit shall be required).

(3) Any other signs on the canopy or pump islands shall be subject to the requirements for building-mounted signage in subsection (3)(d)(vii) of this section.

(H) State Inspection Center Signs. Official state inspection center signs for certified state inspection stations shall be permitted for service stations and automobile dealerships. These signs shall be nonilluminated and located on the building. The maximum sign area shall be six square feet. One such sign shall be permitted. No historic preservation commission approval shall be required.

(I) Menu Boards. Portable signs displaying menu items for a restaurant on the premises shall be permitted if the following conditions are met (no historic preservation commission approval or sign permit shall be required):

(1) Number of signs permitted: one sign for the main entrance to the restaurant; but where a restaurant has a rear entrance from an adjacent parking lot, one additional menu board may be placed at the rear entrance.

(2) Maximum sign area: four square feet.

(3) Maximum height: four feet.

(4) Maximum distance of menu board from restaurant or outdoor dining area entrance: four feet.

(5) Projection over a city right-of-way: prohibited.

(6) Location on a city right-of-way: prohibited.

(7) Illumination: prohibited.

(J) Directory Signs. Freestanding or building-mounted directory signs shall be permitted for shopping centers if the following conditions are met:

(1) Number of signs permitted: one directory sign for each 10 businesses in the shopping center.

(2) Maximum sign area: seven and one-half square feet.

(3) Maximum height for freestanding signs: seven and one-half feet.

(4) Projection over a city right-of-way: prohibited.

(5) Location on a city right-of-way: prohibited.

(6) Illumination: prohibited.

(K) Shopping Centers. One freestanding or building-mounted sign shall be permitted for each city block occupied by the shopping center. Said signs shall display only the name and/or logo of the shopping center, or of a parking facility for the shopping center, and shall be in addition to the sign allowed for individual businesses by subsection (3)(d)(vii) of this section.

(1) Sign area shall not exceed 20 square feet.

(2) Sign height shall not exceed 12 feet, except for decorative bar-iron cresting above the sign which may extend above the 12-foot height; provided, that the bar-iron is no larger than three-quarters of an inch by one and one-half inches in cross section.

(3) Location on a city right-of-way is prohibited.

(4) Freestanding signs shall be mounted on bases a maximum of three feet in height and shall not exceed 12 feet in height from grade.

(5) Separate signs attached to a freestanding sign or its supporting structure, advertising services such as, but not limited to, automobile travel clubs and credit cards, shall be prohibited.

(6) Multiple frontage signs must have a minimum separation of one-third of the facade length from any corner of the facade.

(L) Canopy Signs. Signs mounted under a canopy or covered walkway and designed to be viewed primarily by pedestrians shall be permitted for shopping centers if the following conditions are met:

(1) One canopy sign for each business in the shopping center. This sign shall not count toward the maximum sign area permitted by subsection (3)(d)(vii) of this section.

(2) Maximum sign area: three square feet.

(3) Projection over a city right-of-way: prohibited.

(M) Portable and Sandwich Board Signs. One portable or sandwich board sign shall be permitted per storefront upon the following conditions and shall be exempt from the provisions of Chapter 18.85 SCC and require no permit:

(1) Such sign shall be placed immediately in front of the storefront for which it advertises;

(2) If placed on any public pedestrian right-of-way, such sign shall be positioned with the base of the sign perpendicular to and in full contact with the storefront building face, or, where any public pedestrian right-of-way does not adjoin a designated on-street parking area, it may also be positioned perpendicular to and in full contact with the back of the curb; 

(3) Such sign shall be no larger overall than four feet in height and two feet in width and shall not restrict the width of the public pedestrian right-of-way to less than 36 inches;

(4) Such sign shall have no illumination of any kind and may be displayed only during the time when the business is open to the public. 

(viii) Exemptions from Historic District Sign Regulations. The following types of signs are exempted from all the provisions of this chapter, except for construction and safety regulations and the following requirements:

(A) Public Signs. Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest, erected by or on the order of a public officer in the performance of his public duty, such as safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest, etc.

(B) Institutional Signs. Signs setting forth the name or any simple announcement for any public, charitable, educational, or religious institution, located entirely within the premises of that institution, up to an area of 24 square feet. Such signs may be illuminated in accordance with the regulations shown above. If building-mounted, these signs shall be flat wall signs and shall not project above the roof line. If ground-mounted, the top shall be not more than eight feet above ground level.

(C) Integral Signs. Names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets, etc., when carved into stone, concrete, or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other permanent construction and made an integral part of the structure.

(D) Private Traffic Movement Signs. Signs directing movement onto a premises or within a premises, not exceeding three square feet in area for each sign. Illumination of these signs shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations above.

(E) Menu Signs. Menus affixed directly to the inside of a door or window, or an exterior glass-fronted display case not exceeding four square feet in area and not protruding more than four inches from the surface on which it is mounted, stationary, and attached flat against a building, fence, or wall, in which is posted menu(s) for a restaurant.

(F) Rental or Sales Signs. Signs on a premises announcing rooms for rent, table board, apartment or house for rent, and not exceeding four square feet in area.

(G) Vehicle Signs. Signs on trucks, buses, trailers, or other vehicles, while such vehicles are in use in the normal course of business. This subsection is not to be interpreted to permit the parking, for display purposes, of any vehicle or trailer, to which signs or portable signs are attached, in a district or on a lot of land where such signs are not permitted.

(H) Signs located more than four feet behind the plane of a storefront window.

(I) Governmental flags, or the flags of any nonprofit organization headquartered in the city of Staunton. The height of a flagpole shall not exceed 25 feet in the residential districts; and for all other zoning districts the height of a flagpole shall not exceed the maximum building height allowed for the zoning district in which it is located. The maximum size of a flag shall not exceed 45 square feet when attached to a flagpole with a height of 35 feet or less, and shall not exceed 65 feet when attached to a flagpole with a height greater than 35 feet. All flags shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The zoning administrator may give written notice to remove or replace, within 48 hours, any flag that becomes faded or tattered. Failure to comply will be considered a violation of this chapter.

(J) Temporary Signs. Temporary signs shall be nonilluminated and limited to the following types:

(1) Construction signs, which identify the architects, engineers, contractors, and other individuals or firms involved with the construction. Such signs shall be removed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The maximum area of such signs shall be 32 square feet, and no more than one sign shall be permitted for each street frontage.

(2) Real estate signs, advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the signs are displayed. The maximum sign area shall be eight square feet in residential districts, and 30 square feet in nonresidential districts.

(3) Political campaign signs announcing the candidates seeking public political office and other information pertinent thereto. These signs shall be removed within seven days after the occurrence of the event to which they pertain.

(4) Signs advertising only the name, time, and place of any bona fide fair, festival, bazaar, horse show, or similar event, when conducted by a public agency or for the benefit of any civic, fraternal, religious, or charitable cause; provided, that all such signs shall be removed within 24 hours after the last day of the event to which they pertain. The maximum sign area shall be 32 square feet.

(5) Building-mounted grand opening signs not exceeding 30 square feet shall be permitted; provided, that such sign or signs shall not be displayed for more than 30 days. A sign permit shall be required.

(6) Seasonal or holiday decorations except that seasonal banners not exceeding 10 square feet in area shall be allowed. Such banners shall not display the name of a business or shopping center, nor the words “open,” “sale,” “vacancy,” or other similar words or phrases related to the business activity on the premises. These decorations shall be removed within seven days after the holiday or seasonal event.

(7) Change of business name banners/hoods/covers over existing building-mounted and freestanding signs shall be allowed, while new signs are being manufactured; provided, that such sign or signs shall not be displayed for more than eight weeks and shall not exceed the permitted sign area for that site.

(8) Special Exhibition Signs. A building used primarily as a museum or art gallery shall be permitted to erect a building-mounted banner announcing special exhibitions, special shows, or special displays in process within the building if a sign permit is obtained and the following conditions are met:

(a) Number of Banners Permitted. One building-mounted banner for each building used primarily as a museum or art gallery; provided, that the banner shall be placed on the building no earlier than three days before and removed within 24 hours after the last day of the exhibition to which it pertains. Limit for 30 days without a new permit.

(b) Maximum Banner Area. Fifteen square feet for a building with a setback of less than 100 feet, and 200 square feet for a building with a setback of 100 feet or more. Setback shall be measured perpendicular from the property line at the street to the center of the banner.

(ix) Prohibited Signs in Business District.

(A) Signs that contain or are imitations of “warning,” or similar words, and that are so located as to be visible and similar to official traffic signs or signals or contain the words “stop,” “go slow,” “caution,” “danger,” applicable to operators of motor vehicles on a public street.

(B) Signs that are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring, or manner of illumination that may be confused with or construed as traffic control devices or that hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal.

(C) Signs that visually interfere with traffic.

(D) Flashing or animated signs.

(E) Signs that advertise any activity, business, product, or service no longer conducted on the premises upon which such sign is located.

(F) Signs that move in any manner or have a moving part.

(G) Signs that contain or consist of banners (except under subsection (3)(d)(viii)(J), Temporary Signs, of this section), posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, strings of light bulbs, spinners, or other similarly moving devices and festoons. These devices, when not part of any sign, are similarly prohibited, unless they are permitted specifically by other legislation.

(H) Any sign, except official notices and advertisements, which is nailed, tacked, posted, or in any other manner attached to any utility pole or structure or supporting wire, cable, or pipe, or to any tree on any street or sidewalk or to public property of any description.

(I) Separate signs attached to a freestanding sign or its supporting structure, advertising services such as, but not limited to, automobile travel clubs and credit cards.

(J) Any sign that is attached to or mounted on a roof or projects above the plane of the building facade. This shall include decorative roofs such as mansard roofs.

(K) Moored balloons or other floating signs that are tethered to the ground or to a structure.

(L) Time and temperature signs consisting of flashing or intermittent lights or an intermittent display that is indirectly illuminated.

(M) Any permanent or temporary sign affixed to, painted on, or placed in or upon any parked vehicle, parked trailer, or other parked device capable of being towed, which is obviously and conspicuously parked so as to advertise the business to the passing motorist or pedestrian; and whose primary function is to provide additional on-site signage or is to serve the function of an outdoor advertising sign. Excluded from this subsection are: vehicles/equipment in operating condition, currently registered and licensed to operate on public streets with a valid inspection sticker, and actively used in the daily function of the business to which such signs relate; vehicles/equipment engaged in active construction projects; vehicles/equipment offered for rent to the general public and stored on-premises.

(x) Nonconforming Signs.

(A) Signs that do not conform to the regulations prescribed by this chapter, but that were erected in accordance with all applicable regulations in effect at the time of their erection, shall be considered to be nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs shall not be enlarged, extended, modified, reconstructed, or structurally altered except in accordance with this chapter. Nonconforming signs shall not be repainted or refaced when these actions change the wording, composition, color, or material of the sign.

(B) No new signage for a business shall be approved until all nonconforming freestanding and building-mounted signs pertaining to that business are removed or modified to comply with all the regulations prescribed by this chapter.

(C) No nonconforming sign shall be moved on the same lot or building or to another lot or building unless the sign as relocated is modified to comply with all requirements of this chapter.

(D) If a nonconforming sign is damaged to an extent greater than 50 percent of its current replacement cost, it shall not be rebuilt.

(xi) Maintenance. All signs and components thereof shall be kept in good repair and in a safe, neat, clean, and attractive condition.

(xii) Removal of Abandoned Signs. A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when the business that it advertises is no longer conducted on the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to remove such sign, the zoning administrator shall give the owner 15 days’ written notice to remove it. Upon failure to comply with this notice, the zoning administrator or the administrator’s duly authorized representative may remove the sign at cost to the owner. Such sign, removed by the zoning administrator, shall be stored with fees as set forth in subsection (3)(d)(iv)(F) of this section.

(xiii) Enforcement of Chapter.

(A) The zoning administrator and/or the senior planner is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the zoning administrator or the administrator’s duly authorized representative may enter, at reasonable times, any building, structure, or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon them by this chapter.

(B) Where there is any ambiguity or dispute concerning the interpretation of this chapter, the decision of the zoning administrator shall prevail, subject to appeal as provided in subsection (3)(d)(xiv) of this section.

(xiv) Appeals. Any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved by any decision made hereunder by the historic preservation commission or the senior planner or the zoning administrator, may, within 30 days of the action or decision giving rise to such complaint, appeal the same in writing to the council for the city of Staunton. Such complaint shall be heard by said council within 30 days of receipt by the clerk of council. A copy of the written appeal shall also be mailed or delivered to the senior planner at the same time the appeal is made to city council.

(xv) Severability. This chapter, and the various parts, sections, and clauses hereof, are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, section, or clause is adjudged invalid, the remainder shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2010-04; Ord. 2009-21. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 8).


18.140.050 Industrial district regulations.

In any industrial district, the following regulations shall apply:

(1) Business signs not exceeding one square foot per one linear foot of street frontage. Such sign shall be located not closer than one-half the required setback from all property lines.

(2) Flashing to intermittent illumination is prohibited.

(3) Billboards and other advertising structures are prohibited. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 8).


18.140.060 Permitted signs.

In any district, the following signs shall be permitted:

(1) For each permitted or required parking area that has a capacity of more than four cars, one nonilluminated sign, not more than two square feet in area, designating each entrance to or exit from such parking area, and one nonilluminated sign, not more than nine square feet in area, identifying or designating the conditions of use of such parking area.

(2) One nonilluminated “for sale” or “for rent” sign not exceeding four square feet in area and advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises on which the sign is located. A larger sign shall be permitted for two or more lots in single ownership or for properties in excess of 100 feet in width; provided, that the area of such sign shall be increased on a graded scale of one square foot increase in the area for each additional five feet of frontage over 100 feet, but in no case shall the sign exceed in the aggregate 200 square feet. Such sign shall be a ground or wall sign and located not closer than 20 feet from the street line.

(3) For each real estate subdivision that has been approved in accordance with the regulations of the city, one sign, not over 100 square feet in area, advertising the sale of property in such subdivision. Such sign shall be permitted only when located on some portion of the subdivision being advertised for sale and shall not encroach upon any required yard. Such sign may be illuminated, but no flashing, intermittent, or animated illumination is permitted. Such sign shall be maintained only during such time as some portion of the land is unsold. Permits for such sign shall be issued for a one-year period and may be renewed for additional one-year periods.

(4) For construction on or development of a lot, one sign, not more than 12 feet in area, giving the names of the contractors, engineers, or architects, but only during the time that construction or development is actively underway.

(5) Signs established by, or by order of, any governmental agency.

(6) For special events of public interest, one sign, not over 24 feet in area and located upon the site of the event. Such sign shall not be erected more than 30 days before the event in question and shall be removed immediately after such event. Also directional signs, not more than three square feet in area showing only a directional arrow and the name of the event of public interest. Such sign shall not be erected more than 10 days before the event in question and shall be removed immediately after such event. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 8).


18.140.070 Unsafe and unlawful signs.

The following regulations shall apply to unsafe and unlawful signs and for the maintenance of signs located anywhere within the city of Staunton:

Whenever it shall appear to the zoning administrator that any sign has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the terms of this chapter, or is unsafe or insecure, such sign shall either be made to conform with all sign regulations as provided by this chapter or shall be removed within 10 days after written notification thereof by the zoning administrator. Such sign shall be removed at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. (Ord. 2010-04. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 8).


18.140.080 Permits and fees.

Permits and fees shall be regulated by the code of the city of Staunton. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 8).


Chapter 18.145 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS

Sections:

18.145.010    Service station regulations.


18.145.010 Service station regulations.

The following regulations shall apply to all gasoline service stations:

(1) There shall be a building setback from all right-of-way lines a distance of not less than 40 feet.

(2) Service stations shall not be constructed closer than 50 feet to any residential district.

(3) The minimum distance between the intersection of right-of-way lines at a corner lot and the driveway to a service station shall be not less than 25 feet.

(4) A raised curb at least six inches in height shall be constructed on all street property lines, except at driveway openings.

(5) The length of curb openings shall not exceed 40 feet.

(6) When two curb openings are giving access to a single street, they shall be separated by an island with a minimum dimension of 25 feet. Curb cuts for driveways shall not be located closer than 10 feet to any adjoining property lines.

(7) To ensure that sufficient room be provided on either side of the pumps without intruding upon sidewalks or on adjoining property, gasoline pumps shall not be located closer than 50 feet from any residential district.

(8) Gasoline pumps shall not be located closer than 15 feet to any street right-of-way line.

(9) A solid masonry wall shall be constructed when service station property abuts property zoned for residential purposes. Such wall shall not be less than five feet in height and all required yards shall be landscaped and maintained.

(10) Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking is as regulated in Chapter 18.125 SCC.

(11) Signs. Signs are as regulated in Chapter 18.140 SCC.

(12) Gasoline pump island covers are permitted to be constructed closer to the street line than the standard setback, provided no part of the cover is closer than five feet to any street right-of-way, and the following requirements are met:

(a) The supporting members shall not be located closer than 15 feet of any street right-of-way.

(b) The minimum height measured between finished grade and the bottom of the cover shall not be less than 12 feet, six inches.

(c) The maximum height, measured from finished grade to the top of the cover shall not exceed 20 feet.

(d) The gasoline pump island cover shall be constructed in accordance with the building code requirements. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 9).


Chapter 18.150 HOME OCCUPATION

Sections:

18.150.010    Purpose.

18.150.020    Definition.

18.150.030    Special requirements.

18.150.040    Prohibited uses.

18.150.050    Expiration and revocation.

18.150.060    Fee.


18.150.010 Purpose.

This chapter defines home occupations and prescribes the conditions under which such occupations shall be permitted. (Ord. 2018-08. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 10).


18.150.020 Definition.

A “home occupation” is a gainful occupation or profession conducted by persons residing on the premises and conducted entirely within the dwelling or its accessory buildings. In connection with a home occupation, no stock in trade shall be displayed outside, and no alteration to any building shall indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in whole or in part for any purpose other than a residential unit, including the utilization of a permitted accessory building. (Ord. 2018-08. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 10).


18.150.030 Special requirements.

Home occupation, where permitted, must meet the following special requirements:

(1) The applicant must be the owner of the property on which the home occupation is to be located, or must have written approval of the owner of the property if the applicant is a tenant.

(2) The home occupation shall be operated only by the persons residing on the premises.

(3) The home occupation, when restricted to the main building, shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the floor area within said building except in the case of in-home day care.

(4) The home occupation shall not generate excessive traffic or produce obnoxious odors, glare, noise, vibration, electrical disturbance, radioactivity, or other conditions detrimental to the character of the surrounding area and, in general, shall give no evidence of a nonresidential character of the use.

(5) In addition to the requirements of Chapter 18.130 SCC, all parking in connection with the home occupation, including for vehicles marked with advertising or signage for the home occupation, shall be parked solely in driveways and garages on the premises, or in available on-street parking areas.

(6) Any home occupation resulting in customers or clients coming to the home shall be conducted by appointment only. (Ord. 2018-08. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 10).


18.150.040 Prohibited uses.

(1) Teaching, including tutoring, musical instruction, or dancing, to more than three pupils at any given time. A larger number of pupils may be approved, in advance, for special events by the zoning administrator. When reviewing these special requests the zoning administrator will consider the time and day, available parking in the area, and the complaint history of the home occupation.

(2) Funeral homes and mortuary establishments.

(3) Animal hospitals, kennels, and breeding of any domesticated or nondomesticated animal, bird, fowl, or poultry.

(4) Auto detailing and equipment installation where more than one vehicle being serviced is present on the property at any given time.

(5) Beauty salon or barbershop containing more than two chairs.

(6) Business offices, therapists, and similar business uses where more than one customer, client, or paying entity is served at one time.

(7) Medical or dental clinic.

(8) Outside storage of any kind related to a business.

(9) Restaurants.

(10) Retail or wholesale sales where any goods or merchandise are displayed or otherwise offered on site for sale or purchase except in cases where sales are done individually and by appointment only.

(11) Schools, nursery schools, or day cares that care for more than four nonrelated children.

(12) Stores.

(13) The storage of explosive, flammable, or hazardous waste or materials not otherwise associated or customary to a home use. (Ord. 2018-08. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 10).


18.150.050 Expiration and revocation.

A zoning permit for home occupations shall expire or be revoked under the following conditions:

(1) Whenever the applicant ceases to occupy the premises for which the home occupation permit was issued. No subsequent occupant of such premises shall engage in any home occupation until he shall have been issued a new permit after proper application.

(2) Whenever the holder of such a permit fails to exercise the same for any period of six consecutive months.

(3) Whenever the zoning administrator finds that the holder of the permit has violated the conditions of the permit or one or more of the special requirements identified in SCC 18.150.030. (Ord. 2018-08. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 10).


18.150.060 Fee.

The fee for application for a home occupation permit shall be as provided for under “zoning permit fee” in SCC 18.220.020. (Ord. 2018-08; Ord. 2010-06. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 10).


Chapter 18.152 HOMESTAY

Sections:

18.152.010    Purpose.

18.152.020    Definitions.

18.152.030    General requirements.


18.152.010 Purpose.

This chapter defines a “homestay” and other terms and prescribes the conditions under which such use is allowed. (Ord. 2017-19).


18.152.020 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings:

“Guest” means a person who occupies a homestay unit.

“Homestay” means the use of a residential dwelling unit or a portion thereof for occupancy for lodging purposes in exchange for charge for occupancy. The duration of any period of occupancy may not exceed 30 days; however, there shall be no limit to the frequency in which rentals to occupants may occur.

“Operator” means the proprietor of a homestay, whether in the capacity of the owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other possessory capacity. (Ord. 2017-19).


18.152.030 General requirements.

Any operator utilizing a dwelling as a homestay shall be in violation unless the operator complies with the following requirements:

(1) Shall only be rented on a daily or weekly basis. The duration of any period of occupancy may not exceed 30 days; however, there shall be no limit to the frequency in which rentals to occupants may occur.

(2) No meals shall be prepared for or served to guests, and the guest for which the property is authorized for use shall be at least 18 years of age.

(3) The homestay shall accommodate no more than two adult guests per bedroom.

(4) No signs, advertising, or any other display on the property indicating the use as homestay shall be allowed.

(5) At the request of the city of Staunton zoning administrator, operators shall grant the authority to enter the subject property, upon reasonable notice, at least one time during the calendar year to verify compliance at that time with the provisions of this section.

(6) A homestay shall be exempt from providing additional off-street parking required under the provisions of Chapter 18.125 SCC.

(7) Notwithstanding compliance with the provisions of this chapter, an operator shall comply with all other provisions of the Staunton City Code and other applicable law, including but not limited to the provisions of Chapter 3.37 SCC. (Ord. 2017-19).


Chapter 18.153 CHICKENS

Sections:

18.153.010    Purpose.

18.153.020    Definitions.

18.153.030    General standards.

18.153.040    Administration.

18.153.050    Existing use at the time of enactment.

18.153.060    Fee.


18.153.010 Purpose. 

This chapter authorizes the keeping in the city of Staunton of what are commonly referred to as backyard hens and prescribes the conditions for the keeping of such chickens within an urban residential environment. It also seeks to protect the residential integrity of the surrounding neighborhood and health and safety of the chickens and other poultry, including the poultry that is a vital part of the agribusiness economy of the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia. (Ord. 2015-08).


18.153.020 Definitions. 

The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings: 

“Biosecurity measures” means actions, measures and conditions that promote sanitation and the prevention of disease related to the keeping and maintaining and handling of a chicken or chickens, including: the provision and periodic replacement of dry and clean litter for chicken litter; the disposal of chicken litter only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable law and otherwise away from any place where chickens or other poultry and wild birds would have access; the provision and maintenance of clean coops and pens and related equipment, with regular, periodic complete cleaning and disinfection; the washing and disinfection of footwear and equipment that may enter pens and coops; and the washing and disinfection of hands and the change of clothing after any contact with a sick or diseased chicken, other poultry, animal or wildlife prior to contact with other chickens. 

“Chicken” means adult female domestic chicken kept pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

“Chicken litter” means any resulting mixture or combination of chicken excreta, manure, feed, feathers and material from the bedding for chickens.

“Coop” means the structure within a pen that houses chickens and is built and maintained with materials as impenetrable barriers so as to keep chickens confined and secure from other animals, providing space of not less than three square feet per chicken.

“Litter” means shavings and other materials to be used or used as chicken bedding.

“Pen” means an area of property enclosed at all times and on all sides, including the top, with a strong fence of mesh wire and other reliable materials as an impenetrable barrier so as to keep all chickens confined and secure from other animals, having space of not less than eight square feet per chicken.

“Processing of chicken” means slaughtering, cutting, boning, canning, salting, stuffing, or rendering a chicken that was or is kept or maintained on property pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

“Property” means an area of land, including any buildings and structures located thereon, in the city of Staunton, Virginia, and owned legally or equitably by a person, regardless of ownership titling of interests, or used under a lease or otherwise by a person(s) for the keeping of chickens.

“Rooster” means an adult male domestic chicken.

“Sanitary conditions” mean conditions at all times of keeping or maintaining or handling of a chicken or chickens and related activities on property in accordance with biosecurity measures and other sanitary-related provisions of this chapter.

“Slaughter” means the act of killing a chicken or chickens. (Ord. 2015-08).


18.153.030 General standards. 

Any person keeping chickens on property shall be permitted to use the property to do so as an accessory use to a single-family, two-family, or multifamily dwelling upon the following conditions: 

(1) No more than six chickens shall be allowed per property, regardless of the number of dwellings or the ownership interests or use arrangements, with or without consent. 

(2) Roosters are prohibited.

(3) Chickens shall not be allowed to roam free and they shall be kept in a pen or coop at all times.

(4) All coops and pens shall be deemed accessory structures and shall comply with the rear yard setback requirement of being not less than 10 feet from the property line at all times.

(5) All coops and pens shall be located in the rear yard only.

(6) All coops and pens must be kept in a sanitary condition at all times, and must be cleaned on a regular basis to prevent offensive odors. 

(7) Offensive odors from chickens, manure, or other chicken-related substances shall not be detectable at any time at the property boundaries. 

(8) Biosecurity measures as to the pen, coop and chickens and the property shall be maintained at all times, in addition to compliance with all of the provisions and requirements of the SCC and Virginia Code and regulation directives regarding care, shelter, sanitation, health, disease, insect and rodent control and as to cruelty, neglect, noise, reasonable control and other such requirements pertaining to, but not limited to, the adequate care and control of animals in the city. 

(9) Absent confinement and security and biosecurity measures being maintained at all times in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, one or more chickens may be removed by an animal control officer. 

(10) All feed or other material intended for consumption by a chicken shall be placed and maintained in containers impenetrable by mice, rats, rodents, or other animals, and such container shall be equipped and maintained at all times with tightly fitting caps or lids. The presence of mice, rats, rodents, or other animals on the property in or near an area used for the keeping of chickens shall be proof, without more, that such area is maintained in violation of this chapter.

(11) If any chicken litter or waste is disposed of by use of the city refuse system, it must be double plastic-bagged, with at least 1.5 mil rating, and securely closed and deposited in a city approved receptacle. In addition, any chicken(s) being disposed of shall also be so bagged and securely closed and deposited in a city approved receptacle. 

(12) Storage or disposal of litter, waste, and chickens on public land or in or near a sewage or stormwater collection system, facility or stream or pond, water detention facility, or water garden of any kind is strictly prohibited.

(13) There shall be no slaughtering or processing of chicken outdoors.

(14) The sale of chicken eggs on or from the property is prohibited. Off-site sale of chicken eggs shall only be by a home occupation permit issued by the city as provided in Chapter 18.150 SCC. 

(15) A chicken may be considered a nuisance animal and shall be subject to the provisions of SCC 6.10.240, Nuisance animals. (Ord. 2015-08).


18.153.040 Administration. 

The following pertains to the permit process for keeping chickens and, when necessary, the revocation of such permit:

(1) It shall be unlawful for any persons to keep one or more chickens on property unless the person has been issued a permit for such by the zoning administrator. The application, which the zoning administrator is authorized to promulgate, must, at a minimum, identify the property by address and parcel ID; include a sketch showing the area where the chickens will be housed and all types and sizes of enclosures in which the chickens will be kept; and show all property dimensions and setbacks. Once a one-time zoning permit fee has been paid as provided in SCC 18.153.060 and the site and enclosures have been inspected and approved by the city’s zoning administrator, and the application approved, a permit may be issued. No permit shall be issued to any person or as to any property as to which taxes, fees or other charges owed to the city have not been paid and are in arrears.

(2) The permit applicant must be the owner of the property or must have and submit written consent of the owner of the property as part of the permit application to keep chickens on the property. Upon written notice of the property owner’s withdrawal or cancellation or termination of such approval, the permit shall be revoked by the zoning administrator.

(3) If the permit holder is convicted of any city or state code violation associated with the keeping of chickens, the permit shall be revoked.

(4) In the event of the zoning administrator receiving and verifying three substantial and credible complaints of violation of any provision of this chapter and after notice given of such to the permit holder, the permit shall be revoked. 

(5) Upon revocation of the permit, chickens must be removed within 30 days or be subject to removal. Any person(s) so having a permit revoked shall not be allowed, at any time, to make application for another permit for five years.

(6) Upon a finding by the zoning administrator that there is warning or equivalent notice or advisory or guidance issued by federal or state authorities regarding a present or forecasted substantial threat of the potential transmission or spread of avian influenza or other poultry disease, no further permits shall be issued until such time that, by similar notice or advisory or guidance, the threat has been recognized by federal or state authorities as having been eliminated. (Ord. 2015-08).


18.153.050 Existing use at the time of enactment.

Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, a person whose use of property involves chickens being kept at the time of enactment of the provisions of this chapter shall have a period of 60 days from such date of enactment to comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-08).


18.153.060 Fee.

The one-time fee for application for a permit to keep chickens shall be as provided under SCC 18.220.020 (zoning permit fee). If the use is discontinued by the applicant for a period of more than two years, a new permit process, as provided in SCC 18.153.040, and a new permit fee will be required. (Ord. 2015-08).


Chapter 18.155 TEMPORARY USES

Sections:

18.155.010    Purpose.

18.155.020    Application – Requirements.

18.155.030    Temporary uses.


18.155.010 Purpose.

The regulations contained in this chapter are necessary to govern the operation of certain transitory or seasonal uses, nonpermanent in nature. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 11).


18.155.020 Application – Requirements.

Application for a temporary use permit shall be made to the building inspector and shall contain the following information:

(1) A survey or legal description of the property to be used, rented, or leased for a temporary use, including all information necessary to accurately portray the property.

(2) A description of the proposed use.

(3) Sufficient information to determine the yard requirements, setbacks, sanitary facilities, and availability of parking space to serve the proposed use. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 11).


18.155.030 Temporary uses.

The following uses are deemed to be temporary uses and shall also be subject to the specific regulations and time limits which follow and to the regulations of any district in which such use is located:

(1) Carnival or Circus. In any nonresidential district, a temporary use permit may be issued for a carnival or circus, but such permit shall be issued for a period not longer than 15 days. Such use shall set back from all residential districts a distance of 100 feet or more.

(2) Christmas Tree Sale. In any district, a temporary use permit may be issued for the display and open-lot sales of Christmas trees, but such permit shall be issued for a period not longer than 30 days.

(3) Temporary Buildings. In any district, a temporary use permit may be issued for a contractor’s temporary office and equipment sheds incidental to a construction project. Such office or shed shall not contain sleeping or cooking accommodations. Such permit shall be valid for not more than one year but may be renewed a maximum of two one-year extensions. However, such office or shed shall be removed upon completion of the construction project or upon expiration of the temporary use permit, whichever occurs sooner.

(4) Real Estate Sales Office. In any district, a temporary use permit may be issued for a temporary real estate sales office in any new subdivision which has been approved in accordance with the regulations of Staunton. Such office shall contain no sleeping or cooking accommodations. Such permit shall be valid for not more than one year, but may be renewed a maximum of three one-year extensions. Such office shall be removed or converted to a conforming use upon completion of the development of the subdivision or upon expiration of the temporary use permit, whichever occurs sooner.

(5) Temporary Trailer or Recreational Vehicle Parking. In any district, a temporary use permit may be issued to a landowner (or the owner of the proprietary use in property) to permit the parking and occupation of trailers or recreational vehicles during the time of July 1st through and including July 7th of each calendar year. Such temporary use permit shall be at the sole and absolute discretion of the city manager of the city of Staunton, who shall take into account the location and size of the site proposed, traffic consideration, provisions for water and sewerage disposal, the proximity of the site to residences, complaints received from past usage and any other matters deemed pertinent by the city manager and he shall take into account the wishes and concerns of neighbors and adjoining property owners. The city manager shall ascertain that all local, state, and federal fire, safety and health ordinances, statutes and regulations are complied with and met. The permit shall state the number of such trailers or vehicles permitted on the site and any other conditions imposed upon the issuance of the permit. The landowner (or the owner of the proprietary use of the property) shall be responsible for compliance with the terms of the permit so issued. Applications hereunder must be made by June 15th of the calendar year of the request to the building official for the city of Staunton. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 11).


Chapter 18.160 TENTS

Sections:

18.160.010    Uses.


18.160.010 Uses.

No tent shall be used, erected, or maintained as living quarters. Overnight camping tents are permitted on public lands established for camping purposes, and in private camps permitted in districts of this title. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 12).


Chapter 18.165 LIGHTING

Sections:

18.165.010    Residential districts – Public right-of-way.


18.165.010 Residential districts – Public right-of-way.

Lighting of all types shall be directed so as to reflect away from all residential districts, and shall be situated so as not to reflect directly onto any public right-of-way. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 13).


Chapter 18.169 SITE PLANS

Sections:

18.169.010    Purpose and intent.

18.169.020    Definitions.

18.169.030    Requirements and applicability.

18.169.040    Procedure and administration.

18.169.050    Plan contents.

18.169.060    Standards.

18.169.070    Exceptions and waivers.

18.169.080    Approval period and revisions.

18.169.090    Plans required prior to issuance of building permit.

18.169.100    Occupancy permit.


18.169.010 Purpose and intent.

These site plan regulations are intended to facilitate the utilization of the most advantageous techniques in the development of land in the city. These regulations are also designed to promote high standards and innovations in the layout, design and landscaping of new and existing developments to ensure that land is used in a manner which is efficient and harmonious with the community and the environment. (Ord. 2020-03).


18.169.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

(1) “Site plan” means a detailed engineering drawing of proposed improvements to a given lot. A site plan usually displays a building footprint, travel ways, parking, grading, drainage facilities, sanitary sewer and water lines, trails, lighting, and landscaping. (Ord. 2020-03).


18.169.030 Requirements and applicability.

(1) All nonresidential and multiple-family development (multifamily buildings) shall be subject to the site plan review requirements of this chapter.

(2) Any development that requires an erosion and sediment control plan, a stormwater plan, a traffic impact analysis, or a connection to or an extension of public utilities shall be subject to the site plan review requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-03).


18.169.040 Procedure and administration.

A site plan is required to be submitted by the owner, authorized agent, or the developer of the particular property involved, to the zoning administrator, who shall be responsible for the receipt and processing of such applications and shall have the authority to approve or disapprove such plans. The zoning administrator is hereby designated as the agent of the city for such purposes. If the zoning administrator does not approve the plan, then the applicant shall be promptly notified of the reasons why the plan was disapproved and, if necessary, of any suggestions as to corrections. (Ord. 2020-03).


18.169.050 Plan contents.

The site plan shall provide the following information, at a minimum, unless expressly waived in writing by the zoning administrator due to the scope and scale of the project:

(1) Title and description of the project; names and contact information of the engineer, architect, landscape architect and surveyor, if any; names of the developer and property owner; and a signature panel for the zoning administrator’s agent’s approval;

(2) The boundaries, by bearings and distance utilizing the city datum, of the property involved, the acreage, all existing property lines, setback lines, buildings, structures, watercourses, topography, adjacent property lines, easements with deed or instrument source references, waterways or lakes and other existing physical features in or adjoining the project, including flood hazard areas as provided in Chapter 18.170 SCC, Floodplain Districts and Regulations;

(3) The owners with instrument number or deed book and page number, present zoning, parcel identification numbers, and current use of the property involved and adjoining properties;

(4) Approved proffers, special use permit conditions, waivers, or granted variance on the property involved;

(5) Building lot coverage, building usage, dimensions, square footage, height, number of floors and finished floor elevation; location of accessory structures;

(6) Open space for multiple-family structures as provided in SCC 18.30.050;

(7) Physical features such as watercourses, waterways, or lakes on adjoining properties shown only in approximate scale and proportion;

(8) The location, dimensions, construction type, and names of existing and proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and all curb cuts;

(9) The location and size of existing and proposed sanitary sewers; water, gas, telephone, electric and other utility lines (if known); culverts and other underground or overhead structures in or affecting the project, including existing and proposed facilities and easements for these facilities;

(10) All parking, travel lanes, driveways, loading spaces, walkways and outdoor lighting systems, including luminary size, indicating type of surfacing, size, angle of stalls, width of aisles and a specific schedule showing the number of parking spaces provided and the number required by the provisions of Chapter 18.125 SCC, Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements; 

(11) Existing and proposed stormwater management facilities and erosion and sediment control measures, indicating location, size, type and grade of ditches, catch basins, and pipes, including on-site water retention and related requirements of Chapter 13.05 SCC;

(12) The location of existing and proposed fire hydrants and fire lines; verification of adequacy of fire flow when required by the fire chief; location of fire department connections and valves; fire lanes with access widths and heights for fire apparatus;

(13) Location of all existing and proposed advertisement (if known) and traffic signs and traffic markings as provided in Chapter 18.140 SCC, Signs, Billboards, and Other Advertising Structures;

(14) Additional information as deemed necessary by the zoning administrator to ensure compliance with federal, state, or local code requirements or to clarify requirements herein. (Ord. 2020-03).


18.169.060 Standards.

(1) Plans involving engineering, architecture, landscape architecture or land surveying shall be certified by an engineer, architect, land surveyor or landscape architect licensed to practice in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia, Professions and Occupations, as amended.

(2) Plans shall be prepared to an engineer’s scale at not greater than one inch equals 30 feet on a sheet size of 24 inches by 36 inches. In response to the scope and scale of the project, the zoning administrator may authorize a smaller sheet size in advance of plan submission, if requested by the applicant. Seven copies of the site plan shall be submitted, along with a digital file (portable document format) for each submittal. 

(3) All plan sheets shall include a north arrow, scale, and date. Plans shall include a title sheet with a general information section indicating the number of sheets comprising the site plan, a vicinity map, an index showing the locations of the various sheets and a three-inch by four-inch signature block reserved for the use of the city.

(4) Existing topography with a maximum contour interval of two feet; proposed final grade with contours at an interval not greater than two feet.

(5) Landscaping and screening as provided in Chapter 18.175 SCC. 

(6) Outdoor lighting as provided in Chapter 18.165 SCC.

(7) If the site is within the entrance corridor overlay district, then architectural elevations in color, building and site materials, outdoor lighting, and screening of refuse and recycling containers shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 18.83 SCC, Entrance Corridor Overlay District.

(8) Information necessary to demonstrate that all construction or development will fully comply with applicable federal, state, and local requirements for accessibility, i.e., grades, elevation, dimensions, etc. (Ord. 2020-03).


18.169.070 Exceptions and waivers.

(1) New construction involving an individual single-family dwelling on an individual lot, townhouses, and temporary uses are exempted from the site plan requirements. Any such waiver shall be expressly in writing.

(2) If the site is located within the enterprise zone or opportunity zone, and the zoning administrator finds that extraordinary hardship or practical difficulty may result from strict compliance with the regulations herein, and where the purpose of this chapter or either zone may be served to greater extent by an alternative proposal, a waiver(s) may be granted. Waivers shall not be granted where compliance with the applicable standards is practical and achievable or where such waiver would jeopardize the public health, welfare or safety. (Ord. 2020-03).


18.169.080 Approval period and revisions.

(1) A site plan shall be approved, approved with conditions or a written explanation of deficiencies shall be sent to the applicant within 30 days after receiving a completed application, unless there is written mutual consent between the applicant and the zoning administrator for an extended review time.

(2) Once approved, a total of three copies of the final site plan shall be provided to the zoning administrator for a signature. Digital CAD file of approved plans shall also be provided.

(3) The zoning administrator shall act on any site plan that has been previously reviewed within 30 days after the modified, corrected, and resubmitted site plan has been officially submitted for approval unless there is written mutual consent between the applicant and the zoning administrator for an extended review time. 

(4) Approval of a site plan shall be valid for a period of five years starting the day following the date of approval, unless a building permit has been issued for construction; or, if a building permit has been issued and construction has not commenced, provided that upon the expiration of the building permit, the site plan approval also expires. 

(5) When a site is being developed in phases, a development phasing plan shall be submitted if the proposed project is to be constructed in two or more phases. The site plan shall remain valid so long as construction work does not stop for more than two years after the issuance of an occupancy permit.

(6) No change, revision, addition or deletion shall be made on any site plan or on any accompanying data sheet where approval has been endorsed on the plan or sheet unless authorization for such change is granted in writing by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 2020-03).


18.169.090 Plans required prior to issuance of building permit.

Building construction plans may be submitted for review prior to the approval of a site plan; however, a building permit will not be issued until the site plan has been approved by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 2020-03).


18.169.100 Occupancy permit.

An occupancy permit shall not be issued for such development until all aspects of the approved site plan required hereunder have been completed. When a site is being developed in phases, all aspects noted in the phasing plan for the specific phase shall be completed before the issuance of an occupancy permit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, a temporary occupancy permit with respect to the development may be issued by the building official, if, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, the landscaping and/or screening has been delayed for reasons beyond the control of the developer, such as weather and other causes. (Ord. 2020-03). 


Chapter 18.170 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS

Sections:

18.170.010    General provisions.

18.170.020    Severability.

18.170.030    Penalty for violations.

18.170.040    Definitions.

18.170.050    Establishments of zoning districts.

18.170.060    Submitting technical data.

18.170.070    District provisions.

18.170.080    Standard for subdivision proposals.

18.170.090    Variances – Factors to be considered.

18.170.100    Existing structures in floodplain districts.


18.170.010 General provisions.

(1) Statutory Authorization and Purpose. These provisions are adopted pursuant to the authority granted to localities by Section 15.2-2280 of the Code of Virginia for the purpose of preventing the loss of life and property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by:

(a) Regulating uses, activities, and development which, acting alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities, and frequencies.

(b) Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within areas subject to flooding.

(c) Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur in flood-prone areas to be protected and/or floodproofed against flooding and flood damage.

(d) Protecting individuals from buying land and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.

(2) Applicability. These provisions shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city of Staunton and identified as being flood prone.

(3) Compliance and Liability.

(a) No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this title.

(b) The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that districts outside the floodplain district, or that land uses permitted within such district, will be free from flooding or flood damages.

(c) Records of actions associated with administering these provisions shall be kept on file and maintained by the floodplain administrator.

(d) This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Staunton or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.

(4) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. The ordinance codified in this chapter supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in flood-prone areas. However, any underlying ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive than this chapter. (Ord. 2009-26. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 14).


18.170.020 Severability.

If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions. The remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose, the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. (Ord. 2009-26).


18.170.030 Penalty for violations.

(1) Any person who fails to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of this chapter, or directions of the zoning administrator, or any authorized employee of the city of Staunton pursuant to this chapter, shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 18.225 SCC for violation.

(2) In addition to any penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violation or noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the city of Staunton to be a public nuisance and abated as such. Flood insurance may be withheld from structures constructed in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-26).


18.170.040 Definitions.

(1) “Base flood/100-year flood” means a flood that, on the average, is likely to occur, or be exceeded, once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).

(2) “Base flood elevation (BFE)” means the Federal Emergency Management Agency designated 100-year water surface elevation.

(3) “Basement” means any area of the building having its sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.

(4) “The Staunton board of zoning appeals” means the board appointed to review appeals made by individuals with regard to decisions of the administrator in the interpretation of this chapter.

(5) “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.

(6) “Elevated building” means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, or columns (posts and piers).

(7) “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede of alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

(8) “Flood” or “flooding” means:

(a) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

(i) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;

(ii) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and

(iii) Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection (8)(a)(ii) of this section and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.

(b) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (8)(a)(i) of this section.

(9) “Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means an official map of a community, on which the administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM).

(10) “Flood insurance study (FIS)” means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudflows and/or flood- related erosion hazards.

(11) “Flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.

(12) “Floodplain” means:

(a) A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation.

(b) An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any source.

(13) “Floodway” means the designated area of the floodplain required to carry and discharge flood waters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of this chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the 100-year magnitude without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

(14) “Freeboard” means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. “Freeboard” tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization in the watershed. When a freeboard is included in the height of a structure, the flood insurance premiums will be less.

(15) “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

(16) “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

(a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register.

(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.

(c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

(d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (i) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

(17) “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of Federal Code 44 CFR Section 60.3.

(18) “Manufactured home” means a structure subject to federal regulations, which is transportable in one or more sections; is eight body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length in the traveling mode, or is 320 or more square feet when erected on site; is built on a permanent chassis; is designed to be used as a single-family dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days, but does not include a recreational vehicle.

(19) “Manufactured home park/subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale.

(20) “New construction” means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after December 16, 1988, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

(21) “Recreation vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

(a) Built on a single chassis;

(b) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

(c) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

(d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.

(22) “Shallow flooding area” means a special flood hazard area with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

(23) “Special flood hazard area” means the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined in SCC 18.170.050(3).

(24) “Start of construction” means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration on any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

(25) “Structure” for floodplain management purposes means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. “Structure” for insurance purposes means:

(a) A building with two or more outside rigid walls and a fully secured roof, that is affixed to a permanent site; or

(b) A “manufactured home,” also known as a mobile home, is a structure built on a permanent chassis, transported to its site in one or more sections, and affixed to a permanent foundation; or

(c) “Travel trailer” means a trailer without wheels, built on a chassis and affixed to a permanent foundation, that is regulated under any chapter of the Staunton City Code as well as the Uniform Statewide Building Code; however, for this purpose “structure” does not mean a recreational vehicle or park trailer or other similar vehicle, except as described in this subsection (25)(c), or a gas or liquid storage tank.

(26) “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

(27) “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(b) Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

(28) “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

(29) “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. “Watercourse” includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 2009-26; Ord. 2009-04; Ord. 2007-19. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 14. Formerly 18.170.020).


18.170.050 Establishments of zoning districts.

(1) Description of Districts.

(a) Basis of District. The various floodplain districts shall include areas subject to inundation by waters of the 100-year flood. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the Flood Insurance Study for Augusta County and the City of Staunton prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, dated December 1, 1978, and revised September 28, 2007, and January 6, 2010, as amended.

(i) The floodway district is delineated, for purposes of this chapter, using the criterion that a certain area within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the 100-year flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. These areas included in this district are specifically defined in Table 2 of the above referenced flood insurance study and shown on the accompanying flood boundary and floodway map or flood insurance rate map.

(ii) The special flood hazard area shall be that area of the 100-year floodplain not included in the floodway district. The basis for the outermost boundary of this district shall be the 100-year flood elevations contained in the flood profiles of the above referenced flood insurance study and as shown on the accompanying flood boundary and floodway map or flood insurance rate map.

(iii) The approximated floodplain district shall be that floodplain area for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but where a 100-year floodplain boundary has been approximated. Such areas are shown as zone A on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study. For these areas, the 100-year flood elevations and floodway information from federal, state, and other acceptable sources shall be used, when available. Where the specific 100-year flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data, such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Floodplain Information Reports, U.S. Geological Survey Flood-Prone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use, development and/or activity shall determine this elevation in accordance with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the city of Staunton.

(2) Overlay Concept.

(a) The floodplain districts described above shall be overlays to the existing underlying districts as shown on the official zoning ordinance map, and as such, the provisions for the floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions.

(b) Any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the floodplain districts and those of any underlying district, the more restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the floodplain districts shall apply.

(c) In the event any provision concerning a floodplain district is declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions or judicial decision, the basic underlying provisions shall remain applicable.

(3) Official Zoning Maps. The boundaries of the floodplain districts are established as shown on the flood boundary and floodway map and/or flood insurance rate map which is declared to be part of this chapter and which shall be kept on file at the office of the zoning administrator of the city of Staunton.

(4) District Boundary Change. The delineation of any of the floodplain districts may be revised by the Staunton city council where natural or manmade changes have occurred and/or where more detailed studies have been conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified agency, or an individual documents the need for such change. However, prior to any change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

(5) Interpretation of District Boundaries. Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the administrator. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the Staunton board of adjustment shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires. (Ord. 2009-26; Ord. 2007-19. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 14. Formerly 18.170.030).


18.170.060 Submitting technical data.

The base flood elevation may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, the city shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, flood prevention rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data. (Ord. 2009-26).


18.170.070 District provisions.

(1) General Provisions.

(a) Permit Requirement. All uses, activities, and development occurring within any floodplain district shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a zoning permit. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with all other applicable codes and ordinances such as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and SCC Title 17. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the zoning officer shall require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and shall review all sites to assure they are reasonably safe from flooding. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodway of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system.

(b) Alteration or Relocation of Watercourse. Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or of any watercourse, stream, etc., within this jurisdiction, a permit shall be obtained from the U.S. Corps of Engineers, the Virginia State Water Control Board, and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission (a joint permit application is available from any of these organizations). Furthermore, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all affected adjacent jurisdictions, the Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management (Department of Conservation and Recreation), and the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

(c) New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated; provided, that all areas of the building components below the elevation corresponding to the BFE plus one foot are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied.

(d) Site Plans and Permit Applications. All applications for development in the floodplain district and all building permits issued for the floodplain shall incorporate the following information:

(i) For structures to be elevated, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement).

(ii) For structures to be floodproofed (nonresidential only), the elevation to which the structure will be floodproofed.

(iii) The elevation of the 100-year flood.

(iv) Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground elevations.

(e) Manufactured Homes. Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.

(f) Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites either shall: (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or (ii) meet the permit requirements for placement and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (1)(e) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.

(2) Floodway District. In the floodway district, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the 100-year flood elevation.

(3) Permitted Uses in the Floodway District. The following uses and activities are permitted; provided, that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying area and are not prohibited by any other ordinance; and provided, that they do not require structures, fill, or storage of materials and equipment:

(a) Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.

(b) Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as parks, day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat launching and swimming areas, horseback riding and hiking trails, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, trap and skeet game ranges, and hunting and fishing areas.

(c) Accessory residential uses, such as yard areas, gardens, play areas, and pervious loading areas.

(d) Accessory industrial and commercial uses, such as yard areas, pervious parking and loading areas, airport landing strips, etc.

(4) Special Flood Hazard Areas and Approximated Floodplain Districts. In the flood-fringe and approximated floodplain districts, the development and/or use of land shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying district; provided, that all such uses, activities, and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions contained in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and all other applicable codes and ordinances.

Within the approximated floodplain district, the applicant shall also delineate a floodway area based on the requirement that all existing and future development not increase the 100-year flood elevation more than one foot at any one point. The engineering principle, equal reduction of conveyance, shall be used to make the determination of increased flood heights. Within the floodway area delineated by the applicant, the provision of subsection (2) of this section shall apply.

(5) Design Criteria for Utilities and Facilities.

(a) Sanitary Sewer Facilities. All new or replacement sanitary sewer facilities and private package sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems) shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into the flood waters. In addition, they should be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and impairment.

(b) Water Facilities. All new or replacement water facilities shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.

(c) Drainage Facilities. All storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface waters without damage to persons or property. The systems shall ensure drainage away from buildings and on-site waste disposal sites. The city council of the city of Staunton may require a primarily underground system to accommodate frequent floods and a secondary surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans. The facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.

(d) Utilities. All utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems being placed in flood-prone areas should be located, elevated (where possible), and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood occurrence.

(e) Streets and Sidewalks. Streets and sidewalks should be designed to minimize their potential for increasing and aggravating the levels of flood flow. Drainage openings shall be required to sufficiently discharge flood flows without unduly increased flood heights. (Ord. 2009-26; Ord. 2007-19. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 14. Formerly 18.170.040).


18.170.080 Standard for subdivision proposals.

(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

(3) All subdivisions proposed shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development proposals (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that exceed 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser. (Ord. 2009-26).


18.170.090 Variances – Factors to be considered.

(1) Factors to be considered in review of a request for variance from the provisions of this chapter shall be determined consistent with the following provisions:

(a) Variances shall be issued only upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, and after the board of zoning appeals has determined that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and that the granting of such variance will not result in unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood height, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, and will not create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with local laws or ordinances.

(b) While the granting of variances generally is limited to a lot size less than one-half acre, deviation from the limitation may occur. However, as the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing a variance increases. Variances may be issued by the board of zoning appeals for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level in conformance with the provisions of this section.

(c) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for the development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent uses; provided, that the criteria of this section are met and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.

(2) In passing upon applications for variances, the Staunton board of zoning appeals shall satisfy all relevant factors and procedures specified in other sections of this title and consider the following additional factors:

(a) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. No variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within any floodway district that will cause any increase in the 100-year flood elevation.

(b) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others.

(c) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.

(d) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners.

(e) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.

(f) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.

(g) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.

(h) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.

(i) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area.

(j) The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the property in time of flood.

(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.

(l) The repair on rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

(m) Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this chapter.

(3) The Staunton board of adjustment may refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a variance to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for flood protection and other related matters.

(4) Variances shall be issued only after the Staunton board of adjustment has determined that the granting of such will not result in unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense; and will not create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with local laws or ordinances.

(5) Variances shall be issued only after the Staunton board of adjustment has determined that variance will be the minimum required to provide relief from any exceptional hardship to the applicant.

(6) The Staunton board of adjustment shall notify the applicant for a variance, in writing, that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the 100-year flood elevation increases the risks to life and property, and will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.

(7) A record shall be maintained of the above notification as well as all variance actions, including justification for the issuance of the variances. Any variances which are issued shall be noted in the annual or biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. 2009-26; Ord. 2007-19. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 14. Formerly 18.170.050).


18.170.100 Existing structures in floodplain districts.

A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions, may be continued subject to the following conditions:

(1) Existing structures in the floodway district shall not be expanded or enlarged unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed expansion would not result in any increase in the 100-year flood elevation.

(2) Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use located in any floodplain area to an extent or amount of less than 50 percent or more of its market value shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent possible within the provisions of this code and the Uniform Statewide Building Code for the portion being repaired, altered or added.

(3) The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use, regardless of its location in a floodplain area, to an extent or amount of 50 percent or more of its market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code for the entire structure. (Ord. 2009-26; Ord. 2007-19. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 14. Formerly 18.170.060).


Chapter 18.175 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING

Sections:

18.175.010    Purpose and intent.

18.175.020    Definitions.

18.175.030    Requirements and applicability.

18.175.040    Procedure and administration.

18.175.050    Plan contents.

18.175.060    Standards.

18.175.070    Exceptions.

18.175.080    Approval period and revisions.

18.175.090    Plans required prior to issuance of building permit.

18.175.100    Occupancy permit.


18.175.010 Purpose and intent.

The city council for the city of Staunton, Virginia, in order to promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens; to facilitate the creation of an attractive and harmonious community; to conserve, protect, and enhance natural resources; and to safeguard and protect land values states that the purpose and intent of this chapter is as follows:

(1) To aid in stabilizing the environment’s ecological balance by contributing to the process of air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, and storm water runoff retardation, while at the same time aiding in noise, glare, and heat abatement;

(2) To encourage the preservation of existing trees and cultivated vegetation;

(3) To assist in providing adequate light and air and in preventing overcrowding of land;

(4) To provide visual buffering and enhance the beautification of the city;

(5) To safeguard and enhance property values and to protect public and private investment;

(6) To preserve, protect and restore the unique identity and environment of the city and to protect the economic base attracted to the city by such factors;

(7) To conserve energy and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 15).


18.175.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

“Evergreen tree” means a tree which has foliage that remains green through more than one growing season. Evergreen trees used for screening purposes shall be a minimum of five to six feet in height when planted.

“Ground cover” means low plants which grow close to the ground and may upon review take the place of turf.

“Major tree” means a tree which, at maturity, has a trunk diameter in excess of four inches. Major trees shall be two inches minimum caliper when planted (measured six inches above ground level).

“Minor tree” means a tree which, at maturity, has a trunk diameter of less than four inches. Minor street trees shall be one and one-half inches minimum caliper when planted (measured six inches above ground level).

“Shrub” means a low usually several stemmed plant which, at maturity, is less than 25 feet in height and generally spreads less than 15 feet. Shrubs shall be a minimum of 12 inches in height when planted. This excludes ground cover. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 15).


18.175.030 Requirements and applicability.

(1) Landscaping Plan. Except as provided herein, a landscaping plan shall be submitted for review and approval with respect to all land use and development activities, to be commenced after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. “Land use and development activities,” as used herein, shall mean those activities that require a building permit therefor or the creation of new parking areas or the enlargement of existing parking areas by more than four additional parking spaces (cumulative over a four-year period).

(2) Screening Plan. Except as provided herein, a screening plan shall be submitted for review and approval with respect to all land use and development activities within business, professional and industrial districts, designed to screen the uses of the most intensive use district from the adjoining least intensive use district and public streets.

(3) Exceptions. The requirements hereunder do not apply to:

(a) Individually developed single-family residences;

(b) Additions to or accessory buildings of single-family residences;

(c) Any alteration or reconstruction of buildings situated in the historic conservation district;

(d) Any construction necessitated by the destruction by fire, calamity, storm or other accidental means of less than 50 percent of pre-existing improvements;

(e) Interior and facade improvements made to a structure not requiring any exterior enlargement thereof.

(4) Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, a landscaping plan is required for the development of a residential subdivision. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 15).


18.175.040 Procedure and administration.

(1) The plans required to be submitted hereunder shall be submitted by the owner and the developer of the particular property involved to the senior planner for the city. Said senior planner shall be responsible for the receipt and processing of such applications and shall have the authority to approve or disapprove such plans. Said senior planner is hereby designated as the agent of the city for such purposes. If the senior planner disapproved the plan, the senior planner shall promptly notify the applicant and set forth the reasons why the plan was disapproved and, if necessary, suggestions as to corrections.

(2) Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the agent may appeal such decision to the planning commission for the city of Staunton in writing within 30 days of the decision in question. The planning commission shall schedule such appeal for hearing at its next regularly scheduled meeting to be held at least 14 days after such appeal is noted. The planning commission shall render its judgment on the date the appeal is heard, unless by the agreement of all parties, the decision can be delayed.

(3) Any applicant who is aggrieved by the judgment of the planning commission may appeal such judgment to the council for the city of Staunton in writing within 30 days of the judgment rendered. Such appeal shall be heard by the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting to be held at least 14 days after such appeal is noted. The city council shall render its judgment on the date the appeal is heard, unless, by agreement of all parties, the decision can be delayed.

(4) All appeals set forth above shall be filed with the agent and shall set forth the grounds upon which the petitioner is aggrieved. The agent shall promptly schedule such matter to be heard with the planning commission and/or the city council, as the case may be.

(5) Nothing herein shall deprive an aggrieved party from seeking a variance or other determination with respect hereto from the board of zoning appeals of the city of Staunton as permitted by local and state law. (Ord. 2017-03. Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 15).


18.175.050 Plan contents.

The department of planning for the city of Staunton will assist those required to submit plans hereunder upon request. The landscape and/or screening plan should provide information such as:

(1) The location, size, and type of all proposed plant materials and screening measures.

(2) Existing trees with a caliper of six inches or greater, or wooded areas must be identified and considered for preservation.

(3) Existing landscaping features on the site to be retained.

(4) Location of utilities, including watering facilities for plantings on the site and drainage patterns.

(5) A plan of maintenance. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 15).


18.175.060 Standards.

(1) The following minimum landscaping standards shall apply:

Landscaping shall consist of at least a five feet wide landscaped area, along the street right-of-way, in business and professional districts and at least a 10 feet wide landscaped area, along the street right-of-way, in the industrial districts. These areas are exclusive of the area required for sidewalks, public street rights-of-way, or parking. Utility easements can be used with the permission of the city.

(2) The following minimum screening standards shall apply:

Screening shall consist of a planting strip, existing vegetation, a slightly opaque wall or fence, or combination thereof, to the reasonable satisfaction of the agent. Where only vegetative screening is provided, such screening strip shall not be less than five feet wide in the business and professional districts and 10 feet wide in the industrial districts. Vegetative screening may consist of a double staggered row of evergreen trees planted 15 feet on center, or a double staggered row of evergreen shrubs planted 10 feet on center. Alternate methods of vegetative screening may be approved by the agent. Where a fence or a wall is provided, it shall be a minimum of six feet in height and plantings shall be required at intervals along such fence or wall.

(3) The following minimum street tree standards shall apply:

(a) Street trees shall be required along existing or proposed public streets and shall be planted with even spacing, or as otherwise required by the agent, adjacent to the public street right-of-way. One street tree shall be required for every 50 feet of road frontage, or portion thereof, if the street abutment is 20 feet or more in length, except as exempted in subsection (4) of this section. These trees should have a clear trunk height of at least six feet. The agent may waive these requirements in certain cases where site conditions warrant an alternate solution.

(b) Streets with posted speeds of over 35 mph shall have minor trees only planted along the right-of-way. Streets with posted speeds of less than 35 mph may have major or minor trees planted along the right-of-way.

(c) In the event that trees are desired along walkways adjacent to traffic flow, no tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines or pavement lines. No street tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet to any fire hydrant.

(d) No trees other than those species listed as 30 feet or less in height at maturity may be planted under or within 10 lateral feet to any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line, or other utility.

(4) The following landscaping requirements for new parking areas consisting of five spaces or more shall apply:

(a) Street Trees. Street trees shall be planted in accordance with subsection (3) of this section. The trees shall be planted between the street right-of-way and the parking area within the landscape setback. If this requirement creates a hardship by causing the relocation of required parking spaces, then the additional planting area may be counted toward the interior landscaping requirement.

(b) Interior Landscaping. An area equal to five percent of the parking and patron vehicular circulation area, as measured by the outside boundaries thereof, shall be landscaped to include trees and shrubs. Such landscaping shall be fairly uniformly dispersed throughout the vehicular parking and circulation area. At least one minor shade tree is required for each 10 parking spaces or portion thereof. Shrub plantings, except to the extent that they exceed five feet in width, adjacent to a building shall not be counted as interior landscaping. The requirements of subsections (4)(a), Street Trees, and (4)(c), Additional Planting Along Public Streets, of this section and screening of parking lots are to be excluded as a part of the five percent interior landscaping requirement.

(c) Additional Plantings Along Public Streets. When a parking lot is located such that the parked cars will be visible from a public street, then additional landscaping of low street shrubs may be required between the street and the parking lot. Shrubs shall be in a single row planted five feet on center. All shrub plantings along entrances, exits, and intersections shall be kept below two and one-half feet so that visibility will not be impaired. Alternate methods of landscaping designed to minimize the visual impact of the parking lot may be approved by the agent.

(d) Wheel stops, curbing, or other barriers shall be provided to prevent damage to landscaping by vehicles. Where necessary, trees shall be walled or otherwise protected against change of grade. All pervious areas of the site shall be permanently protected from soil erosion with grass, ground covers, low shrubs, or mulch material. Special attention should be given to using plants that are drought tolerant. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 15).


18.175.070 Exceptions.

In lieu of planting new materials, existing trees and vegetation may satisfy landscaping and screening requirements, subject to the agent’s approval. The landscaping plan shall indicate the trees to be saved, limits of clearing, location and type of protective fencing, grade changes requiring tree wells, or walls and trenching.

Upon review of the site and/or site plan, the agent, or the reviewing authority, may reduce or suspend any of the requirements of this chapter, if the site presents special circumstances whereby the strict compliance of this chapter will produce an undue hardship or if the spirit of the chapter has been met and deviation has been deemed to be in the best interest of the city. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 15).


18.175.080 Approval period and revisions.

(1) All landscaping shall be planted and maintained according to established planting and maintenance procedures using good quality plant materials. The required plant materials may be chosen from a recommended species list provided by the agent. Plant materials not listed may be substituted for suggested plant material if such substitution is expressly approved by the agent.

(2) Approval of landscaping and screening plan under the provisions of this chapter is valid for a period of one year; however, if said plan is part of approved site plan in accordance with this title or an approved subdivision plan, then approval is extended for same period as the site or subdivision plan.

(3) Requested changes or revisions to approved landscaping and screening plans may be authorized in writing by the agent as long as said revisions do not, in the agent’s opinion, substantially affect terms of the original approval. Otherwise, the agent may require a new plan be prepared and submitted for review in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(4) All landscaping and screening required by this chapter shall be installed at the cost of the developer or property owner. The owner shall be responsible for maintaining all landscaping in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris.

(5) All landscaping and screening features shown on the approved plan must be adequately maintained and kept in effect in order for approved plan to remain valid and not become a zoning violation of this title. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 15).


18.175.090 Plans required prior to issuance of building permit.

No building permit shall be issued by the city until the applicant therefor exhibits to the building inspector the approved plans required by this chapter. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 15).


18.175.100 Occupancy permit.

The building inspector for the city shall not issue an occupancy permit for such development until the landscaping and/or screening required hereunder has been completed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the building inspector may issue a temporary occupancy permit with respect to the development, if, in the opinion of the building inspector, said landscaping and/or screening has been delayed for reasons beyond the control of the developer, such as weather and other causes. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 15).


Chapter 18.180 OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS

Sections:

18.180.010    Established.


18.180.010 Established.

For all dwelling units permitted in the various districts of this code, including, but not limited to, boarding houses, dwelling (attached), dwelling (multiple), dwelling (semi-attached), dwelling (single-family), dwelling (two-family), fraternity, sorority house, group house, housing for the elderly, multiple-family dwelling, rooming house, row dwelling and tourist home, the occupancy limitations set forth in Section PM-405.0 (PM 405-1 through PM 405.10, inclusive) of the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code/1996, as amended, shall apply, the provisions of which are adopted herein by reference. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 16).


Chapter 18.185 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

Sections:

18.185.010    General provisions.

18.185.020    Applicability.

18.185.030    Siting requirements.

18.185.040    Federal requirements.

18.185.050    Structural requirements.

18.185.060    Setbacks and separation.

18.185.070    Security requirements.

18.185.080    Landscaping requirements.

18.185.090    Information required and factors considered in granting special use permits.

18.185.100    Removal of defective or abandoned telecommunications facilities.


18.185.010 General provisions.

(1) Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for the siting and/or co-location of telecommunications facilities. The goals of this chapter are to:

(a) Encourage the location of telecommunications facilities in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of telecommunications facilities and sites throughout the city.

(b) Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing telecommunications facilities.

(c) Encourage users of telecommunications facilities to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the city is minimal.

(d) Encourage users of telecommunications facilities to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the telecommunications facilities.

(e) Provide adequate sites for the provision of telecommunications services with minimal negative impact on the resources of the city.

(2) Definitions.

(a) “Alternative telecommunications structure” shall mean buildings, clock towers, bell steeples, electric poles, utility poles, water storage tanks, and other similar alternative-design mounting structures that are used for the purpose of supporting and obscuring the presence of antennas.

(b) “Antenna” means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending, or receiving or both of electromagnetic waves.

(c) “FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration.

(d) “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.

(e) “Height” means when referring to a telecommunications tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the telecommunications tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.

(f) “Telecommunications facility” means any site that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting and including one or more antennas or microwave dishes, and including, but not limited to, telecommunications towers.

(g) “Telecommunications tower” means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting and including one or more antennas or microwave dishes, and including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, manmade trees, monopole towers, telephone, radio and television transmission towers. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 17).


18.185.020 Applicability.

(1) Limitations. The requirements set forth in this chapter shall govern the siting of antennas, telecommunications towers, and telecommunications facilities unless specifically excluded herein.

(2) Amateur Radios. This chapter shall not govern any amateur radio, or its installation, if it is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator and used exclusively for noncommercial purposes.

(3) Television Reception Antennas. This chapter shall not govern any television reception antenna or its installation, if it is under 50 feet in height and is used exclusively for noncommercial purposes.

(4) Existing Structures and Towers.

(a) The placement of a telecommunication antenna and related equipment on alternative telecommunications structures such as roofs, walls, water tanks, existing towers and other suitable structures may be approved by the zoning administrator provided the antenna (1) does not add more than 20 feet to the existing structure, and (2) meets all applicable standards and requirements of local, state and federal regulations. The zoning administrator shall have the right to refer any co-location of telecommunications equipment to the planning commission for review and approval.

(b) Applications for such use must include (1) a final site plan for approval, and (2) a report prepared by a qualified and licensed professional engineer indicating the existing structure’s suitability to accept the antenna and the proposed method of affixing the antenna to the structure. The placement of additional buildings (or equipment) must meet the standards for this and other applicable city ordinances. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 17).


18.185.030 Siting requirements.

The requirements for siting and construction of all telecommunications facilities regulated by this chapter shall include the following:

(1) Any new telecommunications facility site shall not be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that existing telecommunications facilities or alternative telecommunications structures cannot accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna.

(2) Telecommunications towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. Dish antennas will be of a neutral, nonreflective color with no logos.

(3) At the telecommunications facility, the design of the buildings and related structures used in conjunction with telecommunications facilities shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the telecommunications facilities to the natural setting and the built environment.

(4) If an antenna is installed on an alternative telecommunications structure, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the alternative telecommunications structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.

(5) A telecommunications facility or telecommunications tower shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the city may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.

(6) No advertising of any type may be placed on the telecommunications facility, or other structures associated with the telecommunications facility. Signs shall be required displaying the name, registration number, and emergency contact number of the tower owner. The sign shall not exceed four square feet in size and shall be located on the security fence or other approved location. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 17).


18.185.040 Federal requirements.

All telecommunications towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate such facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners and operators of the telecommunications towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such telecommunications towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards as required. Failure to bring telecommunications towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the telecommunications towers and antennas at the owner’s or operator’s expense. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 17).


18.185.050 Structural requirements.

(1) Prior to the use or extension of a telecommunications tower, the owner shall have obtained approval of the structural integrity by a registered professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia and a copy of such report shall be filed with the planning and inspection department.

(2) To ensure the structural integrity of a telecommunications facility or telecommunications tower, the owner or operator of a telecommunications facility or telecommunications tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable federal, state and local building codes and regulations. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 17).


18.185.060 Setbacks and separation.

The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all telecommunications facilities except alternative telecommunications structures:

(1) Telecommunications facility must be set back a distance equal to 110 percent of the height of the telecommunication tower from any off-site structures used for human habitation.

(2) Telecommunications towers, security fencing, and accessory facilities must meet all setback requirements for primary structures for the zoning district in which the telecommunications facility is located. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 17).


18.185.070 Security requirements.

The following requirements shall govern the securing of telecommunications facilities:

(1) Telecommunications facilities, that include buildings or added structures, shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device unless the city determines that its safety requirements are met without it.

(2) If a telecommunications tower or antenna is mounted on an alternative telecommunications structure, the security fencing shall not be required unless the city determines that its safety requirements are not met without it.

(3) Monopole towers and other single-pole structures, standing alone, shall be secured by anti-climbing devices. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 17).


18.185.080 Landscaping requirements.

The following requirements shall govern the planting and maintenance of landscaping surrounding telecommunications facilities:

(1) Telecommunications facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the support buildings and fence from adjacent property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.

(2) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as telecommunications facilities sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 17).


18.185.090 Information required and factors considered in granting special use permits.

Each applicant requesting a special use permit under this chapter shall submit to the planning and inspection department the following for consideration by the planning commission, historic preservation committee (if applicable) and city council:

(1) The following shall be required for a telecommunications facility, telecommunications tower, or for siting an antenna on an alternative telecommunications structure:

(a) An inventory and contour map of its existing facilities that are within the city and at least five miles from the city line, including specific information about the location, height, coverage and capacity zones, and design of each telecommunications facility, telecommunications tower and antenna.

(b) A conceptual plan of proposed sitings.

(c) A scaled site plan including topography.

(d) A scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings.

(e) Calculations and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements.

(f) Radio frequency coverage.

(g) Setbacks.

(h) Parking.

(i) Security fencing.

(j) Landscaping.

(k) Adjacent uses.

(l) An engineering report, certifying that the proposed telecommunications tower is compatible for a minimum of three similar users including the primary user.

(m) Information demonstrating that antennas, telecommunications towers, and telecommunications facilities for possible co-locator antennas are no higher in elevations than necessary.

(n) Height of the proposed telecommunications tower.

(o) Proximity of the telecommunications tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries.

(p) Nature of the uses on adjacent and nearby properties.

(q) Surrounding topography (at least a 400- foot radius).

(r) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage (at least a 400-foot radius).

(s) Design of the telecommunications facility and telecommunications tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.

(t) Proposed ingress and egress.

(u) Co-location policy which outlines policy regarding company’s willingness to co-locate on other company’s telecommunications towers and company’s willingness to accept other users on its telecommunications towers.

(v) Consistency with the comprehensive plan and the purposes to be served by zoning.

(w) Actual photographs from the site showing adjoining properties and other relevant views and simulated photographic image of the proposed telecommunications tower from the adjoining properties.

(x) Other information deemed by the city to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter.

(2) The following requirements shall pertain to the co-location of an antenna that (1) will be placed on a telecommunications facility or telecommunications tower that was sited under the provisions of this chapter; and (2) will not increase the height of the telecommunications tower:

(a) An inventory and contour map of its existing facilities that are within the city and at least five miles from the city line, including specific information about the location, height, coverage and capacity zones, and design of each telecommunications facility, telecommunications tower and antenna.

(b) A conceptual plan of proposed sitings.

(c) Calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements.

(d) Radio frequency coverage.

(e) Height of telecommunications tower with proposed antenna.

(f) Other information deemed by the city to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter.

The planning and inspection department may share such information with other applicants applying for approvals or special use permits under this chapter or other organizations seeking to locate telecommunications towers within the city; provided, however, that the planning and inspection department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 17).


18.185.100 Removal of defective or abandoned telecommunications facilities.

Any antenna, telecommunications tower, or telecommunications facility found to be defective or unsafe shall be repaired to meet federal, state, and local safety standards or removed within six months at the owner’s or operator’s expense. Any antenna, telecommunications tower, or telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 24 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna, telecommunications tower, or telecommunications facility shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of such removal requirement. Removal includes the removal of the antennas, telecommunications towers, and telecommunications facilities, fence footers, underground cables and support buildings. The buildings and foundation may remain with landowner’s approval. If there are two or more users of a single telecommunications facility or telecommunications tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the antennas and telecommunications tower. If the antenna, telecommunications tower, and telecommunications facility are not removed as herein required, the city may either seek court enforcement of such removal or the city may remove the antenna, telecommunications tower, and telecommunications facility at the expense of the owner or operator of the telecommunications facility as the city, in its sole discretion, determines. (Zoning ordinance Art. 5, § 17).


Chapter 18.190 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES OF LAND

Sections:

18.190.010    Existing uses continued.

18.190.020    Alteration or enlargement of buildings and structures.

18.190.030    Outdoor advertising signs and structures.

18.190.040    Building vacancy – Nonconforming.

18.190.050    Change in use.

18.190.060    Nonconforming uses of land.

18.190.070    Damage.

18.190.080    Pending application for building permits.


18.190.010 Existing uses continued.

A nonconforming building or structure, existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, may be continued and maintained except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Zoning ordinance Art. 6).


18.190.020 Alteration or enlargement of buildings and structures.

A nonconforming building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless said building or structure, including additions and enlargements, is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located. However, if a building or structure is conforming as to use, but nonconforming as to yards or height or off-street parking space, said building or structure may be enlarged or added to; provided, that the enlargement or addition complies with the off-street parking requirements of the district in which said building or structure is located. No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to another location on the lot unless every portion of said building or structure is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located. (Zoning ordinance Art. 6).


18.190.030 Outdoor advertising signs and structures.

No outdoor advertising sign or outdoor advertising structure which, after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, exists as a nonconforming use in any district, shall continue, as herein provided for nonconforming uses, but every such sign or structure shall be removed or changed to conform to the regulation of said district within a period of two years. (Zoning ordinance Art. 6).


18.190.040 Building vacancy – Nonconforming.

A nonconforming building, structure, or portion thereof, which is or hereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a continuous period of two years, shall not thereafter be occupied except by the uses which conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. (Zoning ordinance Art. 6).


18.190.050 Change in use.

A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure (i.e., commercial use in a dwelling) shall not be expanded or extended into any portion of such conforming building or structure nor changed except to a conforming use. If such a nonconforming use of a portion thereof is discontinued or changed to a conforming use, any future use of such building, structure, or portion thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such building or structure is located. A vacant or partially vacant nonconforming building or structure may be occupied by a use for which the building or structure was designed or intended if occupied within a period of six months after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.

The use of a nonconforming building or structure may be changed to a use of the same or a more restricted district classification. However, where the use of nonconforming building or structure is changed to a use of a more restricted district classification, it thereafter shall not be changed to a use of a less restricted district classification. (Zoning ordinance Art. 6).


18.190.060 Nonconforming uses of land.

(1) A nonconforming use of land, where the aggregate value of all permanent buildings or structures is less than $1,000, existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, may be continued for a period of not more than three years therefrom, provided:

(a) Said nonconforming use may not be extended or expanded.

(b) If said nonconforming use or any portion thereof is discontinued for a period of six months, or changed, any future use of land shall be in conformity with the provisions of the district in which said land is located.

(2) The following regulations shall apply to any automobile wrecking, junk, or salvage yard, building material, storage yard, contractor’s yard, or any similar more or less temporary use of land when located as a nonconforming use in any residential district.

(a) Any such use is hereby declared to be a public nuisance in any residential district established by this title and shall be abated, removed, or changed to a conforming use within a period of one year after the date of passage of the ordinance codified in this title.

(b) Whenever any district shall have been changed to a residential district from any other district, the date of abatement, removal, or change of such nonconforming use shall be within a period of one year after the date of change of such district.

(3) Any nonconforming automobile wrecking, junk, or salvage yard in any nonresidential district shall, after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, be brought into full conformity within one year. (Zoning ordinance Art. 6).


18.190.070 Damage.

A building which by reason of the passage of the ordinance codified in this title has become nonconforming, which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public enemy to the extent of more than 50 percent of its value at the time of damage shall not be restored except in conformity with the regulation of the district in which it is located.

When damaged by less than 50 percent of its value, a nonconforming building may be repaired or reconstructed, and used as before the time of damage, provided such repairs or reconstruction are completed within one year of the date of such damage. (Zoning ordinance Art. 6).


18.190.080 Pending application for building permits.

Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layout, plans, construction, site or designated use of any development, building, structure or part thereof, for which official approval and required building permits have been granted before the enactment of the ordinance codified in this title, if said construction, conforming with such plans, shall have been started prior the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title and completion thereof carried on in a normal manner within the subsequent six months completion except for reasons beyond the builder’s control. (Zoning ordinance Art. 6).


Chapter 18.195 ORGANIZATION

Sections:

18.195.010    Administrative officer.

18.195.020    Board of zoning appeals.

18.195.030    Planning commission.

18.195.040    Payment of delinquent taxes required.


18.195.010 Administrative officer.

The provisions of this title shall be administered by the senior planner or designee as zoning administrator who shall:

 (1) Issue and renew where applicable all temporary use permits and make and maintain records thereof.

(2) Maintain and keep current zoning maps and records of amendments thereto.

(3) Conduct inspections as prescribed by this title and such other inspections as are necessary to ensure compliance with the various provisions of this title.

 (4) In addition to any other site plan requirement established in the city code, as may be determined necessary, require a site plan to be filed in order to demonstrate compliance with all provisions of this title.

 (5) Take such other action as may be authorized by law. (Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2011-08. Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 1).


18.195.020 Board of zoning appeals.

(1) The establishment of the Staunton board of zoning appeals, hereafter referred to as the “board,” is hereby established. The board shall be composed of five residents of Staunton who are not members of any governing body. The members shall be appointed by the circuit court. Each board member appointed shall serve for a term of five years and be removable for cause as provided by law. Vacancies shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term of any member whose office becomes vacant.

(2) The board shall elect a chairman from its membership, shall appoint a secretary, and shall prescribe rules for the conduct of its affairs. The board shall meet at the call of the chairman, and at such other times as the board may determine, at a fixed time and place. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. It shall have power to call on any other city departments for assistance in the performance of its duties, and it shall be the duty of such other departments to render all such assistance as may be reasonably required consistent with law.

(3) Powers of the Board of Zoning Appeals. The board, to the extent authorized by provisions of the Virginia Code, has the authority to compel the attendance of witnesses at hearings and to administer oaths, and it shall have the powers and duties as otherwise prescribed by law. (Ord. 2009-04. Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 1).


18.195.030 Planning commission.

The planning commission shall:

(1) Establish such rules of procedure as are necessary to the performance of its functions hereunder.

(2) Review all applications for uses permitted on review in accordance with Chapter 18.210 SCC and this division.

(3) Study and report on all proposed amendments to this title; further, review annually this title and, on the basis of such review, suggest amendments thereto. (Ord. 2009-04. Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 1).


18.195.040 Payment of delinquent taxes required.

(1) Prior to the initiation of any application hereunder for any special exception, special-use permit, variance, rezoning, plat approval, or any other land-use permit, including building permits or certificates of occupancy, the applicant shall produce satisfactory evidence that any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the city, which have been properly assessed against the subject property, have been paid.

(2) The foregoing requirement shall not be applicable to any rezoning of real property initiated by the planning commission or by the city council. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 1).


Chapter 18.200 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS

Sections:

18.200.010    Variances.

18.200.020    Appeal of the zoning administrator’s decision to the board of zoning appeals.

18.200.030    Court review of board of zoning appeals decisions.

18.200.040    Repealed.

18.200.050    Repealed.

18.200.060    Repealed.


18.200.010 Variances.

(1) A variance from the Staunton City Code may be granted to allow, in accordance with the Code of Virginia, certain reasonable deviations from those provisions of the ordinance regulating the shape or area of a lot or parcel of land or the size, height, area, bulk, or location of a building or restrict the utilization of the property, and such need for a variance would not be shared generally by other properties, and provided such variance is not contrary to the purpose of the ordinance.

(2) Standards for Variances. The applicant for a variance has the burden of proof to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the application meets the standards for a variance set forth in the Code of Virginia, and a variance permit shall be granted if the evidence shows that all of the following criteria are met:

(a) The strict application of the terms of the zoning code would unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property or the granting of the variance would alleviate a hardship due to a physical condition relating to the property or improvements thereon at the time of the effective date of the zoning code; or alleviate a hardship by granting a reasonable modification to a property or improvements thereon requested by, or on behalf of, a person with a disability; and

(b) The property interest for which the variance is requested was acquired in good faith and any hardship was not created by the applicant for the variance; and

(c) The granting of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to the adjacent property and nearby properties in the proximity of that geographical area; and

(d) The condition or situation of the property concerned is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the zoning code; and

(e) The granting of the variance does not result in a use that is not otherwise permitted on such property or a change in the zoning classification of the property; and

(f) The relief or remedy sought by the variance application is not available through a special exception process that is authorized in the zoning code pursuant to subdivision 6 of Section 15.2309 of the Code of Virginia or the process for modification of a zoning ordinance pursuant to subdivision A4 of Section 15.2-2286 of the Code of Virginia at the time of the filing of the variance application; and

(g) Variances shall not be granted to allow a use otherwise excluded from the particular district in which requested. No provision of this zoning code shall be construed as granting the board the power to rezone land or to base board decisions on the merits of the purpose and intent of local ordinances duly adopted by council; and

(h) Any variance authorized under the provisions of this chapter shall be the minimum adjustment necessary for the reasonable use of the land; and

(i) No variance permit shall be granted to any standard or requirement of any other part of the Staunton City Code; and

(j) A variance shall not be granted that allows a principal or accessory building to exceed applicable maximum size standards set out in the zoning code; and

(k) Any variance granted to provide a reasonable modification to a property or improvements thereon requested by, or on behalf of, a person with a disability may expire when the person benefited by it is no longer in need of the modification to such property or improvements provided by the variance, subject to the provisions of state and federal fair housing laws, or the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. Section 12131 et seq.), as applicable. If a request for a reasonable modification is made and is appropriate under the provisions of state and federal fair housing laws, or the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. Section 12131 et seq.), as applicable, such request shall be granted unless a variance from the board of zoning appeals under this section is required in order for such request to be granted.

(3) Procedural Requirements for Granting of a Variance.

(a) Before the board shall have the authority to grant a variance, it shall give notice of and hold a public hearing pursuant to the requirements of the Code of Virginia; provided, that when giving notice to the owners, etc., immediately across the street or road from the property affected, the board may give such notice by first class mail;

(b) The applicant claiming the variance has the burden of showing by a preponderance of evidence that the standards for variances set out in subsection (2) of this section have been met;

(c) Any materials relating to a particular case, including a staff recommendation or report furnished to a member of the board, shall be made available without cost to such applicant as soon as practicable thereafter, but in no event more than three business days of providing such materials to a board member. If the applicant requests additional documents or materials to be provided by the city other than those materials provided to the board, such request shall be made pursuant to Section 2.2-3704 of the Code of Virginia. Any such materials furnished to a board member shall also be made available for public inspection pursuant to Section 2.2-3707.F of the Code of Virginia;

(d) The nonlegal staff of the city may have ex parte communications with a member of the board prior to the hearing but may not discuss the facts or law relative to a particular case. The applicant, landowner or the applicant’s agent or attorney may have ex parte communications with a member of the board prior to the hearing but may not discuss the facts or law relative to the particular case. If any ex parte discussion of facts or law in fact occurs, the party engaging in such communication shall inform the other party as soon as practicable and advise the other party of the substance of such communication. For purposes of this section, regardless of whether all parties participate, ex parte communications shall not include discussions as part of a public meeting, or discussions prior to a public meeting to which city staff, the applicant, landowner or his agent or attorney are all invited, including a view of the property. For purposes of this section, “nonlegal staff of the city” means any staff who is not in the office of the attorney for the city, or for the board, or who is appointed by special law pursuant to Section 15.2-1542 of the Code of Virginia. Nothing in this section shall preclude the board from having ex parte communications with any attorney or staff of any attorney where such communications are protected by the attorney-client privilege or other similar privilege or protection of confidentiality. (Ord. 2018-27; Ord. 2016-15. Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 2).


18.200.020 Appeal of the zoning administrator’s decision to the board of zoning appeals.

(1) Power of Board of Zoning Appeals. The board of zoning appeals shall have the power to hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of the Staunton Zoning Code. The decision on such appeal shall be based on the board’s judgment of whether the administrative officer was correct. The determination of the administrative officer shall be presumed to be correct.

(2) Hearing. At a hearing on an appeal, the zoning administrator or designee shall explain the basis for the appeal determination after which the appellant has the burden of proof to rebut such presumption of correctness by a preponderance of the evidence.

(3) Consideration. The board shall consider any applicable ordinances, law and regulations in making its decision.

(4) Compliance. Any appeal of a determination of the zoning administrator to the board shall be in compliance with Virginia law, notwithstanding any other provision of law, general or special.

(5) Short-Term, Recurring Violations. The appeal period for notice of violations for short-term, recurring violations involving temporary or seasonal commercial uses, parking of commercial trucks in residential zoning districts, maximum occupancy limitations of residential dwelling unit, or similar violations, shall be 10 days. (Ord. 2016-15; Ord. 2009-04. Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 2).


18.200.030 Court review of board of zoning appeals decisions.

(1) Petition. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of zoning appeals, or any aggrieved taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the locality, may file with the clerk of the circuit court for the city a petition specifying the grounds on which aggrieved within 30 days after the final decision of the board of zoning appeals. The petition shall be styled “In re: [date] Decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Staunton.”

(2) Court Procedures. Upon the presentation of such petition, the court shall allow a writ of certiorari to review the decision of the board of zoning appeals and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made and served on the clerk of the board, or if no secretary exists, the chair of the board, which shall not be less than 10 days and may be extended by the court and otherwise proceed in accordance with law. Any review of decision of the board shall not be considered an action against the board and the board shall not be a party to the proceedings.

(3) Costs. Costs shall not be allowed against the board unless it shall appear to the court that the board acted in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from. (Ord. 2016-15. Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 2).


18.200.040 Standards for variances.

Repealed by Ord. 2016-15. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 2).


18.200.050 Requirements for the granting of a variance.

Repealed by Ord. 2016-15. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 2).


18.200.060 Court review of board of zoning appeals decision.

Repealed by Ord. 2016-15. (Ord. 2009-04. Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 2).


Chapter 18.205 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY

Sections:

18.205.010    Certificate required.


18.205.010 Certificate required.

No new building shall be occupied and no change in occupancy of a building, or part of a building, shall be made until after the building official shall have issued a certificate of occupancy therefore, as regulated in this title. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 3).


Chapter 18.210 PROCEDURE FOR AUTHORIZING USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW

Sections:

18.210.010    Purpose.

18.210.020    Application.

18.210.030    Public hearing.

18.210.040    Restrictions.

18.210.050    Issuance of permit.

18.210.060    Validity of plans.

18.210.070    Time limit and notification.


18.210.010 Purpose.

The following procedure is established to integrate properly in uses permitted on review with other land uses located in the district. These uses shall be reviewed by the planning commission and authorized or rejected by the city council under the following procedures. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 4).


18.210.020 Application.

An application shall be filed with the planning commission for review. Said application shall show the location and intended use of the site, the names of the property owners and existing land uses within 200 feet, and any other material pertinent to the request which the planning commission may require. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 4).


18.210.030 Public hearing.

Upon application, the planning commission shall give a 10-day notification of a public hearing. Such notice of time and place of such hearing shall be published in a daily paper of general circulation. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 4).


18.210.040 Restrictions.

In the exercise of its review, the planning commission may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, or other features of the proposed use or buildings as it may deem advisable in the furtherance of the general purposes of this title. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 4).


18.210.050 Issuance of permit.

Upon completion of the necessary application, hearing, and approval of the city council, the building official shall issue the building permit subject to all applicable rules, regulations, and conditions. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 4).


18.210.060 Validity of plans.

All approved plans, conditions, restrictions, and rules made a part of the approval of the city council, shall constitute certification on the part of the applicant that the proposed use shall conform to such regulations at all times. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 4).


18.210.070 Time limit and notification.

All applications for uses permitted on review shall be decided within 45 days of the date of application and the applicant shall be provided with either a written notice of approval or denial. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 4).


Chapter 18.215 AMENDMENTS

Sections:

18.215.010    General provision.

18.215.020    Application.

18.215.030    Public hearing.

18.215.040    Report to the city council.

18.215.050    Time limit.

18.215.060    Proposed amendment.

18.215.070    Conditional zoning.


18.215.010 General provision.

The regulations, restrictions, boundaries, and options set forth in this title may be amended, supplemented, revised, or repealed from time to time as conditions warrant, subject to the following conditions. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 5).


18.215.020 Application.

(1) An application for a proposed amendment or rezoning shall be filed with the planning commission.

(2) An application, except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, may be instituted by a property owner or his designated representative or by the planning commission or other appropriate governmental agency other than the council.

(3) An application for conditional zoning may be made by a property owner(s) or his designated representative. Said application shall be in writing, signed by the property owner(s) placing certain conditions and restrictions on the use and development of the property of that property owner(s) in addition to the regulations provided for in the zoning district. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 5).


18.215.030 Public hearing.

On application, the planning commission shall schedule a hearing having first given notice of such intention published once a week for two successive weeks in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the city. Such notice shall specify the time (five to 10 days of the final publication of the paper) and the place of the hearing at which persons affected may appear and present their views.

Except upon application of a property owner or his agent, when a proposed amendment of this title involves a change in the zoning classification of 25 or less parcels of land, then in addition to the advertising as above required, written notice shall be given at least five days before the hearing to the owner or owners, their agent, or the occupant, of all abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected. Notice sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of such owner, as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books, shall be deemed adequate compliance with this requirement.

The planning commission shall consider and make recommendations on all proposed amendments, taking into account the testimony at the hearing, a site inspection of the property in question, the recommendations from the health department or other official bodies, and the standards provided for amendments. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 5).


18.215.040 Report to the city council.

The planning commission shall make a report to the city council upon all such applications and no amendment shall be passed except by a majority vote of the entire membership of the city council. Nothing herein is intended nor shall it be taken to abridge or in any way limit the power of the council to amend this title on its own motion without prior submission of the amendment to the planning commission. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 5).


18.215.050 Time limit.

All amendments initiated by application filed with the planning commission shall be finally acted upon by council within 60 days following the date of the public hearing, provided for in SCC 18.215.030, and failure of the council finally to act upon any proposal within the said 60-day period, shall be in all respects equivalent to rejection thereof. The Staunton city council shall not consider an application to amend the zoning of a parcel of land or uses permitted on review for a period of a year from the date of first action on a prior application, if such application relates to an amendment to the same zoning or permitted use on review as applied for in the previous application. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 5).


18.215.060 Proposed amendment.

A proposed amendment shall be considered on its own merit using the following criteria as a guide:

(1) Text or Map Amendments. The following conditions shall be met for all amendments:

(a) The proposed amendment shall be necessary because of substantially changed or changing conditions of the area and districts affected, or in the city generally.

(b) The proposed amendment shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of this title.

(c) The proposed amendment shall not adversely affect any other part of the city, nor shall any direct or indirect adverse effects results from such amendment.

(d) The proposed amendment shall be consistent with and not in conflict with Staunton’s master plan.

(2) No new zoning district shall be created to contain an area of less than four acres. The four acres need not be under common ownership.

(3) Errors or oversights as may be found in the title as originally adopted shall be corrected under normal amendment procedures. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 5).


18.215.070 Conditional zoning.

An application for conditional zoning shall be considered and administered in accordance with Sections 15.2-2296 through 15.2-2303.4 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, and said sections are incorporated herein as a part hereof to the same extent and purpose as though such sections were herein set out in full. The administrator is hereby vested with all necessary authority to administer and enforce such conditions and restrictions. (Ord. 2018-28. Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 5).


Chapter 18.220 FEES

Sections:

18.220.010    Procedure.

18.220.020    Fees established.


18.220.010 Procedure.

Fees shall be established by the planning commission with approval of the city council. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 6).


18.220.020 Fees established.

(1) The fees for the following applications or permits are as follows:

	Special use permit or rezoning application fee	$250.00 

	Site plan submittal or resubmittal 	$200.00

	Zoning official determination letter	$75.00

	Variance application or appeal to BZA	$200.00

	Zoning permit fee	$50.00

(2) Projects by and on property owned and operated by the city of Staunton, Virginia, or the school board of the city of Staunton, Virginia, shall be exempt from such zoning-related fees. (Ord. 2019-05; Ord. 2010-07; Ord. 2005-12. Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 6).


Chapter 18.225 PENALTIES

Sections:

18.225.010    Penalty.


18.225.010 Penalty.

It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, maintain, or use any building or structure, or to use any land in violation of any regulation in this title. Any person, firm, association, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of, any of the provisions of this title shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of $50.00, together with the cost of the action; every day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. Compliance therewith may also be enforced in an injunctional order at the suit of the city, or the owner or owners of real estate within the district affected by the regulation of this title. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 7).


Chapter 18.230 CONFLICTS WITH OTHER LAWS

Sections:

18.230.010    Conflicts with other laws.


18.230.010 Conflicts with other laws.

In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this title, these provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, and the general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this title are at variance with the requirements of other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or codes, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern. (Zoning ordinance Art. 7, § 8).


APPENDICES

Appendix A    Material of Historical Interest

Appendix B    Annexations

Appendix C    Boundary Adjustments


APPENDIX A MATERIAL OF HISTORICAL INTEREST*

Article I.    Historical Statement

Article II.    The First Charter and References to Former Charters

*Editor’s note – Appendices A and B are reprinted herein from the appendices set out in the 1964 and 1985 Staunton City Code.


APPENDIX B ANNEXATIONS*

Article I.    1937 Order

Article II.    1947 Order

Article III.    1955 Order

Article IV.    1986 Order

*Note – See editor’s note for Appendix A.


APPENDIX C BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS

Article I.    2008 Order



-----------------------------

The Staunton City Code is current through Ordinance 2020-21, passed August 13, 2020.

Disclaimer: The City Clerk’s office has the official version of the Staunton City Code. Users should contact the City Clerk’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.staunton.va.us/ City Telephone: (540) 332-3810

Code Publishing Company