CODE OF THE TOWN OF VINTON, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Town Council, 1999 
____________ 
Adopted: May 4, 1999 
Effective: May 4, 1999 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
VINTON, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Bradley E. Grose 
Mayor 
____________ 
Keith N. Liles, Vice Mayor 
Sabrina McCarty 
Janet Scheid 
Michael W. Stovall 
Town Council 
____________ 
Barry W. Thompson 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Theresa Fontana 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Susan N. Johnson 
Town Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
VINTON, VIRGINIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Charles R. Hill 
Mayor 
____________ 
Robert R. Altice, Vice Mayor 
Donald L. Davis 
Roy G. McCarty, Jr. 
William E. Obenchain, Jr. 
Town Council 
____________ 
B. Clayton Goodman, III 
Town Manager 
____________ 
William L. Heartwell, III 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Carolyn S. Ross 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Vinton, Virginia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982 Code, as supplemented through March 19, 1996, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the town council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. William L. Heartwell, III, Town Attorney, and Ms. Carolyn S. Ross, Town Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Vinton, Virginia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Vinton, Virginia. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Vinton, Virginia. 1999. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 708 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the Town of Vinton, Virginia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Vinton, Virginia: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of the Town of Vinton, Virginia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 98, each inclusive, and appendixes A and B, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 17, 1998, and not included in the Code, or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance of the town shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies, such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the town council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 17, 1998, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective May 4, 1999. 
    Passed and Adopted this 4th day of May, 1999. 
APPROVED: 
/s/   
      Charles R. Hill, Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/    
      Carolyn S. Ross, Clerk of Council   Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the forgoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the town council of the Town of Vinton, Virginia, held on the 4th day of May, 1999. 
/s/    
      Carolyn S. Ross, Clerk of Council   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 888  6-16-2009 Included 8 890  7- 7-2009 Included 8 892 12-15-2009 Included 8 893 12-15-2009 Included 8 902  7-20-2010 Included 8 903 10-19-2010 Included 8 908  4- 5-2011 Included 8 909  4- 5-2011 Included 8 910  4- 5-2011 Included 8 911  4- 5-2011 Included 8 912  4- 5-2011 Included 8 913  4- 5-2011 Included 8 917  9- 6-2011 Included 8 918  9- 6-2011 Included 8 Ch. 807, 2010 Leg. Sess.  4-21-2010 Included 9 926  9- 4-2012 Included 9 928 11- 6-2012 Included 9 930  2- 5-2013 Included 10 931  3-19-2013 Included 10 936  5- 7-2013 Included 10 938  6- 4-2013 Included 10 942  9-17-2013 Included 10 948  3-18-2014 Included 11 949  4-15-2014 Included 11 950  4-15-2014 Included 11 951  4-15-2014 Included 11 955  7- 1-2014 Included 11 956 10-21-2014 Included 11 952  5-20-2014 Included 12 960  4-21-2015 Included 12 970  4-21-2016 Included 12 974  6-21-2016 Included 12 975  7- 5-2016 Included 12 982 11-15-2016 Included 13 987  6-20-2017 Included 13 992  4- 3-2018 Included 13 995  6- 5-2018 Included 13  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Charter is set out herein as enacted by section 1 of chapter 618 of the 1981 Acts of the General Assembly. Sections 2 and 3 of said chapter 618 read as follows: 
 "2.  That Chapter 423 of the Acts of Assembly of 1936 [former charter] is repealed. 
 "3.  That an emergency exists and this act is in force from its passage." 
Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes have been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

CHAPTER 1. - INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1.1. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the present limits of the Town of Vinton, as such limits are now or may hereafter be altered and established by law, shall constitute and continue to be a body politic and corporate, to be known and designated as the Town of Vinton, and as such shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, contract and be contracted with, and may have a corporate seal which it may alter, renew, or amend at its pleasure by proper ordinance. 
Sec. 1.2. - Form of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as the "town manager plan." Pursuant to its provisions, and subject only to the limitations imposed by the Constitution of Virginia and by this charter, all powers of the town shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as "the council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the town manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the town. 
Sec. 1.3. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the town shall be as established by the General Assembly, in Chapter 423 of the Acts of Assembly of 1936, and by order of the Circuit Court of Roanoke County, Virginia, entered in the Common Law Order Book 23, page 167. 
CHAPTER 2. - POWERS 

Sec. 2.1. - General grant of powers. 
    The Town of Vinton shall have and may exercise all powers which are now or hereafter may be conferred upon or delegated to towns under the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated herein and no enumeration of particular powers by this charter shall be held to be exclusive, and the town shall have, exercise, and enjoy all of the rights, immunities, powers, and privileges and be subject to all the duties and obligations now appertaining to and incumbent on the town as a municipal corporation. 
Sec. 2.2. - Adoption of certain sections of the Code of Virginia. 
    The powers granted in section 2.1 of this charter include specifically, but are not limited to, all powers set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-837 through 15.1-907, inclusive, as amended, and all acts in furtherance thereof and supplemental thereto. 
Editor's note- The statutes cited in the above section have been transferred to various sections of Code of Virginia, title 15.2. 
Sec. 2.3. - Eminent domain. 
    The powers of eminent domain as set forth in Code of Virginia, titles 15.1 and 25, as amended, are hereby conferred upon the Town of Vinton. 
Editor's note- Code of Virginia, title 15.1, has been superseded by Code of Virginia, title 15.2. 
Sec. 2.4. - Proration of personal property tax. 
(a)  The Town of Vinton may provide by ordinance for the levy and collection of personal property tax on motor vehicles, trailers, and boats which have acquired a situs within such town after the tax assessment day for the balance of the tax year. Such tax shall be prorated on a monthly basis. The ordinance may exclude boats from the property subject to proration of the personal property tax. For purposes of proration, a period of more than one-half of a month shall be counted as a full month and a period of less than one-half of a month shall not be counted. 
    The ordinance shall also provide for relief from such tax and a refund of the appropriate amount of the tax already paid, which shall be prorated on a monthly basis, where any motor vehicle, trailer, or boat loses its situs within such town after the tax assessment day or after the day on which it acquires a situs. When any person sells or otherwise transfers title to a motor vehicle, trailer, or boat with a situs in the town after the tax day or situs day, the tax shall be relieved, prorated on a monthly basis, and the appropriate amount of tax already paid shall be refunded or credited, at the option of the taxpayer, against the tax due on any motor vehicle, trailer, or boat owned by the taxpayer during the same tax year by the treasurer of such town. Such refund shall be made within thirty (30) days of the date such tax is relieved. When any person, after the tax assessment day, acquires a motor vehicle, trailer, or boat with a situs in the town, the tax shall be assessed on the motor vehicle, trailer, or boat for the portion of the tax year during which the new owner owns the motor vehicle, trailer, or boat and it has a situs within the town. 
(b)  The ordinance shall provide for the filing of returns and payment of the tax. The ordinance shall also exempt property from the levy of such personal property tax for any tax year or portion thereof during which the property was legally assessed by another jurisdiction in the Commonwealth and the tax paid. The ordinance may provide that, notwithstanding any other date for billing and payment of personal property tax, the town may bill all personal property taxes assessed for a portion of the tax year less than the full year on or after December 15 of each year. The ordinance may further provide that such taxes shall be due not less than thirty (30) days after the date of the tax bill. If the tax is not paid when due, the penalty and the interest otherwise provided for by law shall be imposed based on the established due date. 
(Acts 1990, Ch. 30, § 1) 
CHAPTER 3. - COUNCIL 

Sec. 3.1. - Election, qualification and term of office for mayor and councilmen. 
    The Town of Vinton shall be governed by a town council composed of a mayor and four councilmen, all of whom shall be qualified voters of the town, to be elected from the town at large. Any person qualified to vote in the town shall be eligible for the office of mayor or councilman. The mayor and the councilmen in office at the time of the adoption of this charter shall continue in office until their successors are duly elected and qualified. An election for two councilmen shall be held on the first Tuesday in May, nineteen hundred eighty-two, and on the first Tuesday in May of every second year thereafter. A mayor shall be elected on the first Tuesday in May, nineteen hundred eighty-four and every four years thereafter unless a vacancy in office occurs, in which case the provisions of section 3.5 of this charter shall control. The mayor and councilmen shall enter upon their duties on the first day of July next succeeding their election, and shall each serve for a term of four years or until their successors have qualified. 
(Ch. 249, 1998, § 1) 
Sec. 3.1.1. - Holding other office. 
    Except as otherwise authorized by law, the mayor or a councilman shall not be eligible during his term of office, or for one year thereafter, to any compensated town employment. If appointed by the council to a board or commission, he may be compensated as a member. 
(Ch. 199, 2003) 
Sec. 3.2. - Vacancies on council. 
    Vacancies on the council shall be filled within forty-five days of when the vacancy occurs by a majority vote of the remaining members of the council. The person appointed by council shall hold office until the qualified voters fill the vacancy by special election pursuant to Article 6 (§ 24.2-225 et seq.) of Chapter 2 of Title 24.2 of the Code of Virginia (1950), and the person so elected has qualified. 
(Ch. 249, 1998, § 1; Ch. 807, § 1, 2010) 
Sec. 3.3. - Council a continuing body. 
    The council shall be a continuing body, and no measures pending before such body, or contract or obligation incurred, shall abate or be discontinued because of the expiration of the term of office or removal of any councilmembers. 
Sec. 3.4. - Mayor and vice-mayor. 
    The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the council, have the same right to speak therein as other members and shall have a vote but no veto. He shall be recognized as the head of the town government for all ceremonial purposes, the purposes of military law, and the service of civil process, and shall authenticate by his signature, such documents or instruments as the council, this charter, or the laws of the Commonwealth shall require. At its first meeting, the council shall choose by a majority vote of all the members thereof one of their number to be vice-mayor for the ensuing two years. The vice-mayor shall in the absence or disability of the mayor perform the duties of the mayor. In the absence or disability of both mayor and vice-mayor the council, by majority vote of those present, shall choose one of their number as acting mayor. 
Sec. 3.5. - Vacancy in office of mayor. 
    A vacancy in the office of mayor shall be filled within thirty days of when the vacancy occurs, for the unexpired portion of the term by a majority vote of council. If, however, the unexpired portion of the term is more than two years, the person appointed by council shall serve only until the next regular councilmanic election. At such election, the vacancy shall be filled by the electorate for a four-year term beginning on July 1 of the year of the election. Succeeding mayoral elections shall be for every four years after the election at which the vacancy was filled. 
(Ch. 249, 1998, § 1) 
Sec. 3.6. - Meetings of council. 
    The council shall fix the time of its stated meetings and it shall meet at least once a month and, except as herein provided, the council shall establish its own rules of procedure and such rules as are necessary for the orderly conduct of its business not inconsistent with the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. A journal shall be kept of its official proceedings, and its meetings shall be open to the public. Three members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting. Special meetings may be called at any time by the mayor, by any three members of the council, or by the town manager; provided that, the members of the council are given reasonable notice of such meetings and no business shall be transacted at a special meeting thereof except that for which it shall be called. If all members are present this provision may be waived by a majority vote of the council. No ordinance, resolution, motion, or vote shall be adopted by the council unless it shall have received the affirmative votes of a majority of the members present. 
Sec. 3.7. - Powers of council. 
    In addition to exercising the powers of the town specified in Chapter 2 of this charter, the council shall have the power to make such rules as are necessary for the orderly conduct of its business and for the administration of the town government not inconsistent with the laws of Virginia. 
Sec. 3.8. - Salaries and expenses. 
    The council by ordinance may establish the salary of the mayor and members of council as provided for in Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-827 and 15.1-827.1, and may also authorize monthly expense allotments or expense accounts for the mayor and members of council. However, all claims for expenses shall be for reasonable expenses to the extent permitted by law incurred in the conduct of official town business and shall be itemized and documented by stamped paid receipts to the extent feasible. 
(Acts 1985, Ch. 14) 
Editor's note- The statutes cited in the above section have been transferred to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1414.7. 
CHAPTER 4. - APPOINTIVE OFFICERS 

Sec. 4.1. - Appointments. 
    At the first meeting in July following each councilmanic election, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the council shall appoint the following officers: 
Sec. 4.2. - Town manager. 
    A town manager who shall be the administrative and executive head of the municipal government. He shall be chosen by the council without regard to political beliefs and solely upon the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. 
Sec. 4.3. - Town treasurer. 
    A town treasurer, whose duties shall be as prescribed by the council. 
Sec. 4.4. - Town clerk. 
    A town clerk, who also may be the town manager, and/or the town treasurer, whose duties shall be as prescribed by council. 
Sec. 4.5. - Town attorney. 
    A town attorney, who shall be an attorney-at-law licensed to practice under the laws of the Commonwealth. He shall receive such compensation and fees as shall be provided by the council by ordinance or resolution. His duties shall be as prescribed by the council. 
(Ch. 272, 1992, § 1) 
Sec. 4.6. - Police and fire department officers. 
    The council, in its discretion, may provide a chief of police and a fire chief whose duties shall be as prescribed by council. In accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-796, there shall not be created in the town the office of town sergeant. 
Editor's note- The statute cited in the above section has been repealed. 
Sec. 4.7. - Deputies and assistants. 
    The council may appoint such deputies and assistants to appointive offices as it may deem necessary. 
Sec. 4.8. - Duties. 
    Each officer, deputy, and assistant, as the case may be, shall have such duties not inconsistent with the Constitution, general laws of the Commonwealth or this charter, and shall be paid such compensation as the council may determine. 
Sec. 4.9. - Term of office. 
    Appointees hereunder shall serve at all times at the pleasure of the council and may be dismissed at any time by the council. 
Sec. 4.10. - Bonds. 
    Officers, deputies, and assistants shall execute such bonds as may be required by resolution of the council. 
Sec. 4.11. - Vacancies of office. 
    The council may fill any vacancy in any appointive office. 
Sec. 4.12. - Appointment of one person to more than one office. 
    The council may appoint the same person to more than one appointive office. 
Sec. 4.13. - Boards and commissions. 
    The council, in its discretion, may appoint such boards and commissions as it deems necessary. 
CHAPTER 5. - COURTS 

Sec. 5.1. - Jurisdiction of courts within the town. 
    The Roanoke County General District Court and the Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court, and the Circuit Court of Roanoke County, or their successors, shall have the same jurisdiction both criminal and civil within the town as provided by law. 
CHAPTER 6. - FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6.1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the town shall begin on July one of each year and end on June thirty of the year following. 
CHAPTER 7. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 7.1. - Elections governed by State law. 
    All town elections shall be held and conducted in the manner prescribed by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Sec. 7.2. - Applicability outside town. 
    All ordinances of the town, so far as they are applicable, shall apply on, in, or to all land, buildings, and structures owned by or leased or rented to the town and located outside the town. 
Sec. 7.3. - Ordinances continued in force. 
    All ordinances now in force in the town, not inconsistent with this charter, shall be and remain in force until altered, amended, or repealed by the council. 
Sec. 7.4. - Severability of provisions. 
    If any clause, sentence, paragraph, or part of this charter shall for any reason be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder of the charter but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered. 
Sec. 7.5. - Disclosure of interest. 
    The council is hereby empowered to enact a conflict of interest and disclosure ordinance to govern elected and/or appointed town officials not inconsistent with the general law. 
Sec. 7.6. - Legislative procedure. 
    Except in dealing with parliamentary procedure, the council shall act only by ordinance or resolution, and with the exception of ordinances making appropriations, or authorizing the contracting of indebtedness, shall be confined to one general subject. 
Sec. 7.7. - Water and sewer service charges. 
    In operating public water and sewer services, the town may charge a different rate for any such services furnished to customers without the corporate limits from the rates charged for similar services to customers within the corporate limits. The town may provide by ordinance that all such unpaid charges and interest thereon shall constitute a lien on the real estate served by such waterline or sewer. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Year Chapter Section  Section 
this Charter 1985 14 3.8 1990 30 1 2.4 1992 272 1 4.5 1998 249 1 3.1 3.2 3.5 2003 199       Added 3.1.1 2010 807 1 3.2  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Incorporation, boundaries, ch. 1; miscellaneous, ch. 7. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the Town of Vinton, Virginia" and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as "Vinton Town Code." 
(Code 1982, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to codify and recodify its ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
    In the interpretation and construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the town, the following rules of construction and definitions shall be observed, unless, they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing, with such surety, if any, as the council may direct, shall be sufficient. 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the town, as it now exists or as it may be amended in the future. 
    Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is used, without further qualification, it shall mean the Code of the Town of Vinton, Virginia, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. When a notice is required to be given or any other act to be done a certain time before any proceeding, there must be that time, exclusive of the day for such proceeding, but the day on which such notice is given or such act is done may be counted as part of the time. When a notice is required to be given or any other act to be done within a certain time after any event, that time shall be allowed, in addition to the day on which the event occurred. 
    Council. The term "council" or "town council" shall mean the council of the Town of Vinton, Virginia. 
    County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Roanoke in the State of Virginia. 
    Following. The word "following," when used by way of reference to any section in this Code, shall be construed to mean next following that in which such reference is made. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females and to corporations, as well as males. 
    Health department. The term "health department" shall mean the health department of Roanoke County, Virginia. 
    Health officer. The term "health officer" shall mean the director of public health of Roanoke County, Virginia, or his authorized representative. 
    In the town; within the town. The words "in the town" or "within the town" shall mean any territory jurisdiction of which, for the exercise of its regulatory power, has been conferred on the town by public or private law. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise expressly stated. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
    Occupant; tenant. The word "occupant" or "tenant," applied to a building or land, shall mean any person who holds a written or oral lease of, or actually occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Officers, agencies. Whenever reference is made to a particular officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency, without further qualification, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Town of Vinton, Virginia." A reference to a specific officer shall include that officer's duly authorized deputies and agents. 
    Official time standard. Whenever particular hours are referred to, the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may be in current use in the town. 
    Or; and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Percent. The word "percent" shall be equivalent to the words "per centum." 
    Person. The word "person" shall include any individual, corporation, firm, joint stock company, partnership, association, company, business, trust, estate, joint venture or other legal entity. 
    Preceding. The word "preceding," when used by way of reference to any section in this Code, shall be construed to mean next preceding that in which such reference is made. 
    Property. The word "property" shall mean real, personal or mixed property. 
    Public grounds. The words "public grounds" shall mean the parks and all public lands owned by the town, and those parts of public places which do not form travelled parts of streets, as defined in this section. 
    Section numbers. Whenever reference is made to a section by number only (e.g., "section 1-1"), without further qualification, it shall be construed as referring to that section of this Code. 
    Shall; may. The word "shall" shall be mandatory; the word "may" shall be permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature; subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write, his name being written near it and being witnessed by a person who writes his own name as a witness. 
    State; commonwealth. The word "state" or "commonwealth" shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Virginia." 
    State code. References to the "State Code" or the "Code of Virginia" shall mean the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
    Street. The word "street" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel in the town, including the streets and alleys, and, for law enforcement purposes, the entire width between the boundary lines of all private roads or private streets which have been specifically designated "highways" by an ordinance adopted by the governing body. 
    Swear; sworn. The word "swear" or "sworn" shall be equivalent to the word "affirm" or "affirmed" in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense may include the future, as well as the past and present. 
    Town. The word "town" shall mean the Town of Vinton, in the County of Roanoke and State of Virginia. 
    Written; in writing. The words "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
(Code 1982, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Rules of construction and definitions applicable to state law, Code of Virginia, § 1-13 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines and other headings. 
    The catchlines of the sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article or division. 
(Code 1982, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to sections of state code, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.9. 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the sections. 
Sec. 1-5. - Editor's notes and references. 
    The editor's notes, Charter references, cross references and state law references in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the user of this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code, or its application to any persons or circumstances, shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, or their application. 
(Code 1982, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions of Code construed as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the Vinton Town Code adopted on February 16, 1982, and ordinances adopted subsequent thereto and included in this Code, shall be construed as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1982, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-8. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the town; 
(2)  Any ordinance granting any franchise or right; 
(3)  Any ordinance appropriating funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to any public improvement or assessments therefor; 
(4)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the town; 
(5)  Any ordinance authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any public improvement or assessments therefor; 
(6)  Any ordinance prescribing the rate, fee or charge for any permit or license issued by the town or for any service rendered by the town; 
(7)  The zoning ordinance, being Ordinance No. 634, adopted on December 19, 1995, and set out in appendix B of this Code, or any amendment thereto, including amendments to the zoning map and ordinances zoning or rezoning specific property; 
(8)  The subdivision ordinance, being Ordinance No. 686, adopted on January 20, 1998, and set out in appendix A of this Code, or any amendment thereto, including ordinances dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision of the town; 
(9)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; or 
(10)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-9. - Code does not affect prior rights, offenses and other actions. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repeal of chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code, so that a reference to the Code shall be understood to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of the Town of Vinton, Virginia, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as enacted. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of the Town of Vinton, Virginia, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as enacted. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1982, § 1-8) 
State Law reference- Authority to supplement Code, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433. 
Sec. 1-12. - Copies of Code and supplements to be available for public inspection. 
    At least three copies of this Code and of every supplement thereto shall be kept in the office of the town clerk and shall there be available for public inspection, during normal business hours. 
(Code 1982, § 1-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433. 
Sec. 1-13. - Classification of and penalties for violations; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the town or any rule or regulation promulgated by any officer or agency of the town, under authority duly vested in such officer or agency, it is provided that a violation of any provision thereof shall constitute a class 1, 2, 3 or 4 misdemeanor, such violation shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Class 1 misdemeanor. Confinement in jail for not more than 12 months and a fine of not more than $2,500.00, either or both. 
(2)  Class 2 misdemeanor. Confinement in jail for not more than six months and a fine of not more than $1,000.00, either or both. 
(3)  Class 3 misdemeanor. A fine of not more than $500.00. 
(4)  Class 4 misdemeanor. A fine of not more than $250.00. 
(b)  Whenever in any provision of this Code or in any other ordinance of the town any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided for the violation of such provision and such violation is not described as being of a particular class of misdemeanor, such violation shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor and be punished as prescribed in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or any other section of this Code, no penalty for a violation of this Code or other ordinance of the town shall exceed that prescribed by general law for a like offense. 
(d)  Each day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, except where otherwise provided. 
(Code 1982, § 1-10) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1429; bonds of persons convicted, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1430; injunctive relief against continuing violation of ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1432; classification of misdemeanors and punishment therefor, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-9, 18.2-11. 
Sec. 1-14. - Liability of corporations, organizations and agents for violations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code or other ordinance of the town by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall, in every case, also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment, as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization, for the violation by it of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the town, where such violation was the act or omission or the result of the act, omission or order of any such person. 
(Code 1982, § 1-11) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Form of government, § 1.2; powers, ch. 2; miscellaneous, ch. 7. 
Cross reference- Courts, ch. 22; elections, ch. 26; offenses against the administration of justice, § 62-61 et seq.; planning, ch. 70; taxation, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 94; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations, app. B, art. VII. 
State Law reference- The Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3700 et seq.; State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3100 et seq.; Virginia Public Procurement Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4300 et seq.; counties, cities and towns, Code of Virginia, title 15.2; Virginia Public Records Act, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-76 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Execution of deeds and other instruments requiring use of seal. 
    All deeds for the conveyance or exchange of the property of the town, and all agreements or other instruments requiring the seal of the town to be affixed thereto, shall, when authorized by the council, be authenticated in the name of the town by the mayor, and the seal of the town shall be affixed thereto and attested by the town clerk. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-2. - Method of sale of land for failure to pay local or special assessments, or other expenses. 
    The method of making sale of any lands, lots or premises for nonpayment of the amount of any local or special assessments thereon, or for the nonpayment of any expense incurred by the town in abating any nuisance thereon, or cutting or removing weeds therefrom, shall be the same as the method employed for the sale of lands, lots or premises for delinquent taxes. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4) 
Secs. 2-3-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- General powers of council, § 1.2; council generally, ch. 3; legislative procedure, § 7.6. 
Cross reference- Elections, ch. 26. 

Sec. 2-21. - When regular council meetings held. 
    The council shall hold its regular meetings on the first and third Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1982, § 2-2) 
Charter reference- Council to fix time for stated meetings, § 3.6. 
Secs. 2-22-2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Appointive officers, ch. 4. 
Cross reference- Animal control officer, § 10-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-41. - Salaries, bonds, benefits for officers and employees. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance relating to salaries or bonds of town officers and employees, or to social security, retirement or pension benefits for such officers and employees, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-42. - Disclosure statement required to be filed. 
    In addition to those officials specified in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3115, the following persons shall file the statement required in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3115, namely: 
(1)  The town manager; and 
(2)  The town treasurer. 
(Code 1982, § 2-6) 
Secs. 2-43-2-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TOWN MANAGER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Appointment of town manager, § 4.2. 

Sec. 2-56. - To be purchasing agent. 
    The town manager shall be the purchasing agent of the town. He may delegate this authority only in accordance with written policies which have been expressly approved by the town council. All purchases of goods or services must conform to the requirements of the town's purchasing policy and the Virginia Public Procurement Act as found in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4300 et seq. 
(Code 1982, § 2-16; Ord. No. 661, § 2-16, 2-4-1997; Ord. No. 942, 9-17-2013) 
Sec. 2-57. - Orders by council and members to subordinates. 
    Neither the council nor any of its members nor the mayor shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the town manager, either publicly or privately. 
(Code 1982, § 2-17) 
Secs. 2-58-2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TOWN CLERK[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Appointment of town clerk, § 4.4. 

Sec. 2-71. - Attendance at council meetings. 
    The town clerk shall attend every meeting of the council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-28) 
Sec. 2-72. - General duties as to books and records. 
    In addition to the books of account and records provided for in the Charter, the town clerk shall keep such other books and records as may be necessary in the discharge of the functions of his office. He shall file and preserve all papers and records that come into his hands as clerk. 
(Code 1982, § 2-29) 
Sec. 2-73. - Examination of clerk's books and papers. 
    The books and papers of the town clerk shall, at all times, be subject to examination by any member of the council or by any person designated by the council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-30) 
Sec. 2-74. - Transmission to council of reports of town officers. 
    The town clerk shall transmit to the council, monthly, the reports of town officers. 
(Code 1982, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-75. - Duty to keep journal of council proceedings; attestation and publication of ordinances, papers and proceedings. 
    The town clerk shall keep an accurate journal of the proceedings of the council. He shall attest and publish, as clerk, all ordinances or other papers or proceedings required by the council to be published. 
(Code 1982, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-76. - Duties with respect to book of ordinances and resolutions. 
(a)  The town clerk shall enter in a book copies of each ordinance or resolution having the effect of an ordinance passed by the town council. The book in which ordinances and resolutions are thus entered shall be known as the "Ordinances and Resolutions at Large of the Town of Vinton, Virginia" and shall be indexed. 
(b)  The clerk shall write on the first page of every ordinance or resolution entered in the book mentioned in this section, if the same has been amended or repealed, the words "amended" or "repealed," with a reference to the page of such book where the amending or repealing ordinance or resolution can be found. 
(Code 1982, § 2-33) 
Secs. 2-77-2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TOWN TREASURER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Appointment of town treasurer, § 4.3. 

Sec. 2-91. - Bond. 
    Before entering on the duties of his office, the treasurer shall execute an official bond, with satisfactory sureties, in such penalty as the council may prescribe. 
(Code 1982, § 2-45) 
Sec. 2-92. - Deposit of funds. 
    All money belonging to the town shall be deposited, by the town treasurer, in the name of the town, in such banks and other financial institutions as are designated by the town council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-46) 
State Law reference- Security for public deposits, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4400 et seq. 
Sec. 2-93. - Execution of checks. 
    All checks drawn against any account of the town shall be signed by the treasurer and countersigned by the town manager; provided, however, that in case of the absence or disability of either the treasurer or town manager, the assistant town manager or the town clerk may sign in such absence or disability. 
(Code 1982, § 2-47) 
Sec. 2-94. - Record of receipts, disbursements and accounts generally. 
    It shall be the duty of the treasurer to keep suitable books in which all receipts and disbursements shall be properly entered and in which the accounts of all persons accountable to the town shall be kept. Each fund shall be separated. All accounts of the town shall be kept correctly and plainly. 
(Code 1982, § 2-48) 
Sec. 2-95. - Record of checks issued. 
    The treasurer shall keep a record of all town checks issued by him, showing number, date, to whom issued, on what account, amount and date of payment by the treasurer. 
(Code 1982, § 2-49) 
Sec. 2-96. - Monthly financial statement. 
    The treasurer shall each month prepare a full statement to the town council of all receipts, disbursements and expenditures for the month preceding, which shall also show the liabilities and resources of the town and the balance, if any, in his hands at that time, as well as all other things necessary to show the true financial condition of the town. 
(Code 1982, § 2-50) 
Secs. 2-97-2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TOWN ATTORNEY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- Appointment and qualifications of town attorney, § 4.5. 

Sec. 2-111. - Attendance at council meetings. 
    The town attorney shall attend council meetings. 
(Code 1982, § 2-61) 
Sec. 2-112. - Compensation generally. 
    In addition to the annual retainer paid the town attorney by way of salary, he shall have additional compensation for all special services rendered the council, in such amount as may be agreed upon by the town attorney and the council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-62) 
Charter reference- Compensation of town attorney, § 4.5. 
Sec. 2-113. - Reimbursement for expenses. 
    From time to time, the town attorney shall present for payment any actual outlay or expense which the performance of his duties has entailed. 
(Code 1982, § 2-63) 
Sec. 2-114. - Annual report. 
    The town attorney shall make an annual report to the council, giving a condensed statement of the business done in his office for the town in the year immediately preceding such report. This report shall contain a list of deeds, contracts and other instruments to which the town was a party. Such report shall also contain a statement of the unfinished business in the hands of the town attorney with such suggestions with reference to the interest of the town as he may deem pertinent. 
(Code 1982, § 2-64) 
Secs. 2-115-2-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Fair housing board, § 50-46 et seq.; planning commission, § 70-21 et seq.; board of zoning appeals, app. B, art. IX. 

Secs. 2-136-2-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the town saved from repeal, § 1-8(1); any ordinance appropriating any funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to any public improvements and assessments therefor saved from repeal, § 1-8(3); any ordinance prescribing the rate, fee or charge for any permit or license issued by the town or any service rendered by the town saved from repeal, § 1-8(6); taxation, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-106 

Sec. 2-156. - Fee for returned checks. 
    A fee of $50.00 will be assessed for the uttering, publishing or passing of any check or draft for payment of taxes or any other sums due to the town treasurer or any other agent of the town, which is subsequently returned for insufficient funds or because there is no account or the account has been closed. 
(Code 1982, § 1-13; Ord. No. 809, 1-18-2005; Ord. No. 930, 2-5-2013) 
Sec. 2-157. - Recovery of administrative costs. 
    As authorized by section 58.1-520.1, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, the administrative costs associated with collection pursuant to the Setoff Debt Collection Act of any debt owed the town, not to exceed twenty-five dollars shall be collected, in addition to the amount of delinquent debt collected pursuant to such Act. 
(Ord. No. 903, 10-19-2010) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, § 86-246 et seq. 
State Law reference- Charitable gaming, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.15 et seq.; minors in public places of amusement, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-432, 40.1-100; public dancehalls, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-433. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC DANCEHALLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of town to regulate public dancehalls, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-433. 

Sec. 6-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public dancehall means any place open to the general public where dancing is permitted. 
(Code 1982, § 3-21) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-22. - Violations of article. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  To conduct or to operate a public dancehall in any manner or mode other than as is provided in this article shall, in addition to being unlawful, constitute a nuisance and be abatable as such. This remedy shall be considered a cumulative one and shall be enforceable by the town in a proper proceeding to be instituted by, and in the discretion of, the council. 
(Code 1982, § 3-22) 
Sec. 6-23. - Exceptions from article. 
    This article shall not be construed to apply to dances held for benevolent or charitable purposes or when the dances are conducted under the auspices of religious, educational or military organizations. 
(Code 1982, § 3-23) 
Sec. 6-24. - Construction of article with reference to disturbance of peace. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as permitting any person to conduct or operate a public dancehall in such a manner as to unnecessarily disturb the peace, comfort and ordinary rest of the citizens generally residing in the neighborhood of such public dancehall. 
(Code 1982, § 3-24) 
Sec. 6-25. - Construction of article with reference to license taxes. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as exempting any public dancehall from the payment of any license tax now imposed or which, in the future, may be imposed, whether such tax be for the purpose of raising revenue or for regulatory purposes. 
(Code 1982, § 3-25) 
Sec. 6-26. - Operating permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct a public dancehall without a permit, which permit may be obtained from the council. The permit to operate or conduct a public dancehall shall be a personal privilege, not transferable, and may at any time be revoked by the council, without a public hearing, for cause deemed adequate by the council. 
(Code 1982, § 3-26) 
Sec. 6-27. - Operation prohibited on Sunday and between certain hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct a public dancehall, where dancing, music or entertainment of any kind is furnished or afforded, at any time on Sunday or between the hours of 1:01 a.m. and 12:00 noon on any other day. 
(Code 1982, § 3-27) 
Sec. 6-28. - Minors prohibited; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person conducting or in charge of a public dancehall to allow any person under the age of 18 years to enter or to remain in such dancehall while dancing is being conducted therein, unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, or by a brother or sister over the age of 18 years, except upon the written consent of the parent or legal guardian of such minor, in which event there shall be a separate and independent written consent for each afternoon or evening such minor enters or remains in such dancehall while dancing is being conducted therein. 
(Code 1982, § 3-28) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to regulate presence of minors in places of amusement, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-432. 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- Livestock and poultry, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-723 et seq.; comprehensive animal laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.66 et seq.; cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.122 et seq.; dogs and cats, deemed personal property, rights relating thereto, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.127; penalties for offenses involving animals, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.128, 18.2-403.1 et seq.; diseased animals, dead animals, etc., Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-323, 18.2-510; game, inland fisheries and boating, Code of Virginia, title 29.1; schools and public parks, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-527; estrays, Code of Virginia, § 55-202 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote harmonious relationships in the interaction between man and animal by: 
(1)  Protecting animals from improper use, abuse, neglect, exploitation, inhumane treatment and health hazards; 
(2)  Delineating the animal owner's or harborer's responsibility for the acts and behavior of his animal at all times; 
(3)  Providing security to residents from annoyance, intimidation, injury and health hazards caused by animals; 
(4)  Encouraging responsible pet ownership; and 
(5)  Providing standards for any and all persons and agencies, public or private, engaged in confinement, buying, selling, harboring or dealing in animals in any manner whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 506, 11-1-1988) 
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, or if not included in this section, as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6500, as amended from time to time, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandon means to desert, forsake or absolutely give up an animal without having secured another owner or custodian for the animal or by failing to provide the elements of basic care as set forth herein for a period of five consecutive days. 
    Adequate care or care means the responsible practice of good animal husbandry, handling, production, management, confinement, feeding, watering, protection, shelter, transportation, treatment and, when necessary, euthanasia, appropriate for the age, species, condition, size and type of the animal and the provision of veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering or impairment of health. 
    Adequate exercise or exercise means the opportunity for the animal to move sufficiently to maintain normal muscle tone and mass for the age, species, size and condition of the animal. 
    Adequate feed means access to and the provision of food which is of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain each animal in good health; is accessible to each animal; is prepared so as to permit ease of consumption for the age, species, condition, size and type of each animal; is provided in a clean and sanitary manner; is placed so as to minimize contamination by excrement and pests; and is provided at suitable intervals for the species, age and condition of the animal, but at least once daily, except as prescribed by a veterinarian or as dictated by naturally occurring states of hibernation or fasting normal for the species. 
    Adequate shelter means provision of and access to shelter that is suitable for the species, age, condition, size and type of each animal; provides adequate space for each animal; is safe and protects each animal from injury, rain, sleet, snow, hail, direct sunlight, the adverse effects of heat or cold, physical suffering and impairment of health; is properly lighted; is properly cleaned; enables each animal to be clean and dry, except when detrimental to the species; and, for dogs and cats, provides a solid surface, resting platform, pad, floormat or similar device that is large enough for the animal to lie on in a normal manner and can be maintained in a sanitary manner. Under this chapter, shelters whose wire, grid or slat floors permit the animals' feet to pass through the openings, sag under the animals' weight, or otherwise do not protect the animals' feet or toes from injury are not adequate shelter. 
    Adequate space means sufficient space to allow each animal to easily stand, sit lie, turn about and make all other normal body movements in a comfortable, normal position for the animal and interact safely with other animals in the enclosure. When an animal is tethered, adequate space means a tether that permits the above actions and is appropriate to the age and size of the animal; is attached to the animal by a properly applied collar, halter or harness configured so as to protect the animal from injury and prevent the animal or tether from becoming entangled with other objects or animals, or from extending over an object or edge that could result in the strangulation or injury of the animal; and is at least three times the length of the animal, as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail, except when the animal is being walked on a leash or is attached by a tether to a lead line. When freedom of movement would endanger the animal, temporarily and appropriately restricting movement of the animal according to professionally accepted standards for the species is considered provision of adequate space. 
    Adequate water means provision of and access to clean, fresh, potable water of a drinkable temperature which is provided in a suitable manner, sufficient volume, and at suitable intervals, but at least once every 12 hours, to maintain normal hydration for the age, species, condition, size and type of each animal, except as prescribed by a veterinarian or as dictated by naturally occurring states of hibernation or fasting normal for the species; and is provided in clean, durable receptacles which are accessible to each animal and are placed so as to minimize contamination of the water by excrement and pests or an alternative source of hydration consistent with generally accepted husbandry practices. 
    Adoption means the transfer of ownership of a dog or cat from a releasing agency to an individual. 
    Agricultural animals means all livestock and poultry. 
    Ambient temperature means the temperature surrounding the animal. 
    Animal means any nonhuman vertebrate species. For the purposes of sections 10-6 and 10-7, animal means any species susceptible to rabies. For the purposes of section 10-9, animal means any nonhuman vertebrate species, including fish, except those fish captured and killed or disposed of in a reasonable and customary manner. 
    Animal control officer means that person educated in the care, seizure, custody and confinement of animals, or his agent, as appointed by the town manager and supervised by the chief of police, who shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
    Animal shelter means a facility which is used to house or contain animals and which is owned, operated or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, animal rescue group or any other organization devoted to the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals. 
    Bite means to be seized with the teeth or jaws so that a person or animal has been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced and saliva of the biting animal has contacted the resulting break or abrasion of the skin. 
    Board means the board of agriculture and consumer services. 
    Boarding kennel means a place or establishment, other than a pound or animal shelter, where companion animals not owned by the proprietor are sheltered, fed and watered, for a period not exceeding 30 consecutive days, in exchange for a fee. 
    Cat means any feline or member of the animal species Felis catus. 
    Collar means a well-fitted device, appropriate to the age and size of the animal, attached to the animal's neck in such a way as to prevent trauma or injury to the animal. 
    Companion animal means any domestic or feral dog, domestic or feral cat, nonhuman primate, guinea pig, hamster, rabbit not raised for human food or fiber, exotic or native animal, reptile, exotic or native bird, or any feral animal or any animal under the care, custody or ownership of a person or any animal which is bought, sold, traded or bartered by any person. Agricultural animals, game species or any animals regulated under federal law as research animals shall not be considered companion animals for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Consumer means any natural person purchasing an animal from a dealer or pet shop or hiring the services of a boarding establishment. The term "consumer" shall not include a business or corporation engaged in sales or services. 
    Control of an animal means that the animal is on a leash not more than eight feet in length; is under voice control in the presence of a competent person; is on or within a vehicle being driven or parked; or is within the property limits of its owner or harborer or upon the premises of another person with the consent of that person. 
    Dangerous dog means a canine or canine crossbreed that has: 
(1)  Bitten any person or companion animal that is a dog or cat; 
(2)  Attacked any person or companion animal that is a dog or cat; 
(3)  Inflicted injury on a person or companion animal that is a dog or cat; 
(4)  Which has killed a companion animal that is a dog or cat. 
However, when a dog attacks or bites a companion animal that is a dog or cat, the attacking or biting dog shall not be deemed dangerous: 
(1)  If no serious physical injury as determined by a licensed veterinarian has occurred to the dog or cat as a result of the attack or bite; 
(2)  If both animals are owned by the same person; 
(3)  If such attack occurs on the property of the attacking or biting dog's owner or custodian; or 
(4)  For other good cause as determined by the court. 
No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog as a result of biting, attacking, or inflicting injury on a dog or cat while engaged with an owner or custodian as part of lawful hunting or participating in an organized, lawful dog handling event. 
    Dealer means any person who in the regular course of business for compensation or profit buys, sells, transfers, exchanges or barters companion animals. Any person who transports companion animals in the regular course of business as a common carrier shall not be considered a dealer. Any person whose primary purpose is to find permanent adoptive homes for companion animals shall not be considered a dealer. 
    Direct and immediate threat means any clear and imminent danger to an animal's health, safety or life. 
    Dog means any canine or any member of the animal species Canis familiaris, or any canine crossbreed. 
    Emergency veterinary treatment means veterinary treatment to stabilize a life-threatening condition, alleviate suffering, prevent further disease transmission, or prevent further disease progression. 
    Enclosure means a structure used to house or restrict animals from running at large. 
    Euthanasia means the humane destruction of an animal accomplished by a method that involves instantaneous unconsciousness and immediate death or by a method that involves anesthesia, produced by an agent which causes painless loss of consciousness, and death during such loss of consciousness. 
    Exhibitor means any person who has animals for or on public display, excluding an exhibitor licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture. 
    Groomer means any person who, for a fee, cleans trims, brushes, makes neat, manicures or treats for external parasites any animal. 
    Harborer means any person who provides food and shelter for any domesticated animal on other than a periodic or temporary basis. 
    Housing facility means any room, building or area used to contain a primary enclosure. 
    Humane means any action taken in consideration of and with the intent to provide for the animal's health and well-being. 
    Humane society means any chartered, nonprofit organization incorporated under the laws of this commonwealth and organized for the purpose of preventing cruelty to animals and promoting humane care and treatment of animals. 
    Law enforcement officer means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of a police department or sheriff's office which is part of or administered by the commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof and who is responsible for the detection of crime and the enforcement of penal, traffic or highway laws of the commonwealth. Part-time employees are compensated officers who are not full-time employees as defined by employing police department or sheriff's office. 
    Livestock means all domestic or domesticated: bovine animals; equine animals; ovine animals; swine and porcine animals, including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs and related breeds of pigs; cervidae animals; capradae animals; animals of the genus Lama; ratites; fish or shell fish in aquaculture facilities, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-2600; enclosed domestic rabbits or hares raised for human food or fiber; or any other individual animal specifically raised for food or fiber, except companion animals. 
    New owner means an individual who is legally competent to enter into a binding agreement pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6574(B)(2), and who adopts or receives a dog or cat from a releasing agency. 
    Nuisance means any animal that: 
(1)  Molests or disturbs persons or drivers of vehicles by chasing, barking or biting; 
(2)  Attacks other animals; 
(3)  Damages property other than that of its owner or harborer; 
(4)  Barks, whines, howls, honks, brays, cries or makes other noises excessively; 
(5)  Creates noxious or offensive odors; 
(6)  Defecates upon any public place or upon premises not owned or controlled by the animal owner or harborer, unless promptly removed by the animal owner or harborer; or 
(7)  Creates an insect breeding and/or attraction site due to an accumulation of excreta. 
    Other officer means all other persons employed or elected by the people of the state, or by any municipality, county or incorporated town thereof, whose duty it is to preserve the peace, to make arrests or to enforce the law. 
    Owner means any person who: 
(1)  Has a right of property in an animal; 
(2)  Keeps or harbors an animal; 
(3)  Has as animal in his care; or 
(4)  Acts as a custodian of an animal. 
    Pet shop means an establishment where companion animals are bought, sold, exchanged or offered for sale or exchange to the general public. 
    Poultry means all domestic fowl and game birds raised in captivity. 
    Pound means a facility operated by or under contract with the town for the purpose of impounding or harboring, seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals. 
    Primary enclosure means any structure used to immediately restrict an animal to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, cage, compartment or hutch. For tethered animals, the term includes the shelter and the area within reach of the tether. 
    Properly cleaned means that carcasses, debris, food waste and excrement are removed from the primary enclosure with sufficient frequency to minimize the animals' contact with the above-mentioned contaminants; the primary enclosure is sanitized with sufficient frequency to minimize odors and the hazards of disease; and the primary enclosure is cleaned so as to prevent the animals confined therein from being directly sprayed with the stream of water, or directly or indirectly exposed to hazardous chemicals or disinfectants. 
    Properly lighted means sufficient illumination to permit routine inspections, maintenance, cleaning and housekeeping of the housing facility, and observation of the animal; to provide regular diurnal lighting cycles of either natural or artificial light, uniformly diffused throughout the animal facilities; and to promote the well-being of the animals. 
    Releasing agency means a pound, animal shelter, humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or other similar entity that releases a dog or cat for adoption. 
    Research facility means any place, laboratory or institution licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture at which scientific tests, experiments or investigations involving the use of living animals are carried out, conducted or attempted. 
    Sanitize means to make physically clean and to remove and destroy, to a practical minimum, agents injurious to health. 
    State veterinarian means the veterinarian employed by the state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services. 
    State veterinarian representative means an employee of the state department of agriculture and consumer services who is under the direction of the state veterinarian. 
    Sterilize or sterilization means a surgical or chemical procedure performed by a licensed veterinarian that renders a dog or cat permanently incapable of reproducing. 
    Swine means all porcine animals, including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs and related breeds of pigs. 
    Tethering means a rope, chain, or the like, by which an animal is fastened to a fixed object so as to limit its range of movement. 
    Trainer is a person qualified by training and experience in various facets of animal life, normally dogs. 
    Treasurer means the treasurer and his assistants of the town or other officer designated by law to collect taxes in the town. 
    Treatment or adequate treatment means the responsible handling or transportation of animals in the person's ownership, custody or charge, appropriate for the age, species, condition, size and type of the animal. 
    Vaccination means the administration of antirabic vaccine by a licensed veterinarian at such intervals as required by state statutes and the state department of agriculture. 
    Veterinary treatment means treatment by or on the order of a duly licensed veterinarian. 
    Vicious dog means a canine or canine crossbreed that has: 
(1)  Killed a person; 
(2)  Inflicted serious injury to a person, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or 
(3)  Continued to exhibit the behavior which resulted in a previous finding by a court, or one [on] or before July 1, 2006, by an animal control officer as authorized by local ordinance, that it is a dangerous dog, provided that its owner has been given notice of that finding. 
Any dog evidencing the characteristics or conduct described in subsections (1), (2) or (3) of this definition shall be a vicious dog even though not previously found so by any court. 
    Work dog means any member of the animal species Canis familiaris trained for and actively engaged in rescue, law enforcement or war work, or as a guide for the blind or deaf. 
    Weaned means that an animal is capable of and physiologically accustomed to ingestion of solid food or food customary for the adult of the species, and has ingested such food, without nursing, for a period of at least five days. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-2, 11-17-1998; Ord. No. 840, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 992 , 4-3-2018) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-3. - Animal control officer. 
    There is hereby created the position of animal control officer, within the organization of the police department of the town. The animal control officer or his agent, or any officer of the law, shall have the powers granted to animal control officers under Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6555 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-3, 11-17-1998; Ord. No. 992 , 4-3-2018) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-41 et seq. 
Sec. 10-4. - Pound registry. 
    The animal control officer, upon taking custody of any animal in the course of his official duties, shall immediately make a record of the matter, and the record shall include a description of the animal including color, breed, sex, approximate weight, reason for seizure, location of seizure, the animal owner's name and address (if known), and all license or other identification numbers, and the disposition of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-5, 11-17-1998) 
Sec. 10-5. - Responsible animal care. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or harborer of a companion animal not to provide for his animal: 
(1)  Adequate feed; 
(2)  Adequate water; 
(3)  Adequate shelter that is properly cleaned; 
(4)  Adequate space in the primary enclosure for the particular type of animal depending upon its age, size, species and weight; 
(5)  Adequate exercise; 
(6)  Adequate care, treatment and transportation; and 
(7)  Veterinary care, when needed, or to prevent suffering or disease transmission. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or harborer of a companion animal to tether the animal: 
(1)  More than three cumulative hours during the day between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; 
(2)  At any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; 
(3)  At any time if the animal is sick, injured, or in heat; 
(4)  At any time if the animal is four months of age or younger. 
    For the purposes of this section, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that an animal has been tethered for more than three cumulative hours, if the law enforcement officer witnesses the tethering once an hour for at least five minutes per hour for three consecutive hours. 
(c)  As authorized by Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6543, each violation of this section shall be a civil violation subject to a fine of $150.00. An animal control officer or law-enforcement officer may issue a summons for the violation. Any person summoned or issued a ticket for the violation may make an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the department of finance of the town prior to the date fixed for trial in court. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability, and pay the civil fine established herein. The imposition of a civil fine shall not preclude an action for injunctive, declaratory, or other equitable relief. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall also apply to every animal shelter, pound, dealer, pet shop, exhibitor, kennel, groomer and boarding establishment unless exempted by law. This section shall not require that animals used as food for other animals be euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-6, 11-17-1998; Ord. No. 992 , 4-3-2018) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.68. 
Sec. 10-6. - Rabies control; emergency ordinance. 
(a)  All cases of rabies occurring within the town shall be reported by the animal control officer to the county health department. If there is sufficient reason to believe that a rabid animal is at large, the town council may pass an emergency ordinance which shall become effective immediately upon passage, requiring owners of all dogs and cats within the town to keep the same confined on their premises unless leashed under the restraint of the owner in such a manner that persons or animals will not be subjected to the danger of being bitten by the rabid animal. 
(b)  Any such ordinance enacted pursuant to this section shall be operative for a period not to exceed 30 days unless renewed by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-7, 11-17-1998) 
State Law reference- Rabies control, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-48.1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-7. - Rabies procedure. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of any animal to refuse or fail to promptly surrender any animal suspected of being affected by rabies. Any dog, cat or other animal suspected of being affected by rabies shall be seized by the animal control officer and the procedures mandated in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6522, shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-8, 11-17-1998; Ord. No. 992 , 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 10-8. - Diseased animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any domestic animal to knowingly cause or allow the animal to run at large or be exposed in any public place anywhere in the town, or to ship or remove such animal from the owner's premises when the animal is afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease except under the supervision of the health officer. It shall be the duty of the health officer to order the disposition of such diseased animal and treatment of the affected premises to prevent the communication and spread of infection except in cases where the state veterinarian is empowered to act and does act. 
(Code 1982, § 4-9) 
Sec. 10-9. - Cruelty to animals; penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to: 
(1)  Override, overdrive, overload, torture, ill treat, abandon, willfully inflict inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly or unnecessarily beat, maim, mutilate, or kill any animal, whether belonging to himself or another; 
(2)  Deprive any animal of necessary, food, drink or shelter or emergency veterinary treatment; 
(3)  Willfully set on foot, instigate, engage in, or in any way further any act of cruelty to any animal; 
(4)  Carry or cause to be carried in or upon any vehicle, vessel or otherwise any animal in a cruel, brutal or inhumane manner, so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering; or 
(5)  Cause any of the above things, or being the owner of such animal, permit such acts to be done by another. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-10, 11-17-1998) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.122 et seq. 
Sec. 10-10. - Nuisances; civil violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog, cat or other domestic animal to perform, create or engage in any nuisance as defined by section 10-2. Any person found violating this article by permitting a nuisance to exist as defined by section 10-2 shall be subject to a civil violation and subject to a fine of $150.00. An animal control officer or law-enforcement officer may issue a summons for the violation. Any person summoned or issued a ticket for the violation may make an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the department of finance of the town prior to the date fixed for trial in court. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability, and pay the civil fine established herein. The imposition of a civil fine shall not preclude an action for injunctive, declaratory, or other equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 992 , 4-3-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 992 , adopted Apr. 3, 2018, amended § 10-10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 10-10 pertained to nuisances; misdemeanors and derived from Ord. No. 700, § 4-11, adopted Nov. 17, 1998. 
Sec. 10-11. - Removal of excrement. 
    No person shall appear with an animal upon the public ways, within public places or upon the property of another, absent that person's consent, without some means for the removal of excrement; nor, shall any person fail to remove any excrement deposited by such animal. This section shall not apply to a blind person while walking his guide dog. 
(Code 1982, § 4-12) 
Sec. 10-12. - Animal exhibitions. 
    Exhibitions or parades involving ferae naturae or domestic animals, or both, may be conducted only upon the issuance of a permit therefor by the town manager. Performing exhibits, circuses and parades must be investigated in advance as to purpose, intent, animal care procedures and assurances for human health and safety. 
(Code 1982, § 4-14) 
Sec. 10-13. - Female animals in heat. 
    All female animals in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure or upon leash in such a manner that the animal cannot come into contact with a male animal except for planned breeding. 
(Code 1982, § 4-15) 
Sec. 10-14. - Unlawful for animals to run at large; confinement and disposition of stray animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of any animal to cause or allow the animal to run at large in the town. Any animal found to be running at large within the town, or any animal found within the town not under the control of its owner and without identification shall be confined to the pound. The pound shall be accessible to the public at reasonable hours during the week. 
(b)  An animal confined pursuant to this section shall be kept for a period of not less than five days, such period to commence on the day immediately following the day the animal is initially confined in the pound unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner. The operator or custodian of the pound shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain whether the animal has a collar, tag, license, tattoo or other form of identification. If such identification is found on the animal, the animal shall be held for an additional five days, unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner. If the rightful owner of the animal can be readily identified, the operator or custodian of the pound shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of the animal's confinement within the next 48 hours following its confinement. If any animal confined pursuant to this section is claimed by its rightful owner, such owner shall be charged with the actual expenses incurred in keeping the animal impounded. 
(c)  If an animal confined pursuant to this section has not been claimed upon expiration of the appropriate holding period as prescribed by subsection (b) of this section, it shall be deemed abandoned and become the property of the pound or shelter. If such abandoned animal did not when delivered to the pound bear a collar, tag, license, tattoo or other form of identification, it may be humanely destroyed or disposed of by: 
(1)  Sale or gift to a federal agency, state-supported institution, agency of the commonwealth, agency of another state, or a licensed federal dealer having its principal place of business located within the commonwealth, provided that such agency, institution or dealer agrees to confine the animal for an additional period of not less than five days; 
(2)  Delivery to any humane society or animal shelter within the commonwealth; 
(3)  Adoption by any person who is a resident of the town or the county and who will pay the required license fee, if any, on such animal; 
(4)  Adoption by a resident of an adjacent political subdivision of the commonwealth; or 
(5)  Delivery, for the purposes of adoption or euthanasia only, to a humane society or an animal shelter located in and lawfully operating under the laws of another state, provided that such humane society or animal shelter: 
a.  Maintains records which would comply with Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6557; 
b.  Requires that adopted dogs and cats be sterilized; and 
c.  Has been approved by the state veterinarian or his designee as a facility which maintains such records, requires adopted dogs and cats to be sterilized, and provides adequate care and euthanasia. 
If such abandoned animal when delivered to the pound bore a collar, tag, license, tattoo or other form of identification, it may be humanely destroyed or disposed of by the methods described in subsections (c)(2), (c)(3) or (c)(4) of this section. No pound or shelter shall deliver more than two animals or a family of animals during any 30-day period to any one person under subsections (c)(3) or (c)(4) of this section. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the immediate destruction of a critically injured, critically ill or unweaned animal for humane purposes. Any animal destroyed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be euthanized by one of the methods prescribed or approved by the state veterinarian. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the immediate destruction or disposal by the methods listed in subsections (c)(2) through (c)(5) of this section of an animal that has been delivered voluntarily or released to a pound, animal shelter, animal warden or humane society by the animal's rightful owner after the rightful owner has, in writing, surrendered all property rights in such animal and has read and signed a statement: 
(1)  Certifying that no other person has a right of property in the animal; and 
(2)  Acknowledging that the animal may be immediately euthanized or disposed by the methods listed in subsections (c)(2) through (c)(5) of this section. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit any feral dog or feral cat not bearing a collar, tag, tattoo or other form of identification which, based on the written certification of a disinterested person, exhibits behavior that poses a risk of physical injury to any person confining the animal, from being euthanized after being kept for a period of not less than three days, at least one of which shall be a full business day, such period to commence on the day the animal is initially confined in the facility; unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner. The certification of the disinterested person shall be kept with the animal as required by Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546. For purposes of this subsection, a disinterested person shall not include a person releasing or reporting the animal to the facility. 
(g)  For purposes of this section: 
    Animal shall not include agricultural animals. 
    Humane society, when referring to an organization without the commonwealth, means any nonprofit organization organized for the purpose of preventing cruelty to animals and promoting humane care and treatment or adoption of animals. 
    Rightful owner means a person with a right of property in the animal. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-18, 11-17-1998; Ord. No. 992 , 4-3-2018) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to regulate animals and fowl running at large, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.94:1. 
Sec. 10-15. - Fees. 
(a)  The owner of any animal apprehended and/or impounded pursuant to this chapter shall pay the town the following fees prior to the release of the animal: 
(1)  Impoundment fee. Such daily fee as may be established by the town council from time to time. 
(2)  Pickup fee. A fee of $35.00 for an initial pickup of an animal; a fee of $50.00 for a second pickup of the same animal within 12 months of the initial pickup; or a fee of $75.00 for a third or successive pickup of the same animal within 12 months of the initial pickup. 
(b)  The fees established by this section shall be in addition to any other fines or costs which may be imposed in connection with the apprehension and/or impoundment of a stray or other animal. 
(Ord. No. 666, § 4-19, 4-1-1997; Ord. No. 796, 12-16-03; Ord. No. 992 , 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 10-16. - Seizure and impoundment of animals; notice and hearing; disposition of animal; disposition of proceeds upon sale. 
(a)  Any humane investigator, law enforcement officer or the animal control officer may lawfully seize and impound any animal that has been abandoned, has been cruelly treated, or that is suffering from an apparent violation of this chapter that has rendered the animal in such a condition as to constitute a direct and immediate threat to its life, safety or health. Upon seizing or impounding the animal, such person shall petition the county general district court for a hearing. The hearing shall be not more than ten business days from the date of the seizure of the animal. The hearing shall be to determine whether the animal has been abandoned, has been cruelly treated or has not been provided adequate care. 
(b)  The humane investigator, law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall cause to be served upon the person with a right of property in the animal or the custodian of the animal notice of the hearing. If such person or the custodian is known and residing within the town, written notice shall be given at least five days prior to the hearing of the time and place of the hearing. If such person or the custodian is known but residing out of the town, written notice by any method or service of process, as is provided by the Code of Virginia, shall be given. If such person or the custodian is not known, the humane investigator, law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction wherein such animal is seized notice of the hearing at least one time prior to the hearing, and shall further cause notice of the hearing to be posted at least five days prior to the hearing at the place provided for public notices at the county general district court. 
(c)  The procedure for appeal and trial shall be the same as provided by law for misdemeanors. Trial by jury shall be as provided in Code of Virginia, § 19.2-260. The commonwealth shall be required to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(d)  The humane investigator, law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall provide for such animal until the court has concluded the hearing. If the court determines that the animal has been neither abandoned, cruelly treated, nor deprived of adequate care, the animal shall be returned to the owner. If the court determines that the animal has been abandoned, cruelly treated or deprived of adequate care, then the court shall order that the animal be: 
(1)  Sold by the town; 
(2)  Humanely destroyed, or disposed of by sale or gift to a federal agency, state supported institution, agency of the commonwealth, agency of another state, or a licensed federal dealer having its principal place of business located within the commonwealth; 
(3)  Delivered to any local humane society or shelter, or to any person who is a resident of the town, the county or an adjacent county or city in the commonwealth and who will pay the required license fee, if any, on such animal; or 
(4)  Delivered to the person with a right of property in the animal as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  In no case shall the owner be allowed to purchase, adopt or otherwise obtain the animal if the court determines that the animal has been abandoned, cruelly treated or deprived of adequate care; however, the court shall direct that the animal is delivered to the person with the right of property in the animal, upon his request, if the court finds that the abandonment, cruel treatment or deprivation of adequate care is not attributable to the actions or inactions of such person. 
(f)  The court shall order the owner of any animal determined to have been abandoned, cruelly treated or deprived of adequate care to pay all reasonable expenses incurred in caring and providing for such animal from the time the animal is seized until such time that the animal is disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this section, to the provider of such care. 
(g)  The court may prohibit the possession or ownership of other companion animals by the owner of any companion animal found to have been abandoned, cruelly treated or deprived of adequate care. In making a determination to prohibit the possession or ownership of companion animals, the court may take into consideration the owner's past record of convictions under this chapter or other laws prohibiting cruelty to animals or pertaining to the care and treatment of animals and the owner's mental and physical condition. 
(h)  If the court finds that an agricultural animal has been abandoned or cruelly treated, the court may prohibit the possession or ownership of any other agricultural animal by the owner of the agricultural animal if the owner has exhibited a pattern of abandoning or cruelly treating agricultural animals as evidenced by previous convictions of violating Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6504, or Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6570. In making a determination to prohibit the possession or ownership of agricultural animals, the court may take into consideration the owner's mental and physical condition. 
(i)  Any person who is prohibited from owning or possessing animals, pursuant to subsections (g) or (h) of this section, may petition the court to repeal the prohibition after two years have elapsed from the date of entry of the court's order. The court may, in its discretion, repeal the prohibition if the person can prove to the satisfaction of the court that the cause for the prohibition has ceased to exist. 
(j)  When a sale occurs, the proceeds shall first be applied to the costs of the sale then next to the unreimbursed expenses for the care and provision of the animal, and the remaining proceeds, if any, shall be paid over to the owner of the animal. If the owner of the animal cannot be found, the proceeds remaining shall be paid to the literary fund of the state treasury. 
(k)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the humane destruction of a critically injured or ill animal for humane purposes by the impounding humane investigator, law enforcement officer, animal warden, animal control officer or licensed veterinarian. 
(l)  The provisions of this section which address whether an animal has been provided with or deprived of adequate care shall apply only with respect to the companion animals. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-20, 11-17-1998; Ord. No. 992 , 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 10-17. - Unlawful acts; penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful and constitute a class 4 misdemeanor for a person to do any of the following: 
(1)  Make a false statement in order to secure a dog or cat license. 
(2)  Fail to pay any license tax required by this chapter before February 1 of the year in which it is due; in addition, the court may order confiscation and the appropriate disposition of the dog or cat. 
(3)  Fail to obey any emergency rabies ordinance passed pursuant to section 10-6 or comply with the procedures found in section 10-7. 
(4)  Fail to dispose of the body of his companion animal in accordance with section 10-95. 
(5)  Permit his dog or cat to stray from his premises if he is aware his dog or cat suffers from a contagious or infectious disease. 
(6)  Conceal or harbor any dog or cat on which any required license tax has not been paid. 
(7)  Remove a legally required license tag from a dog or cat without the permission of the dog's or cat's owner or custodian. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-42, 11-17-1998) 
Sec. 10-18. - Other violations; enjoining of violations. 
    A violation of any provision of this chapter, excluding any section where a specific punishment is listed, shall be a class 4 misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be held to have been committed each day that such violation shall occur or continue. In addition to any other penalty imposed, the town may seek an injunction to enjoin the continuing violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-44, 11-17-1998) 
Secs. 10-19-10-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-41. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own or harbor any dog or cat four months or more in age in the town without having first obtained a license or appropriate permit therefor by application to the town treasurer. Only persons who comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such license. 
(Code 1982, § 4-21) 
State Law reference- Authority of local governing bodies as to licensing of dogs and cats, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.85 et seq. 
Sec. 10-42. - Application for license. 
(a)  Written application for a license shall be made annually to the treasurer by the owner on a form provided by the town. 
(b)  Upon receipt of proper application and current certificate of vaccination as required by this article, the treasurer shall issue a license receipt for the amount on which he shall record the name and address of the owner or custodian, the date of payment, the year for which issued, the serial number of the tag, whether dog or cat, whether male, unsexed female or female, and deliver the metal license tags or plates provided for in this article. The information thus received shall be retained by the treasurer and open to public inspection during the period for which such license is valid. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-22, 11-17-1998) 
Sec. 10-43. - Rabies inoculation required. 
(a)  The owner or custodian of all dogs and cats four months of age and older shall have them currently vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian or licensed veterinary technician who is under the immediate and direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian on the premises. The supervising veterinarian on the premises shall provide the owner of the dog or the custodian of the domesticated cat with a certificate of vaccination. The owner of the dog or the custodian of the domesticated cat shall furnish, within a reasonable period of time, upon the request of the animal control officer or law enforcement officer, or official of the department of health, the certificate of vaccination for such dog or cat. The vaccine used shall be licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture for use in that species. 
(b)  A copy of the certificate of rabies inoculation shall be presented with the application for license as required by section 10-42. No license shall be issued unless such certificate bears a date within one year prior to the date of license application if a one-year immunization vaccine was used, or within three years prior to the date of license application if a three-year immunization vaccine was administered. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-23, 11-17-1998) 
Sec 10-44. - Fee imposed; when due and payable. 
(a)  The annual license fee for any dog or cat four months or more in age is as follows: 
(1) Spayed/Neutered dog or cat $ 5.00 (2) Dog or cat 10.00 (3) Dangerous dog, as declared by any general district court or circuit court of this commonwealth, in addition to the other application fees in this section 50.00  
Written certification by a licensed veterinarian must be presented upon application for the fees applicable in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(b)  On January 1, and not later than January 31 of each year, the owner of any dog or cat four months old or older shall pay a license fee as prescribed in this section. Annual licenses shall expire on December 31 following the date of issuance of the license. 
(c)  If a dog or cat becomes four months of age or comes into the possession of any person between January 1 and October 31 of any year, the license fee for the current calendar year shall be paid by the owner. 
(d)  If a dog or cat becomes four months of age or comes into the possession of any person between November 1 and December 31 of any year, the license fee for the succeeding calendar year shall be paid by the owner, and this license shall be valid from the date the license is purchased. 
(e)  No license fee shall be imposed upon work dogs. 
(f)  The owner of a dog or cat may purchase a three-year license as long as the three-year license period does not exceed the period that the rabies inoculation is effective for the particular dog or cat as certified by a veterinarian. The three-year license fees shall be as follows: 
(1) Spayed/Neutered dog or cat $13.50 (2) Dog or cat 27.00  
Three-year licenses shall expire on December 31 of the third year of the license, so a three-year license issued in January 2008, for example, would expire on December 31, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-24, 11-17-1998; Ord. No. 856, 9-4-2007) 
Sec. 10-45. - License exceptions. 
    A current year license issued by another governmental jurisdiction which requires rabies inoculation as a licensing prerequisite will be honored by the town as a valid license through the above specified expiration date. No license fee shall be applied for work dogs. 
(Code 1982, § 4-25) 
Sec. 10-46. - License tags; duplicates; display of licenses and tags; failure to wear tag as proof of nonlicense. 
(a)  A dog or cat license shall consist of a license receipt and a metal tag. The tag shall be stamped or otherwise permanently marked to show that the town has issued the license, the sex of the dog or cat, the calendar year for which issued and shall bear a serial number. 
(b)  If a dog or cat license tag is lost, destroyed or stolen, the owner or custodian shall at once apply to the treasurer or his agent who issued the original license for a duplicate license tag, presenting the original license receipt. Upon affidavit of the owner or custodian before the treasurer or his agent that the original license tag has been lost, destroyed or stolen, he shall issue a duplicate license tag which the owner or custodian shall immediately affix to the collar of the dog. The treasurer or his agent shall endorse the number of the duplicate and the date issued on the face of the original license receipt. The fee for a duplicate tag for any dog or cat shall be $1.00. 
(c)  Dog and cat license receipts shall be carefully preserved by the licensees and exhibited promptly on request for inspection by any law enforcement officer or the animal control officer. Dog tags shall be securely fastened to a substantial collar by the owner or custodian and worn by such dog. It shall be unlawful for the owner to permit any licensed dog four months old or older to run or roam at large at any time without a license tag. The owner of the dog may remove the collar and license tag required by this section when: 
(1)  The dog is engaged in lawful hunting; 
(2)  The dog is competing in a show; 
(3)  The dog has a skin condition which would be exacerbated by the wearing of a collar; 
(4)  The dog is confined; or 
(5)  The dog is under the immediate control of its owner. 
(d)  Any dog not wearing a collar bearing a license tag of the proper calendar year shall prima facie be deemed to be unlicensed, and in any proceedings under this chapter the burden of proof of the fact that such dog has been licensed, or is otherwise not required to bear a tag at the time, shall be on the owner of the dog. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-26, 11-17-1998) 
Sec. 10-47. - Limitation on number of dogs and cats. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor, care for, have custody of, or knowingly permit at any time, more than four dogs or cats, in any combination thereof (this number not including dogs or cats under four months of age), to be upon any property or within any dwelling in the town, excluding the premises of properly licensed animal shelters; animal hospitals and clinics; grooming parlors; animal training schools and boarding kennels; and excluding work dogs. If more than two dogs or cats are kept as permitted herein, such additional dogs or cats must be spayed or neutered. 
(b)  As of November 3, 1998, any person who held a valid breeder permit prior to November 3, 1998, pursuant to the former section 4-28 of the 1982 Code of the town, shall be entitled to continue to own, keep, harbor and care for any dogs or cats in his possession as of November 3, 1998, but not more than five dogs or cats, in any combination thereof, until those dogs or cats are no longer alive or are no longer owned by him, provided that he comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  A license for each dog or cat, as required by section 10-41, shall be obtained within 30 days of the effective date of this subsection. 
(2)  A license shall be obtained and kept in force for each dog or cat claimed under this subsection for each year that the dog or cat remains alive or is owned by the licensee. Any break in maintaining a valid license for any dog or cat shall extinguish any right of the owner to claim the benefit of this subsection. 
(3)  The owner of any dog or cat claimed under this subsection shall allow the animal control officer for the town to examine and inspect each such dog or cat within 30 days of the effective date of this subsection. The animal control officer shall make and maintain a form listing the dog's or cat's breed, a physical description of the dog or cat and the dog's or cat's age. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-27, 11-17-1998; Ord. No. 956, 10-21-2014 ) 
Sec. 10-48. - Bite procedure. 
    All incidents of bites by a dog or cat suffered by a human shall be reported to the animal control officer or his agent within 24 hours of the bite. The animal control officer shall report all bite incidents to the county health department on forms and in the time sequence required by that agency. The animal control officer shall follow the rules and procedures of the health department regarding examination and quarantine of biting animals. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-29, 11-17-1998) 
Sec. 10-49. - Expense liability. 
    The owner or harborer of any dog or cat requiring veterinarian, impounding, licensing, destruction or disposition services as a result of any violations of this chapter shall be responsible for all such expenses. In addition, failure to assume such expenses shall be deemed an act of disclaiming and the dog or cat involved shall be considered a stray animal. 
(Code 1982, § 4-30) 
Secs. 10-50-10-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS 

Sec. 10-66. - Dangerous dog; vicious dog; penalties; procedures. 
    Any animal control officer or law-enforcement officer who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed within his jurisdiction is a dangerous or vicious dog as set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 3.2-6540 and 3.2-6540.1, shall apply to a magistrate of the jurisdiction for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before a general district court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. If a law enforcement officer successfully makes an application for the issuance of a summons, he shall contact the local animal control officer and inform him of the location of the dog and the relevant facts pertaining to his belief that the dog is dangerous or vicious. The animal control officer shall confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. If the animal control officer determines that the owner or custodian can confine the animal in a manner that protects the public safety, he may permit the owner or custodian to confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a dangerous dog, the court shall order the owner to comply with the provisions of section 10-67 and 10-68. If the court finds that the dog is a vicious dog the court shall order the animal euthanized in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6540.1. The procedure for appeal and trial shall be the same as provided by law for misdemeanors. Trial by jury shall be as provided in article 4 (§ 19.2-260 et seq.) of Code of Virginia, 19.2-15. The commonwealth shall be required to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(Ord. No. 992 , 4-3-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 992 , adopted Apr. 3, 2018, amended §§ 10-66 and 10-66.1 in their entirety to read as herein set out. The text of former § 10-66 was repealed and the text of former § 10-66.1 was redesignated as § 10-66. Former §§ 10-66 and 10-66.1 pertained to similar subject matter, and control of dangerous or vicious dogs, and derived from Code 1982, § 4-19.1; Ord. No. 677, § 4-19.1, adopted Aug. 19, 1997; and Ord. No. 840, adopted Oct. 3, 2006. 
Sec. 10-67. - Dangerous dog registration certificate. 
    The owner of any dog found by a court to be a dangerous dog shall, within thirty days of such finding, obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the department of finance for the town by paying a fee of $150.00, and any other outstanding fees and costs. The finance department shall provide the owner with a uniformly designed tag which identifies the dog as a dangerous dog. The owner shall affix the tag to the dog's collar and ensure that the dog wears the collar and tag at all times. All certificates issued pursuant to this section shall be renewed annually as required by Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6540(G), for a fee of $85.00. All dangerous dog certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons 18 years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence: 
(1)  Of the animal's current rabies vaccination, if applicable; 
(2)  That the animal has been neutered or spayed; and 
(3)  That the animal is and will be confined in a proper enclosure or is and will be confined inside the owner's residence or is and will be muzzled and confined in the owner's fenced-in yard until the proper enclosure is constructed. 
    In addition, owners who apply for licenses or renewals thereof under this section shall not be issued a license or renewal thereof unless they present satisfactory evidence that: 
(1)  Their residence is and will continue to be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property; and 
(2)  The animal has been permanently identified by means of a tattoo on the inside thigh or by electronic implantation. 
    All licenses or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons who present satisfactory evidence that the owner has liability insurance coverage, to the value of at least $100,000.00 that covers animal bites. The owner may obtain and maintain a bond in surety, in lieu of liability insurance, to the value of at least $100,000.00. The animal control officer shall provide a copy of the dangerous dog registration certificate and verification of compliance to the state veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 992 , 4-3-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 992 , adopted Apr. 3, 2018, amended § 10-67 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 10-67 pertained to licensure of dangerous dog, and derived from Code 1982, § 4-19.2; Ord. No. 677, § 4-19.2, adopted Aug. 19, 1997; and Ord. No. 840, adopted Oct. 3, 2006. 
Sec. 10-68. - Keeping dangerous dogs; conditions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dangerous dog to own, keep or harbor any such dog within the town except in compliance with each of the following conditions and specifications: 
(1)  While on the property of its owner, a dangerous dog shall be confined indoors, or, if kept outdoors, shall be kept in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height and design to prevent its escape or direct contact with or entry by minors, adults or other animals. The structure shall be designed to provide the dog with shelter from the elements of nature. 
(2)  While off the property of its owner, a dangerous dog shall be kept on a leash and muzzled in such a manner so as not to cause injury to the animal or interfere with the animal's vision or respiration, but so as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal. 
(3)  The owner shall produce satisfactory evidence of and post clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the owner's property. 
(4)  The owner shall produce satisfactory evidence of and shall permanently identify the dog by means of a tattoo on the dog's inside thigh or by electronic implantation. 
(5)  The owner of any dangerous dog shall obtain insurance coverage, in the amount of not less than $100,000.00 that covers animal bites insuring the owner for any injury or damage caused by such a dog. The owner shall maintain a valid policy and certificate of insurance issued by the insurance carrier or agent as to the coverage required by this section at the premises where the dog is kept and shall, upon request, display such policy and certificate to any animal control officer or police officer. The owner may obtain and maintain a bond in surety, in lieu of liability insurance, to the value of at least $100,000.00. No license or license renewal shall be issued until the owner produces satisfactory evidence of such insurance or bond in surety. 
(6)  After an animal has been found to be a dangerous dog, the owner shall immediately, upon learning of the same, notify the animal control officer: 
a.  Of the name, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners; 
b.  Of all the means necessary to locate the owner and the dog at any time; 
c.  Of any complaints or incidents of attack by the dog upon any person or cat or dog; 
d.  Of any claims made or lawsuits brought as a result of any attack; 
e.  Of the tattoo or chip identification information or both; 
f.  Of proof of insurance or surety bond; 
g.  If the dangerous dog is loose or unconfined; 
h.  If the dangerous dog bites a person or attacks another animal; 
i.  If the dangerous dog is sold, given away, dies, or has been moved to a different address. 
(7)  If a minor is the owner of a dangerous dog, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this section. 
(8)  In addition to the conditions and specifications established by this section with respect to dangerous dogs, the owner of any dangerous dog shall meet all other requirements established by this article for keeping any dog. 
(Code 1982, § 4-19.3; Ord. No. 677, § 4-19.3, 8-19-1997; Ord. No. 840, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 992 , 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 10-69. - Violations. 
    Any owner of any canine or canine crossbreed or other animal is guilty of a: 
(1)  Class 2 misdemeanor if the canine or canine crossbreed previously declared a dangerous dog pursuant to this division or the state comprehensive animal laws, which such declaration arose out of a separate and distinct incident, attacks and injures or kills a cat or dog that is a companion animal belonging to another person; 
(2)  Class 1 misdemeanor if the canine or canine crossbreed previously declared a dangerous dog pursuant to this section or the state comprehensive animal laws, when such declaration arose out of a separate and distinct incident, bites a human being or attacks a human being causing bodily injury; 
(3)  Class 6 felony if any owner or custodian whose willful act or omission in the care, control, or containment of a canine, canine crossbreed, or other animal is so gross, wanton and culpable as to show a reckless disregard for human life and is the proximate cause of such dog or other animal attacking and causing serious bodily injury to any person; 
(4)  Class 1 misdemeanor if the owner of an animal previously declared a dangerous dog pursuant to this division or the state comprehensive animal laws willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this division. 
    All fees collected pursuant to the dangerous dog and vicious dog provisions herein, less the costs incurred by the animal control authority in producing and distributing the certificates, licenses and tags required by this chapter, shall be paid into a special dedicated fund to the department of finance for the purpose of paying the expenses of any training course required under Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6556. 
(Code 1982, § 4-19.4; Ord. No. 677, § 4-19.4, 8-19-1997; Ord. No. 840, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 992 , 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 10-70. - Exceptions. 
(a)  No animal shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was, at the time: 
(1)  Committing a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian. 
(2)  Committing a willful trespass upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; or 
(3)  Provoking, tormenting or physically abusing the animal, or who can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal at other times. 
(b)  No animal that, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, or a person, or its owner's or custodian's property, shall be found to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. 
(c)  No police dog which was engaged in the performance of its duties at such time as the acts complained of shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
(d)  No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog solely because it is a particular breed. 
(Code 1982, § 4-19.5; Ord. No. 677, § 4-19.5, 8-19-1997; Ord. No. 840, 10-3-2006) 
Secs. 10-71-10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ANIMALS OTHER THAN DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 10-91. - Rabies inoculation recommended. 
    All warm-blooded animals, domestic and wild, are susceptible to rabies. Once infected with rabies, the disease is fatal to uninoculated animals and untreated humans. The inoculation of dogs and cats, as required by this chapter, is recommended for all other domestic animals. 
(Code 1982, § 4-31) 
Sec. 10-92. - Keeping of livestock, fowl and rabbits; impounding and confiscation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any livestock including, but not limited to, cattle, horses, sheep, goats or swine, or to keep any fowl or rabbits within the town, except in accord with the provisions of the zoning ordinance. When a warrant has been obtained or a summons issued pursuant to this section, the animal control officer, his agent or any officer of the law may, in his discretion, enter onto private property and confiscate and impound the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a final verdict rendered in the matter. If the court finds any person to be in violation of this section, that person shall be responsible for payment to the town of any expenses of confiscating and impounding the animal pending disposition of the case at the rate prescribed by the town council. The court may, through its contempt power, compel any person to produce the animal for the animal control officer, his agent or any officer of the law. 
(Code 1982, § 4-32) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to regulate or prohibit keeping of animals and fowl, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.94:1. 
Sec. 10-92.1. - Horseback riding prohibited; exceptions. 
    No person shall ride or lead a horse within the town upon any public way or public property, except upon property which has been designated for that purpose by the town manager. This section shall not apply to persons riding in parades or recognized civic events. 
(Ord. No. 775, 11-19-2002) 
Sec. 10-92.2. - Violations. 
    A violation of section 10-92.1 shall be a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 775, 11-19-2002) 
Sec. 10-93. - Beekeeping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any apparatus, structure or device which has for its purpose the keeping of bees, or to in any manner encourage such bees to swarm or hive or otherwise remain within the town, except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Owners or keepers of bees shall apply for a permit from the town manager who shall determine that all requirements of this section are met before the permit is issued. 
(2)  Bee hives shall not be located closer than 40 feet to any street or residence. 
(3)  Hives shall be kept clean and painted and not more than 12 hives shall be kept at one location. 
(4)  Bees shall not be handled or disturbed in daylight. 
(Code 1982, § 4-33) 
State Law reference- Beekeeping, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-610.1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-94. - Town designated bird sanctuary. 
    The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the town is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1982, § 4-34) 
Sec. 10-95. - Disposal of dead companion animals. 
    The owner of any companion animal which has died from disease or other cause shall forthwith cremate, bury or sanitarily dispose of the animal. If, after notice, any owner fails to do so, the animal control officer, animal warden or other officer shall bury or cremate the companion animal, and he may recover on behalf of the local jurisdiction from the owner his cost for this service. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-36, 11-17-1998) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-510. 
Sec. 10-96. - Wild creatures. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, permit or have custody of anywhere in the town: 
(1)  Any wild creature contrary to federal, state or local laws or regulations, except that such creature, too young to survive without the presence of specie adults native to the area, may be temporarily kept, cared for and protected in the same manner as domestic animals; or 
(2)  An imported creature as is subject to special permit and licensing by any department of the state. 
(Code 1982, § 4-13) 
Sec. 10-97. - Fowl, chickens and other domestic birds. 
(a)  Definitions. Fowl is defined as any various domestic birds by way of example but not limited to: Chickens, roosters, ducks, geese, turkeys, guinea fowl, emus, rheas, ostriches and pigeons. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, permit or allow any domesticated fowl within the corporate limits of the town, or to allow any domesticated fowl to run at large within the corporate limits of the town, except as specifically permitted below. 
(c)  It shall only be lawful for a person to keep, permit or allow chickens within the corporate limits of the town on residential property only, under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  No more than six chicken hens shall be allowed for each single-family dwelling, with roosters prohibited. No chickens shall be allowed on townhouse, duplex, apartment or manufactured housing park properties. 
(2)  Chicken hens allowed under this section shall only be raised for domestic purposes and no commercial use such as selling eggs or selling chickens for meat shall be allowed. There shall be no outside slaughtering of chickens. 
(3)  Each single-family dwelling shall contain at a minimum an acre (43,560 square feet) of land. 
(4)  Chicken hens shall be kept in an enclosed secure movable/portable pen/chicken tractor, stationary pen or a fenced enclosure (henhouse/coop) that contains at a minimum four square feet per bird. The size of the enclosed portable and/or stationary henhouse/coop shall not exceed 64 square feet in area. Birds shall not be allowed to roam free. 
(5)  The materials used in making a henhouse/coop or chicken tractor shall be uniform for each element of the structure such that the walls are made of the same material, the roof has the same shingles or other covering, and any windows or openings are constructed using the same materials. The use of scrap, waste board, sheet metal, or similar materials is prohibited. Henhouses and chicken tractors shall be well maintained. 
(6)  All enclosed permanent henhouses/coops must be at least 25 feet from the adjoining property lines and no closer than 50 feet from any adjacent residential dwelling or to any other building used for residential purposes, other than that of the owner of the chicken hens. All enclosed permanent henhouses/coops shall not be located in the front yard, required street side yard, required side yard, nor shall be located in any drainage area that would allow fecal matter to enter any storm drainage system or stream. 
(7)  Secure movable/portable henhouses/coops and chicken tractors must be located at least 20 feet from the adjoining property line and no closer than 25 feet from any adjacent residential dwelling or to any other building used for residential purposes, other than that of the owner of the chicken hens. 
(8)  All enclosures for the keeping of chicken hens shall be constructed and maintained as to prevent rodents or other pests from being harbored underneath, inside, or within the walls of the enclosure. The henhouse/coop must be impermeable to rodents, wild birds, and predators, including dogs and cats. All enclosed pens must be kept dry, well-ventilated, and in sanitary condition at all times, and must be cleaned on a regular basis to prevent offensive odors. All manure not used for composting or fertilizing shall be removed promptly. Odors from chickens, chicken manure, or other chicken-related substances shall not be detectable at the property boundaries. 
(9)  No dog or cat that kills a chicken hen will, for that reason alone, be considered a dangerous or aggressive animal. 
(10)  Adequate shelter, care and control of the chicken hens are required. Any person allowed to keep chicken hens under this section shall comply with all of the provisions and definitions of the Code of Ordinances regarding care, shelter, sanitation, health, rodent control, cruelty, neglect, noise, reasonable control and any other requirements pertaining to the adequate care and control of animals in the town. 
(11)  The chicken hen owner shall take necessary action to reduce the attraction of predators and rodents and the potential infestation of insects and parasites. Chicken hens found to be infested with insects and parasites that may result in unhealthy conditions to human habitation may be removed by an animal control officer. 
(12)  All feed or other material intended for consumption by the chickens shall be kept in containers impenetrable by rats or other rodents, and such container shall be equipped with tightly fitting caps or lids. All feeding shall be conducted in a manner as to prevent unconsumed food from being accessible to other animals or rodents. The presence of rodents in an area used for the keeping of chickens shall be prima facie evidence that such area is maintained in violation of this section. 
(13)  Chicken litter and waste shall not be deposited in any trash container that is collected by any public and shall be disposed of by either composting on site or disposed of at a permitted solid waste facility in accordance with the applicable permit. Also, any dead birds shall not be deposited in any trash container that is collected by any public waste collector but shall be taken to the permitted solid waste disposal facility and properly disposed of in accordance with the receiving facility's applicable permit. 
(14)  Disposal of chicken litter, waste, and dead birds in the public wastewater collection system is strictly prohibited since this may cause backups and/or overflows. 
(15)  Persons wishing to keep chicken hens pursuant to this subsection must file an application with the town's planning and zoning department. The application shall include a sketch showing the area where the chickens will be housed and all types and size of enclosures in which the chickens will be housed along with a twenty-five dollar fee. The sketch must show all property dimensions and setbacks. Once the site and enclosures have been inspected and approved by the town's animal control officer, a permit will be issued by the planning and zoning department. The permit shall be valid for one year. Each existing permit must be renewed annually in January by filing an application with the town's planning and zoning department, along with payment of a twenty-five dollar renewal. The town's animal control officer shall make another inspection of the site, prior to the approval of the renewal application. 
(d)  The above subsection (c) shall not apply to indoor birds, such as, but not limited to parrots or parakeets, or to the lawful transportation of fowl through corporate limits of the town. 
(e)  Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subsequent violations of this section by the same person shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 913, 4-5-2011) 
Secs. 10-98-10-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDING KENNELS AND PET SHOPS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, § 86-246 et seq. 

Sec. 10-116. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a boarding kennel or pet shop without having first obtained a license therefor. Application for such license shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of this chapter relating to license applications. Such application shall specify existing district zoning of the premises and the precise location upon the premises of the kennels or pens in which animals are to be kept. No such kennels or pens shall be located less than ten feet from the nearest public place or lot line bounding the premises. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-37, 11-17-1998) 
State Law reference- Permit for pet shop, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.84. 
Sec. 10-117. - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a boarding kennel or pet shop license pursuant to section 10-116, the town manager, or his designee, shall cause an investigation to be made. The town manager shall determine whether the proposed location and dimensions of the pet shop or boarding kennel comply with the applicable zoning regulations. The town manager shall also determine whether the proposed licensee ever has been prohibited from owning or possessing companion or agricultural animals by the court pursuant to section 10-16(g) or (h). The town manager shall further determine whether the proposed licensee is eligible to maintain a boarding kennel or pet shop under any applicable state laws. If any such prohibition occurred in the past, the proposed licensee is not eligible, or the boarding kennel or pet shop does not conform to the applicable zoning regulations, no license shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-39, 11-17-1998) 
Sec. 10-118. - License fees. 
(a)  The license for any boarding kennel or pet shop shall expire on December 31 following its issuance. The annual fees for such licenses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Pet shops which do not handle dogs and cats ..... $25.00 
(2)  Pet shops which handle dogs and cats ..... 150.00 
(3)  Boarding kennels with a capacity of ten animals or less ..... 25.00 
(4)  Boarding kennels with a capacity of more than ten animals ..... 50.00 
(b)  Should the business of buying, selling or dealing in birds or dogs or other small animals as household pets or for domestic purposes be conducted, operated, managed or carried on in connection with a boarding kennel on the same premises by the same person, then only one license need be obtained. The amount of each license shall be the highest license fee applicable. The licensee of any boarding kennel or pet shop shall be held responsible for the proper licensing of each dog and cat which may be owned, kept or harbored at such boarding kennel or pet shop in the town. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 4-40, 11-17-1998) 
Sec. 10-119. - Sanitation requirements. 
    Every kennel and pet shop shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be free and clear from decaying food and filth of any kind. All kennels, barns and pens shall be cleaned and disinfected on a regular schedule, and shall be kept in a sanitary condition satisfactory to the town sanitarian who shall have the right to cause an inspection of such premises to be made from time to time. 
(Code 1982, § 4-41) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; fair housing, § 50-21 et seq.; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; planning, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 94; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference- Access to and use of buildings by handicapped, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-1159; Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 14-21. - Adopted; general construction standards. 
(a)  There are hereby adopted by reference for the town the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as adopted and promulgated by the state board of housing and community development. Such code shall control all matters concerning the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures and all other functions which pertain to the installation of systems vital to all buildings and structures and their service equipment, as defined by such code, and shall apply to existing and proposed buildings and structures in the town. 
(b)  All construction, alteration or repair of buildings or structures, or the installation of plumbing, piping, wiring, mechanical or electrical equipment in or upon such buildings, structures or premises, shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with the provisions of this Code, the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and all orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof. Conformity of construction or installations of equipment with regulations set forth in the state code adopted by this section shall be prima facie evidence that construction or installations are reasonably safe to persons and property. 
(c)  The enforcement of this article shall be effected by the county, as authorized by Code of Virginia, § 36-105, and that certain agreement by and between the town and the county executed by the parties upon adoption of this subsection, a copy of such documents being on file in the office of the town manager. 
(Code 1982, § 5-21) 
State Law reference- Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq. 
Sec. 14-22. - Permit and inspection fees. 
    The fees for permits and inspection required by the Uniform Statewide Building Code shall be as are prescribed by the county board of supervisors and/or its building official from time to time, but in no event greater than like fees charged to other residents of the county. 
(Code 1982, § 5-24) 
Sec. 14-23. - Repair or demolition of unsafe buildings. 
(a)  The town adopts by reference chapter 7, article IV, Unsafe Buildings and Structures, section 7-61 et seq., of the Roanoke County Code, as such article may from time to time [be] amended. The provisions of such article shall be controlling in the inspection, enforcement, repair, removal and securing of buildings or other structures within the town. 
(b)  In addition to any other provisions required by article IV of chapter 7 of the Roanoke County Code, the town, or its agent, shall send a written notice mailed by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the property owner and publish said notice once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the locality, informing the owner of the action to be taken by the town. No action shall be taken by the town to remove, repair or secure any building or other structure for at least 30 days following the later of the return of the receipt or newspaper publication. 
(Code 1982, § 5-4, Ord. No. 721, 4-18-2000) 
Sec. 14-24. - Penalty for violation of provisions of section 14-23. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of the code adopted by section 14-23 or fail to comply with any of the requirements of such code, or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of such code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500.00. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1982, § 5-22) 
State Law reference- Similar penalty for violation of statewide building code, Code of Virginia, § 36-106. 
Secs. 14-25-14-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOUSING CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Fair housing, § 50-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to regulate the light, ventilation, sanitation, etc., of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1117. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means a representative of an owner who performs services for the owner with respect to the management or maintenance of real estate of the owner. 
    Dwelling means that portion of a building or structure used, in whole or in part, as a home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings. 
    Dwelling unit means a room or rooms in a building or structure used or intended to be used by a family or household as a home, residence or sleeping place of the family or household. 
    Habitable room means a room in a building or structure used or intended to be used by one or more human beings for living, sleeping, eating or cooking; provided, however, that a storeroom, bathroom, toilet, closet, hall or space in an attic or in a basement shall not be deemed a habitable room, except as permitted in section 14-93. 
    Occupant means a person who is in control of or is in actual possession of or actually occupies a dwelling, dwelling unit or habitable room. 
    Owner means a person who holds legal title to a dwelling, dwelling unit or habitable room and an agent, executor, administrator, trustee or guardian having charge, care, management or control of a dwelling, dwelling unit or habitable room under the circumstances provided in section 14-49. 
    Premises means a dwelling, dwelling unit or habitable room, together with the ground, yard, lawn, court, way, walk, alley, approach or stair used in connection therewith, whether or not used in whole or in part with others. 
(Code 1982, § 10-13) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-47. - Conflicts with building code. 
    The Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall control if there is any conflict with this article. 
Sec. 14-48. - Responsibility for compliance with article not affected by contract. 
    No contract with any other person and no principle of law shall relieve an occupant or owner or agent on whom a responsibility, duty or liability is placed by this article from any penalty that may be imposed for failure to discharge the same, nor shall this article in any way affect the obligation of such occupant, owner or agent in regard to such duty, responsibility or liability. 
(Code 1982, § 10-14) 
Sec. 14-49. - Responsibility of executors, trustees, agents and others under article. 
    Whenever any person shall be in actual possession of, or have charge, care or control of, any property within the town, as executor, administrator, trustee, guardian or agent, such person shall be deemed and taken to be the owner of such property, within the true intent and meaning of this article, and such person shall comply with the provisions of this article to the same extent as the owner. Notice to any such person of any order or decision of the town manager under this article shall be deemed and taken to be a good and sufficient notice to the same extent, as if such person were actually the owner of the property in question. Any such person shall be allowed such additional time, not to exceed 60 days in any event, for compliance with any order of the town manager as is reasonable for obtaining authority to comply therewith. If such person shall not, by the exercise of reasonable diligence, be able to obtain such authority within 60 days, he shall be discharged from all further responsibility. 
(Code 1982, § 10-15) 
Sec. 14-50. - Rules and regulations for administration and enforcement of article. 
    The town manager may, with the approval of the town council, make and adopt such rules and regulations as he may deem proper and necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article, which rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with this article nor shall such rules and regulations constitute an enlargement of the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such rules and regulations so made and adopted. 
(Code 1982, § 10-16) 
Sec. 14-51. - Authority of town manager to permit less than full compliance with article. 
    The town manager may, with the approval of the town council and upon written application, permit less than full compliance with any of the provisions of this article when, in his judgment, full or immediate compliance would work an undue hardship. 
(Code 1982, § 10-17) 
Sec. 14-52. - Violations of article generally. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500.00. 
(Code 1982, § 10-18) 
Sec. 14-53. - Orders to correct violations. 
(a)  Conditions requiring. If the town manager shall find that any conditions enumerated in this section exist, he shall, by written order, direct the person to remedy the specified condition within such reasonable time after the service of the owner as he shall specify in the order. The conditions referred to in this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any dwelling, dwelling unit or habitable room is unfit for human habitation because of the character of the construction thereof. 
(2)  The plumbing, sewage disposal facilities, drainage, light or ventilation thereof constitutes a threat to, or is detrimental to, life or health. 
(3)  There exists on the premises any condition likely to cause sickness of, or injury to, the occupants thereof or other persons. 
(4)  The provisions of this article are being otherwise violated. 
(b)  Service of order. Service of an order provided for in this section may be made by any person by delivery of a copy thereof to the person to whom directed in person. If the person to whom the order is directed is not found at his usual place of abode, the order may be served by delivering a copy thereof to, and giving information of its purport to, any person found there, who is a member of the family of the person to whom the order is directed, is not a temporary sojourner or guest and is above the age of 16 years. If neither the person to whom the order is directed nor any such other person be found at such usual place of abode, such order may be served by leaving a copy posted at the front door of such usual place of abode; provided, however, that if such order reaches its destination five days before the expiration of the time specified therein, it shall be sufficient, although not served in the manner mentioned in this subsection. 
(c)  Compliance required; failure, neglect or refusal; appeals. It shall be unlawful for any person upon whom an order of the town manager has been served as provided in this section to fail, neglect or refuse, within the period of time specified in the order, to commence compliance with the directions thereof and to complete such compliance within a reasonable period thereafter, or within ten days after such service, to perfect an appeal to the town council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing in the office of the town manager a notice of appeal stating, in brief and concise form, the grounds therefor, and the payment to the town manager, or such other person as is designated by him for the purpose, of a fee of $5.00, which shall be paid into the general treasury. 
(d)  Hearing and determination of appeals. The town council shall hear and determine appeals filed pursuant to subsection (c) of this section as promptly as practicable, and its decision, together with the reasons thereof, shall be filed in writing in the office of the town manager as a public record. The vote of at least a majority of the members of the council shall be necessary to reverse or amend in any manner the order appealed from. If the order appealed from is reversed or amended by the town council, the fee paid pursuant to subsection (c) of this section shall be refunded. 
(e)  Failure or refusal to comply with order of town manager. No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any such order of the town manager, with modifications, if any, made by the town council. 
(f)  Prerequisite to obligation to make repairs, alterations, installations or additions to comply with article. The obligation to make repairs, alterations, installations or additions to any premises, dwelling, dwelling unit or habitable room, or the equipment thereof, in order to comply with this article shall not arise, and the leasing or occupancy of the premises, dwelling, dwelling unit or habitable room shall be permissible without them, until the town manager shall find thereat a condition dangerous to health and shall, after full inspection, serve an order in the manner specified in subsections (a)-(e) of this section. 
(Code 1982, §§ 10-19, 10-20) 
Secs. 14-54-14-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BASIC FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 14-71. - Windows. 
    Unless a habitable room in a dwelling or dwelling unit is equipped with approved mechanical ventilation and approved artificial lighting, the owner shall provide for every such habitable room windows, opening directly to the outside air, and the total area of such windows shall not be less than ten percent of the floor area of such room. The owner shall glaze all window sash and provide the same with suitable hardware and shall make the same to open to the extent of not less than five percent of the floor area of such room. Each occupant shall keep free from obstruction such provided means of light and ventilation. 
(Code 1982, § 10-31) 
Sec. 14-72. - Running water and sink. 
    The owner of a dwelling unit containing two or more rooms shall provide such dwelling unit with running water and at least one sink connected to the public sewer or to an approved sewage disposal system. 
(Code 1982, § 10-32) 
Sec. 14-73. - Water closets; bathtubs or showers. 
(a)  The owner of a dwelling shall provide at least one flush-type water closet, either of the standard china-type or of the frostproof-type, for each ten persons or fraction thereof occupying a dwelling. If the standard china-type is provided, it may be located within the dwelling. If the frostproof-type is provided, it shall be located in a room attached to the dwelling by a passage or areaway protected from the weather. 
(b)  After October 19, 1965, no dwelling shall be constructed without having provided therein at least one standard china-type water closet and one bathtub or shower for each ten persons or fraction thereof occupying such dwelling, which facilities shall be located in a room within and accessible from within the dwelling. 
(c)  No occupant shall use any dwelling unless it is equipped with the water closets and bathtubs or showers required by this section. 
(Code 1982, § 10-33) 
Sec. 14-74. - Light and ventilation for toilets and bathrooms. 
    The owner of a dwelling unit shall provide every toilet and every bathroom in such dwelling with adequate light and ventilation. 
(Code 1982, § 10-34) 
Sec. 14-75. - Separate access for each dwelling unit. 
    The owner shall provide each dwelling unit with separate access, either to a hallway, landing, stairway or street. 
(Code 1982, § 10-35) 
Secs. 14-76-14-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPACE AND USE STANDARDS 

Sec. 14-91. - Minimum air and floor space for sleeping rooms. 
    No owner shall knowingly lease for use for sleeping purposes and no occupant shall use for sleeping purposes any room, unless in such room there are at least 400 cubic feet of air space and 50 square feet of floor space for each adult and at least 200 cubic feet of air space and 30 square feet of floor space for each child under the age of 12 years occupying such room. No occupant shall use a room for sleeping purposes which shall have a floor area of less than 60 square feet. 
(Code 1982, § 10-46) 
Sec. 14-92. - Maximum occupancy per habitable room. 
    No owner shall knowingly lease and no occupant shall use any dwelling unit having more than one habitable room in which the occupancy shall exceed an average of two persons per habitable room. For the purpose of this section, any child under one year of age shall not be counted and any child more than one year old but under 12 years of age shall be counted as one-half person. 
(Code 1982, § 10-47) 
Sec. 14-93. - Occupancy of basement rooms. 
    No room in a basement shall be leased for occupation and no occupant shall occupy such room unless: 
(1)  The clear inner height thereof is at least seven feet, six inches. 
(2)  The uppermost three feet of the required clear inner height is above the average ground level and the floors and walls are waterproof and dampproof in accordance with an approved method, if in contact with earth, unless adjacent areaways or other approved means shall provide reasonably equivalent natural or artificial light and ventilation. 
(Code 1982, § 10-48) 
Secs. 14-94-14-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-111. - General duties of owners and occupants. 
(a)  The owner of a dwelling, dwelling unit or habitable room shall keep and maintain the same in good repair and fit for human habitation and shall repair leaks in the roof thereof in such manner as to prevent leaking and shall do all things necessary to drain and convey surplus water therefrom so as not to cause dampness in the walls or ceilings thereof. 
(b)  The owner of each dwelling, dwelling unit or habitable room shall keep the same reasonably weatherproof and capable of being adequately heated. 
(c)  The occupant of any dwelling, dwelling unit or habitable room shall keep the same, including the ceiling, wall, woodwork and floor thereof, clean and free from any accumulation of dirt, grime, grease, filth, rubbish, garbage or similar matter that creates an unsanitary condition and free from vermin and rodent infestation. 
(Code 1982, § 10-59) 
Sec. 14-112. - Maintenance of cellar or basement. 
    The owner shall make the basement or cellar of any dwelling capable of being kept well-drained and well-ventilated. The occupant of a dwelling shall keep the basement or cellar of his dwelling well-ventilated and well-drained. 
(Code 1982, § 10-60) 
Sec. 14-113. - Control of dampness. 
    The owner of every dwelling, dwelling unit or habitable room shall make the floors and walls thereof capable of being kept reasonably free from dampness when the provided means of ventilation are used. Each occupant thereof shall utilize the provided means of ventilation to keep his dwelling, dwelling unit or habitable room free from dampness. 
(Code 1982, § 10-61) 
Sec. 14-114. - Maintenance of plumbing fixtures and appliances. 
    The owner of a dwelling unit shall maintain all water closets and other plumbing fixtures and appliances in such dwelling unit in good repair in accordance with the requirements of state law and of the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the town relating to the installation and maintenance of plumbing fixtures and appliances. 
(Code 1982, § 10-62) 
Sec. 14-115. - Drainage. 
    The owner of a dwelling shall properly grade and drain all courts, yards or other areas on the premises of such dwelling. Each occupant of a dwelling shall fully utilize and keep free from obstruction the provided facilities for drainage, in such manner as to maintain the premises free from the accumulation of rain, waste or surface water. 
(Code 1982, § 10-63) 
Secs. 14-116-14-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING NUMBERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 

Sec. 14-136. - Persons responsible; time of placing numbers on buildings. 
    Each owner of a building, commercial property, industrial structure, single-family residence, or multifamily residence shall be responsible for affixing to such building its assigned building number. Each owner is further responsible for maintaining and repairing the assigned numbers in conformance with section 14-137. Numbers are to be affixed within 30 days after the owner has received notice of the assignment. Building numbers shall be assigned by the town council or by an authorized agent of the town designated by the town council. 
(Code 1982, § 5-41) 
Sec. 14-137. - Size, type of material and location of numbers. 
    Building numbers shall not be less than three inches in height and shall be made of a durable and clearly visible or light-reflecting material. The numbers shall be conspicuously placed on, above or at the side of the main entrance door so that the number is plainly visible from the street. Whenever a building is more than 50 feet from the street, or when the building entrance is not visible from the street, the number shall be placed at the walk, driveway or other suitable location that is easily discernible from the street. 
(Code 1982, § 5-42) 
Sec. 14-138. - Multifamily residence complexes; multiunit office or commercial complexes. 
    In addition to the requirements of sections 14-136 and 14-137, whenever one building number is assigned to a building which is further divided into separate apartments, suites or other unconnected units, the owner shall affix to the entrance of each unit the designated letter, numbers or name which differentiates that unit from the others contained within the same building. Such identifying letter, numbers or name shall be made of a durable and clearly visible or light-reflecting material and shall be placed so as to be clearly visible from the street or walkway on which the entrance faces. 
(Code 1982, § 5-43) 
Sec. 14-139. - Enforcement; penalty for violation. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the town manager or his authorized agent. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this article shall be a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 5-44) 
ARTICLE V. - SPOT BLIGHT ABATEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Spot blight abatement, Code of Virginia, § 36-49.1:1 

Sec. 14-140. - Purpose. 
    The town council finds that deteriorating properties, including the improvements and the land on which they are built, have a deleterious effect on property values and the quality of life in the area surrounding them. This article is enacted to provide for the abatement of blight which threatens the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
( Ord. No. 955, 7-1-2014 ) 
Sec. 14-141. - Blight abatement authorized. 
    The town may clear or repair any blighted property as defined in this article in order to abate blight. In addition, the town may recover the cost of any clearing or repair of such property from the owner of the property. 
( Ord. No. 955, 7-1-2014 ) 
Sec. 14-142. - Blighted property defined. 
(a)  The term "blighted property" means any individual commercial, industrial, or residential structure or improvement that endangers the public's health, safety, or welfare because the structure or improvement upon the property is dilapidated, deteriorated, or violates minimum health and safety standards, or any structure or improvement previously designated as blighted under the process of determination of "spot blight." 
(b)  A property can be considered blighted if it meets the standards set forth in Virginia Code § 36-49.1:1, as amended, and if it meets any of the following criteria: 
(1)  It has been vacant and/or boarded for at least one year; 
(2)  It has been the subject of documented complaints; 
(3)  It is no longer being maintained for useful occupancy; 
(4)  It is dilapidated or lacks normal maintenance and upkeep; 
(5)  It has been the subject of nuisance abatement actions undertaken by the town or County of Roanoke; 
(6)  Any buildings or improvements which, by reason of dilapidation, obsolescence, overcrowding, faulty arrangement of design, lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities, excessive land coverage, deleterious land use or obsolete layout, or any combination of these or other factors, are detrimental to the safety, health or welfare of the community. 
(c)  The following is a list of potential conditions that may cause a property to be considered blighted under the terms of this article: 
(1)  Condemned structure. A structure on the property has been continuously vacant for at least one year, has been condemned as unfit for human occupancy by the Roanoke County building office in accordance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, but has neither been demolished nor repaired by the owner as directed by the building official; 
(2)  Rat and rodent infestation. There is evidence of rat or rodent infestation or harborages caused by conditions on the property; 
(3)  Previous citations. The property has been used or maintained in a condition which as result in the following actions: 
(i)  The owner has been cited on at least three separate occasions because activities or conditions on the property violate state or town laws or ordinances governing the use or maintenance of property, and those activities or conditions threaten the public health, safety and welfare of the community; or 
(ii)  The owner has refused to abate one or more violations as ordered by the court or has repeated conduct involving the use or maintenance of property for which the owner has been convicted of violating state law, town/county or local ordinances in the past. 
(4)  Inadequate facilities. The property has inadequate sewage, septic, plumbing, well or heating facilities; 
(5)  Potential trespass. If the property is vacant, the owner has failed to take adequate precautions to prevent the use of or access to the property by trespassers; 
(6)  Nuisance to children. A potential attractive nuisance to children exists on the property, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, basements, excavations or broken fences; 
(7)  Fire hazard. Any condition exists on the property that has been specifically identified as a fire hazard by the fire department or the building official; or 
(8)  Substantial dilapidation of buildings or structures as evidenced by either: 
(i)  Collapse of either interior or exterior structural elements such as floors, walls, roofs, porches, decks and similar appendages which pose a danger to the public; or 
(ii)  Removal or rotting of exterior siding, roofing or sheathing exposing structural members to the weather. 
( Ord. No. 955, 7-1-2014 ) 
Sec. 14-143. - Procedures for declaring blight; notification of owner; public hearing. 
(a)  The town manager or his designee shall make a preliminary determination that a property has non-structural blight in accordance with section 14-142. The building commissioner or his designee shall make the preliminary determination that a property has structural blight in accordance with section 14-142. The town manager or his designee shall notify the owner by regular and certified mail sent to the last address shown in the real estate tax assessment records, specifying the reasons why the property is blighted. The owner shall have 30 days within which to respond in writing with a plan to cure the blight within a reasonable time. Such plan shall include a site plan delineating blighted condition(s) and specifying measures to be taken for the removal of each. 
(b)  Upon the building commissioner's approval of the plan to cure structural blight, and/or the town's approval of the plan to cure non-structural blight, the owner shall have 90 days to complete all work approved in the spot blight abatement plan. The town, upon acceptance of a performance bond in the amount of the estimated cost of the work, may grant an extension of an additional 90 days to complete work where it is determined that the owner has completed substantial portions of the work in compliance with the plan and is diligently pursuing completion of all work. 
(c)  If the owner fails to respond within the 30-day period with a spot blight abatement plan that is acceptable to the building commissioner and/or the town, or fails to complete the work approved in the spot blight abatement plan to cure the blight within the allotted time, including any extensions, the town manager or his designee (1) may request the town council to conduct a public hearing concerning the repair or other disposition of the property in question, and if a public hearing is scheduled, (2) shall prepare a spot blight abatement plan for the repair or other disposition of the property. The town shall send written notice and the proposed plan to the owner before the town council acts on the ordinance and proposed plan. 
(d)  Notice of public hearing will be mailed by regular mail to (1) the property owner(s) and (2) abutting property owner(s) at least three weeks prior to the date of the public hearing. Notice must also be published twice in a newspaper with local circulation, and shall also be posted on the property. 
(e)  Following the public hearing, the town council may consider the proposed ordinance to declare the property blighted and the proposed plan. At least four members of town council must vote to approve the ordinance in order for it to be adopted. If said ordinance is adopted and council approves the proposed plan, the town may clear or repair the property in accordance with the approved plan, the provisions of this section, and applicable law. The town shall have a lien on all property so cleared or repaired under an approved plan to recover the cost of demolition or improvements made by the town or its designee to bring the blighted property into compliance with applicable building codes. The lien on such property shall bear interest at the legal rate of interest established in Code of Virginia, § 6.2-301, as amended, beginning on the date the repairs are completed through the date on which the lien is paid. The lien shall be filed in the County of Roanoke Circuit Court and shall be treated in all respects as a tax lien and enforceable in the same manner as provide by law. The town may recover its costs of clearing or repair from the owner of record of the property when the clearing or repairs were made at such time as the property is sold or disposed of by such owner. The costs of clearing or repair shall be recovered from the proceeds of any such sale. 
( Ord. No. 955, 7-1-2014 ) 
Sec. 14-144. - Declaration of nuisance. 
    In lieu of the exercise of powers granted in sections 14-140 through 14-143, the town council, by ordinance, may declare any blighted property to constitute a nuisance, and thereupon abate the nuisance as authorized by law. Such ordinance shall be adopted only after written notice by certified mail to the owner of the property at the last known address of such owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records. If the owner does not abate or remove the nuisance and the town abates or removes the nuisance at its expense, the costs of abatement or removal shall be a lien on the property and the lien shall bear interest at the legal rate of interest established in Code of Virginia, § 6.2-301, as amended, beginning on the date the abatement or removal is completed through the date on which the lien is paid. 
( Ord. No. 955, 7-1-2014 ) 
Sec. 14-145. - Provisions cumulative. 
    The provisions of this article shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to any remedies for spot blight abatement that may be authorized by law. 
Sec. 14-146. - Definitions, per § 36-3 of the Code of Virginia. 
    Blighted area: Any area that endangers the public health, safety or welfare; or any area that is detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare because commercial, industrial, or residential structures or improvements are dilapidated, or deteriorated or because such structures or improvements violate minimum health and safety standards. This definition includes, without limitation, areas previously designated as blighted areas pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Virginia § 36-1 et seq. 
    Blighted property: Any individual commercial, industrial, or residential structure or improvement that endangers the public's health, safety, or welfare because the structure or improvement upon the property is dilapidated, deteriorated, or violates minimum health and safety standards, or any structure or improvement previously designated as blighted pursuant to the Code of Virginia § 36-49.1:1, under the process for determination of "spot blight. 
    Spot blight: A structure or improvement that is a blighted property as defined in this section. 
    Spot blight abatement plan (referred to as "plan"): Means the written plan prepared by the owner or owners of record of the real property to address spot blight. If the owner or owners of record of the real property fail to respond as provided in the Code of Virginia § 36-49.1:1, the locality or the authority can prepare a spot blight abatement plan to address the spot blight with respect to an individual commercial, industrial, or residential structure or improvement, but may only implement such plan in accordance with the provisions of § 36-49.1:1. 
( Ord. No. 955, 7-1-2014 ) 
Chapter 22 - COURTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Courts, ch. 5. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Jurisdiction of general district court, Code of Virginia, § 16.1-123.1. 

Sec. 22-1. - Courthouse maintenance fees. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 17.1-281, the county board of supervisors shall return to the town a portion of the fees for courthouse maintenance taxed as costs in each traffic case in the county general district court. The portion returned shall be the percentage derived from dividing the number of traffic cases originating and heard in the town, by the total number of traffic cases originating and heard in the county. 
(Code 1982, § 5-5) 
Chapter 26 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Election of mayor and councilmen, § 3.1; town elections to be governed by state law, § 7.1. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; council, § 2-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Elections, Code of Virginia, title 24.2; town election process, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-601. 

Sec. 26-1. - Voting precincts; polling places. 
    Local descriptions of the north and south voting precincts are as follows: 
(1)  North Vinton Precinct. Beginning at the east corporate line of the City of Roanoke and the west corporate line of the Town of Vinton at Virginia Avenue; thence with the corporate line of the Town of Vinton in a northeasterly and easterly direction to Wolf Creek; thence with Wolf Creek and the east corporate line of the Town of Vinton in a southerly direction to Washington Avenue; thence with Washington Avenue in a westerly direction to Pollard Street; thence with Pollard Street in a southerly direction to Virginia Avenue at First Street; thence with Virginia Avenue in a westerly direction to the place of beginning. 
Vinton Baptist Church - Polling Place 
219 E. Washington Avenue 
Vinton, VA 24179 
(2)  South Vinton Precinct. Beginning at the east corporate line of the City of Roanoke and the west corporate line of the Town of Vinton at Virginia Avenue; thence with Virginia Avenue in an easterly direction to Pollard Street at First Street; thence with Pollard Street in a northerly direction to Washington Avenue; thence with Washington Avenue in an easterly direction to Wolf Creek being the east corporate line of the Town of Vinton; thence with Wolf Creek and the east corporate line of the Town of Vinton in a southerly direction to the Roanoke River; thence in a westerly direction with the Roanoke River and the south corporate line of the Town of Vinton to Tinker Creek being the east corporate line of the City of Roanoke and the west corporate line of the Town of Vinton; thence with Tinker Creek in a northwesterly direction to the place of beginning. 
Vinton Senior Citizens Center - Polling Place 
814 E. Washington Avenue 
Vinton, VA 24179 
(Code 1982, § 6-1; Ord. No. 668, § 6-1, 5-6-1997) 
State Law reference- Polling places to be fixed by ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-308. 
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Regulation of alarm company operators, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-911. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE AND SECURITY ALARMS 

Sec. 30-21. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the use and operation of security and fire alarm systems in premises to which the police department or fire and rescue services are expected to respond. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 7-52, 2-4-1997) 
Sec. 30-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm means any mechanical or electrical device or system of devices located in or connected to any premises that when actuated by the occurrence of a criminal act or fire risk requiring police, fire or rescue response, transmits a signal to a central alarm system, a third party or directly to the town police department emergency communications center, or produces an audible or visible signal designed to notify a person within audible or visible range of the signal. 
    Alarm board means the facility located in the emergency communications center of the town police department which is designed to receive direct signals from alarm systems authorized to be connected thereto. 
    Alarm company means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, organization or any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual who is legally authorized to transact business within the commonwealth and who currently maintains either a state contractor's license or a local business license, who is engaged in the business of selling leasing, installing, maintaining, altering, servicing or monitoring security or fire alarm systems which respond to such alarms. 
    Disruption of telephone circuit means a disruption of telephone circuits that causes multiple false alarms on the same circuit when the disruption was beyond the user and user's alarm company's control, and which disruption has been corrected. 
    False alarm means any security or fire alarm signal, communicated directly or indirectly to the emergency communications center which is not in response to an actual or threatened criminal activity or fire risk requiring immediate police, fire or rescue response. False alarms shall include negligently or accidentally activated signals; signals which are the result of faulty, malfunctioning or improperly installed or maintained equipment; signals which are purposely activated to summon the police department or fire and rescue service in nonemergency situations; and signals for which the actual cause is not determined. False alarms shall not include signals caused by unusually severe weather conditions or other causes which are identified and determined by the chief of police or designee to be beyond the control of the user. 
    Notice means written notification of a false alarm by the chief of police, or his designee, to the user of the security alarm system transmitting a false alarm, or by certified or registered mail to the user's agent. 
    Protected premises means the premises upon which a security or fire alarm system has been placed for the purpose of detecting a hazard. 
    Severe weather means an electrical storm, rain storm, snow storm, ice storm, flood, hurricane, tornado or other act of nature which causes multiple false alarms within the town. 
    User means any person using a security or fire alarm system or any person owning premises in which a security or fire alarm system is installed, or any person having an insurable interest in any premises in which is located such a system, regardless of whether the person owns the security or fire alarm or the premises on which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 7-53, 2-4-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-23. - Intentional false alarms prohibited; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and without just cause, activate a security or fire alarm system to summon the police department or fire or rescue services in situations where there is no actual or threatened criminal or fire risk requiring immediate police, fire or rescue response. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 7-54, 2-4-1997) 
Sec. 30-24. - Alarm deactivation; prohibition of alarms without timing mechanisms. 
(a)  The police officer or fire or rescue official responding to a false alarm shall have the authority to deactivate such alarm system without liability when it is disturbing the peace and quiet of the community, if the user fails to deactivate the alarm system within a reasonable time. A reasonable time for purposes of this section shall be 15 minutes from the time that substantial efforts are first made to contact the user. 
(b)  Owners or users of audible alarms must equip such audible alarms with a timing mechanism that will disengage the audible alarm after a maximum of 15 minutes. Audible alarms without such a timing mechanism shall be unlawful in the town and must be disconnected by the owner or user. This section shall not apply, however, to fire alarms. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 7-55, 2-4-1997) 
Sec. 30-25. - Duties of user and alarm company. 
(a)  Users who connect, maintain and operate security or fire alarm systems that have their point of termination in the emergency communications center of the town police department, or who maintain an audible alarm must comply to the following conditions: 
(1)  Complete upon an annual basis an emergency alarm information form to be delivered to the chief of police, containing the following information: 
a.  Name and address of the protected premises. 
b.  Name, address, telephone number or other locations whereby the person maintaining the alarm can be located. 
c.  Names, addresses, telephone numbers or other means of locating a minimum of two persons, at different locations, who can be contacted on a 24-hour-a-day basis in case of an alarm or false alarm who are capable of affording access to the premises where the alarm is located, and who can respond to an alarm on the premises within 30 minutes. 
d.  Any additional relevant information requested by the chief of police for the town. 
(2)  Inform the chief of police in writing within five business days of any changes that materially alter any information listed on the emergency alarm information form. 
(3)  Comply with the town police department's policies and procedures in regard to alarm responses which will be provided by the town police department and will accompany the emergency alarm information form. 
(b)  Each user of a security or fire alarm shall be responsible for maintaining such alarm in good working order and providing or causing to be provided the necessary service to prevent false alarms. Each user shall cause his security alarm to be inspected regularly by a person qualified to inspect and service such alarm. Inspections shall particularly address conditions that have the potential of causing false alarms. 
(c)  Each alarm company selling, leasing or installing a security alarm or fire alarm within the town shall at the time of sale, lease or installation of a security or fire alarm, provide the user or potential user of such security or fire alarm with a copy of this article. 
(d)  Implementation of a continuous training program for appropriate employees and others, who may have occasion to activate the alarm system, regarding the use and operation of such alarm system, which includes instruction on the setting, activation and resetting of the alarm. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 7-56, 2-4-1997) 
Sec. 30-26. - Notice of false alarm. 
    Notice shall be hand delivered to the user or user's agent or mailed, by certified or registered mail, to the current address of the user or the user's agent of: 
(1)  The number of false alarms recorded for the user's security alarm during the current recording period; 
(2)  The proposed fee to be assessed against the user; and 
(3)  The user's right to appeal pursuant to 30-28. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 7-53, 2-4-1997) 
Sec. 30-27. - False alarm fees. 
(a)  Users shall be allowed four unintentional false alarms, without fees, in any calendar year. For each false alarm beyond the four permitted by this section, there will be civil fees levied against the user, except as follows: 
(1)  No fee shall be charged for a false alarm if, prior to dispatch of vehicles or personnel of the police department, fire or rescue services to the scene of the alarm, the emergency communications center is notified of the false alarm by the user or an authorized employee or agent of the user. 
(2)  No fee shall be charged for a false alarm when the use demonstrates to the satisfaction of the chief of police, or his designee, that the false alarm was generated by adverse weather conditions, or electrical or telephonic power failures or to other causes which are identified and determined by the chief of police, or his designee, to be beyond the control of the user. 
(b)  If within any calendar year, there is a dispatch of vehicles or personnel of the police department, fire or rescue services in response to more than four false alarms per premises, fees shall be assessed against the user for all subsequent dispatches in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Fifth dispatch, $25.00; 
(2)  Sixth dispatch, $50.00; 
(3)  Seventh dispatch, $100.00; and 
(4)  Eighth and all subsequent dispatches, $150.00. 
(c)  Telephonic requests received for police, fire or rescue responses to protected premises or dwellings from a third party alarm monitoring service which meets the criteria for false alarms shall be subject to the false alarm fee schedule contained in this section. The user shall be legally responsible for all fees or charges imposed under this section. 
(d)  Any violation of any section of this article where punishment is not specifically provided shall constitute a civil fine in the amount of $25.00. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate fine. 
(e)  The town police department will be responsible for maintaining records of false alarms for billing purposes and shall forward such information to the town treasurer's office on a monthly basis. 
(f)  If a user fails to pay a false alarm fee or civil fine levied under this section within 30 days of the billing date used by the town treasurer, the user shall be charged interest at the judgement rate from such billing date. All such fees and charges shall be paid to the town treasurer. An appeal, as provided for in section 30-28, shall suspend the running of such interest, but interest shall be due to the town as calculated from the date the fees or charges were originally billed if such appeal is denied. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 7-57, 2-4-1997) 
Sec. 30-28. - False alarms appeals process. 
(a)  Disputes over the number of false alarms or assessment of fines and fees may be reviewed by a panel consisting of the chief of police, or his designee, the assistant town manager, and the town of town fire chief, or his designee, upon receipt of a written request from the petitioner within five business days of his receiving a bill. Decisions of this panel shall be consistent with the purposes and intent of this article. A consensus of the panel shall constitute the final decision which shall be communicated to the petitioner and town treasurer in writing. 
(b)  The administrative appeal panel shall consider the following factors in reaching a determination as to the appropriateness of a false alarm fee: 
(1)  Evidence of attempts by the user to eliminate the cause of false alarms, including installation of new equipment, replacement of defective equipment, inspection and repair of the system by an alarm company, and specific formal training of the user. 
(2)  Evidence that any false alarm was caused by electrical storm, rain storm, snow storm, ice storm, flood, hurricane, tornado or other act of God. 
(3)  Evidence that any false alarm was caused by the disruption of telephone circuits beyond the control of the user of any alarm company or central monitoring agency, and that the cause of such disruption has been corrected. 
(4)  Written evidence that the alarm system which caused the alarm response has been disconnected and removed form the premises. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 7-58, 2-4-1997) 
Sec. 30-29. - Exceptions. 
    No alarm shall be designated a false alarm, and no fee shall be imposed upon the user of any security or fire alarm under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the security or fire alarm is located in or connected to any premises owned, leased or occupied or controlled by the United States of America, the commonwealth, the town or the county. 
(2)  When the security alarm is located within or attached to a motor vehicle except when such vehicle is inside the premises to which the police response is made and the motor vehicle security alarm generated the signal which caused the false alarm response. 
(3)  When a newly installed security alarm transmits a false alarm during the first 20 days after its installation, provided that the user, user's alarm company or user's agent had given prior written notice to the police department of the date of installations and service or adjustment during such time period that might cause a false alarm. 
(4)  When advance notice is given by the user, the user's alarm company or the user's agent to a police dispatcher that a security alarm is being repaired, serviced or is malfunctioning so that police response may be suspended until the user, the user's alarm company or the user's agent gives notice that the repairs or services have been completed. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 7-59, 2-4-1997) 
Secs. 30-30-30-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FEE FOR SERVICES 

Sec. 30-40. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency shall mean an unforeseen condition or circumstance in which there is a need for immediate medical care in order to prevent loss of life or aggravation of illness or injury. 
    Emergency medical services vehicle shall mean an ambulance, rescue squad vehicle, fire truck or other vehicle which may be used for or is maintained or operated to provide immediate medical care to or transport of persons who are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless. 
    Patient shall mean an individual who is sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless. 
    Permit shall mean a permit issued by the town manager or his designee, authorizing the operation of an emergency medical services vehicle. 
    Person shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, group of individuals acting together for a common purpose, or organization of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 753, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 30-41. - Charges for emergency medical services vehicle. 
    The town council may establish by resolution, upon recommendation of the town manager, reasonable fees for the provision of emergency medical services by all emergency medical service personnel, whether volunteers, paid public employees, or private entities operating under a permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 753, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 30-42. - Permit required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated an emergency medical services vehicle from within the town to any other location within or outside the town, unless such person possesses a permit. 
(b)  The town manager, or his designee, is authorized to determine and prescribe the areas of service within which a permit holder may operate within the town so as to assure adequate coverage throughout the geographical area of the town. Further, the number of permits for emergency medical service vehicles in the town may be limited to achieve the objectives of this article. 
(c)  No permit shall be required for operation of an emergency medical services vehicle which is: 
(1)  Engaged in the transportation of a person from a point beyond the limits of the town to a location within the town; or 
(2)  Engaged in the transportation of a person through the town. 
(d)  No permit shall be required for operation of an emergency medical services vehicle when used to render assistance, at the request of the town, in the case of a major catastrophe or emergency with which the vehicles which have received a permit to operate in the town are insufficient or unable to cope. 
(Ord. No. 753, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 30-43. - Volunteer rescue squads and governmental agencies. 
    Volunteer rescue squads and the members thereof who are acting in such capacity and agencies of the town and their employees who are acting in any capacity of emergency services shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 753, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 30-44. - Permit-Application. 
    Any person who desires a permit shall file a sworn application with the town manager, or his designee, on a form prepared and provided for that purpose. The application shall include evidence of compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter and such other information as the chief of fire and rescue, or his designee, shall require. 
(Ord. No. 753, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 30-45. - Same-Requirements. 
    No person shall be issued a permit unless he: 
(1)  Furnishes proof that he possesses a valid permit issued by the commonwealth to operate an emergency medical service vehicle. 
(2)  Agrees in writing to comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter, other provisions of this Code, any reasonable rules and regulations developed by the town manager or his/her designee for the implementation of this article, and applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(3)  Agrees in writing to provide mutual aide assistance, if available, in any emergency situation upon the request of the town. 
(4)  Provides an appropriate certificate of insurance, or certificate of self-insurance where appropriate, indicating the following minimum coverages: motor vehicular liability insurance of $100,000.00 per occurrence and $300,000.00 aggregate and general liability insurance of $100,000.00 per occurrence and $300,000.00 aggregate. The certificate of insurance shall contain a clause obligating the company issuing the same to give 15 days notice in writing to the town manager before the cancellation of such policies. The town shall be named as an additional insured on such policies of insurance as its interests may appear. 
(Ord. No. 753, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 30-46. - Same-Issuance or denial. 
(a)  The town manager, or his designee, upon consideration of the requirements set forth in this chapter, shall grant or deny the request for permit. The decision of the town manager, or his designee, shall be in writing and he/she shall mail a copy thereof to the applicant at the address listed on his/her application. 
(b)  Any person who is denied a permit by final decision of the town manager may appeal the same to the town council by written notice filed with the town clerk within 30 calendar days of mailing of the town manager's final decision. Upon proper filing of such appeal, after such notice and hearing as the town council may deem appropriate, the council may affirm, reverse, or modify the town manager's decision, or may remand the matter for further investigation or action. 
(Ord. No. 753, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 30-47. - Duty to give notice of change of circumstances. 
    The applicant for a permit or, if a permit has been granted, the holder of a permit shall immediately give notice in writing to the town manager of any change in the information set forth in the application for permit, including, without limitation, any insurance coverage, or the ownership of 50 percent or more of the common stock of the corporation which has applied for or has received the permit. 
(Ord. No. 753, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 30-48. - Current holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity. 
    Any person who, on the effective date of this article, holds a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the commonwealth licensing the operation of an ambulance or vehicle for the transportation of handicapped persons may, for a period of 60 calendar days after the effective date of this article, continue to operate the same within the town. Thereafter such person shall be required to have a permit issued by the town manager, or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 753, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 30-49. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  Any permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the town manager, or his designee, after a hearing, for failure to comply with the provisions of title 32.1, chapter 5, article 2.1 of the Code of Virginia (Code of Virginia, § 32.1-138.6 et seq.) or of this chapter or any other provision of local, state or federal law or regulation. Such hearing shall be held after ten calendar days prior written notice, mailed to the permit holder at the address listed on his application or any subsequent written notification of change of address. After the hearing, the town manager, or his designee, shall render his decision in writing and shall mail a copy thereof to the permit holder at the address described above. The decision of the town manager, or his designee, shall be effective as of the date established in his decision and shall not be stayed pending the outcome of any appeal. 
(b)  Any permit holder affected by an adverse decision of the town manager may appeal the same to the town council by written notice filed with the town clerk within 30 calendar days of mailing of the town manager's final decision. Upon proper filing of such appeal, after such notice and hearing ass the town council may deem appropriate, the council may affirm, reverse, or modify the town manager's decision, or may remand the matter for further investigation or action. 
(Ord. No. 753, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 30-50. - Sale, assignment, etc. prohibited. 
    No permit granted under this chapter may be sold, assigned, or transferred, nor shall it in any way vest in any person, other than the applicant to whom the permit is granted, any rights or privileges under the permit. For purposes of this section, the transfer of ownership of 50 percent or more of the common stock of a corporation which has been granted a permit shall be deemed to be a transfer of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 753, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 30-51. - Authorization to provide non-emergency services; response to emergencies permitted under limited conditions. 
(a)  The holder of a permit shall be authorized to respond to requests for non-emergency service. Response to emergencies shall not be permitted unless: 
(1)  A request is made by the patient or by someone on behalf of the patient. 
(2)  A request is made by an authorized representative of the town. 
(3)  A condition is coincidentally observed by the owner or operator of the emergency medical services vehicle which requires immediate attention. 
(b)  A permit holder who provides ambulance or emergency medical service under emergency conditions shall give immediate notice of such response at the time of response to the county emergency dispatch/E-911 center. 
(Ord. No. 753, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 30-52. - Operations within the town. 
(a)  As a condition of the permit, the permit holder agrees to provide service throughout the geographic area designated by the permit. 
(b)  No permit holder shall refuse to transport any person in the town to any hospital emergency room, approved by the town manager, or his/her designee, without just cause. For purposes of this section, the term "just cause" shall include unavailability of qualified personnel or vehicles and the inability or refusal of the patient to pay for the requested ambulance service. 
(Ord. No. 753, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 30-53. - Service logs. 
    Every permit holder shall maintain accurate service logs of operations undertaken in accordance with its permit. Such service logs shall include, with regard to each request for ambulance service, the time and date the request was received, the location of the patient on whose behalf the request was made, the time the ambulance arrived at the location, the destination and time of arrival at the destination. If the request was denied, the log shall indicate the reason for such denial. In addition, the service log shall include any other information required by the town manager. Such logs shall be maintained for a period of three years and made available for inspection by authorized representatives of the town upon reasonable request. 
(Ord. No. 753, 8-21-01) 
Sec. 30-54. - Powers and responsibilities of the town manager. 
    The town manager, or his designee, is hereby authorized to exercise the following powers and responsibilities in order to effectively achieve the purposes of this article as follows: 
(1)  To enter into contracts with any person for the administration and collection of any fees which are imposed by the town, by any volunteer rescue squad or other non-profit organization operating under any permit granted in accordance with this article; 
(2)  To establish reasonable rules and procedures for imposing and collecting authorized fees for the provision of emergency medical services; 
(3)  To write off as uncollectible any accounts which are reasonably deemed to be uncollectible; and 
(4)  To exercise such other reasonable powers and authority as shall be necessary for the proper administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 753, 8-21-01) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; planning, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 94; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference- Erosion and sediment control, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq.; stormwater management, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-603.3; local air pollution ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1321; abatement or removal of nuisances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 918, adopted Sept. 6, 2011, amended and reenacted the former Art. II, §§ 34-21-34-27, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1982, §§ 12-103-12-108; Ord. No. 658, § 12-107, adopted Jan. 7, 1997. 

Sec. 34-21. - Declaration of policy. 
    At certain levels, noise can be detrimental to the health, welfare, safety, peace, and quality of life of the citizens of the Town of Vinton, and in the public interest, noise should be controlled. Therefore, it is hereby declared to be the public policy of the town to promote an environment for its citizens free from noise that jeopardizes their health or welfare or degrades the quality of life. 
(Ord. No. 918, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 34-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dwelling unit shall mean one or more rooms arranged, designed, or intended to be occupied as separate living quarters by one or more persons and including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
    Emergency work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from immediate exposure to danger, including work performed by public service companies when emergency inspection, repair of facilities or restoration of services is required for the immediate health, safety or welfare of the community. 
    Motor vehicle means the following self-propelled vehicles: passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semitrailers, campers, racing vehicles, and any motorcycles including, but not limited to, motor scooters, minibikes, all-terrain vehicles and three-wheelers, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
    Noise or noise disturbance means any sound which (a) endangers or injures the safety or health of any person; (b) causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on any person; or (c) negatively impacts the value of personal or real property. 
    Owner means the person owning, controlling, or possessing land, premises, or personalty. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, cooperative partnership, firm, association, trust, estate, private institution, group, agency or any legal successor, representative, agent or agency thereof. 
    Plainly audible shall mean any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. 
    Public property means any real property owned or controlled by the county or any other governmental entity. 
    Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity, or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound including, duration, intensity, and frequency. 
    Sound-amplifying equipment means any machine, device, or equipment for the amplification of the human voice, music, or other sound as defined herein. This term shall not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic-safety purposes. 
(Ord. No. 918, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 34-23. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or to the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
(2)  Music, bells, chimes or other sounds which are emanating from a church, temple, synagogue or other place of worship. 
(3)  Sound generated from school-sponsored athletic or recreational events. 
(4)  Sound generated by activities which are an official or approved part of the Vinton Dogwood Festival, or any other town-approved festival or activity. 
(5)  Sound generated in M-1, M-2 and B-G zoning districts which are necessary and incidental to the uses permitted therein. 
(6)  Sound for which a variance has been granted in accordance with section 34-27. 
(7)  Religious or political gatherings and other activities protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(8)  Sounds generated by airplanes and trains. 
(Ord. No. 918, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 34-24. - Penalties. 
    A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor on the following schedule: 
(1)  First violation: class 4 misdemeanor. 
(2)  Second violation: class 3 misdemeanor. 
(3)  Third violation: class 2 misdemeanor. 
(4)  Fourth and any future violation: class 1 misdemeanor. 
    Each separate act on the part of the person violating this article shall be deemed a separate offense, and each day a violation is permitted to continue unabated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 918, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 34-25. - Reserved. 
Sec. 34-26. - Loud noises prohibited. 
    The following acts are declared to be noise disturbances in violation of this article. The acts so specified shall not be deemed to be an exclusive enumeration of those acts which may constitute a noise disturbance and provided that the acts so specified as follows may still constitute a noise disturbance independently of the hours of day such acts take place: 
(1)  Engaging in, or operating or causing to be operated any equipment used, in the construction, repair, alteration or demolition of buildings, streets, alleys or appurtenances thereto, except for emergency work, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day. The use of construction vehicles for transportation to and from an active construction site may be done at any time. 
(2)  Repairing, rebuilding or modifying any motor vehicle or other mechanical device between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in a manner as to be plainly audible across property boundaries. 
(3)  Loading or unloading trucks in the outdoors within 100 yards of a residence between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day. 
(4)  Sounding the horn or warning device of a vehicle, except when necessary as a warning during the operation of the vehicle. 
(5)  Operating or permitting the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, television, phonograph or any other device for the production of sound, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day, in such a manner as to be plainly audible across property boundaries or through partitions common to two residences within a building or plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet or more from such device. 
(6)  Using or operating on the inside or outside of any store, shop, business establishment, warehouse, or commercial building, any loudspeaker, sound amplifying equipment, or other sound producing or reproducing device capable of emitting music, noise, sounds, tapes, or voice in such a manner that it is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet or more from the store, shop, business establishment, warehouse or commercial building unless it is used only intermittently for announcing or paging an individual or unless it signals the ringing of a telephone, danger from smoke, a fire, or a burglary, or the beginning or stopping of work or school, or unless it is operated in accordance with conditions of zoning. 
(7)  Playing or permitting the playing of any radio, stereo, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker, sound-amplifying equipment, or other electronic device or mechanical equipment used for the amplification of sound within a motor vehicle and which is plainly audible from outside the motor vehicle at a distance of 50 feet of more from the vehicle. This provision shall not apply to sirens, loud speakers, and emergency communications radios in public safety vehicles; nor shall this provision apply to motor vehicle alarms or other security devices. 
(8)  Using or operating any motor vehicle without factory-installed mufflers or their equivalent, on private property within a residential use district. 
(9)  To allow noise between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. that is plainly audible either inside the confines of the dwelling unit, house, or apartment of another person or at a distance of 50 feet or more. 
(10)  Allowing any animal (except farm animals in agricultural districts) to create noise that is plainly audible at least once per minute for ten consecutive minutes (i) inside the confines of the dwelling unit, house, or apartment of another or (ii) at a distance of 50 feet or more from the animal. This provision shall not apply if the noise is due to harassment of or injury to the animal, or due to a trespass upon the premises where the animal is located. 
(11)  Creating plainly audible noise in residential areas between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in connection with lawn care, leaf removal, gardening, tree maintenance or tree removal, and other landscaping, lawn, or timbering activities. 
(12)  Failing to deactivate an alarm system plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet or more from such alarm within 30 minutes of hearing the alarm or receiving notice of the alarm's activation. 
(Ord. No. 918, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 34-27. - Undue hardship variances. 
(a)  Any person responsible for a noise or noise disturbance may apply to the town council for a variance or partial variance from the provisions of this article. The town council may grant such variance or partial variance if they find that: 
(1)  The noise does not endanger the public health, safety or welfare; or 
(2)  Compliance with the provisions of this article from which variance is sought would produce serious hardship without producing equal or greater benefit to the public. 
(3)  In determining whether to grant such variance, the town council shall consider the time of day the noise will occur, duration of the noise, whether the noise is intermittent or continuous, its extensiveness, the technical and economic feasibility of bringing the noise into conformance with this article and such other matters as are reasonably related to the impact of the noise on the health, safety and welfare of the community and the degree of hardship which may result from the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(4)  No variance or partial variance issued pursuant to this article shall be granted for a period to exceed one year, but any such variance or partial variance may be renewed for like periods if the town council shall find such renewal is justified after again applying the standards set forth in this article. No renewal shall be granted except upon application therefor. 
(Ord. No. 918, 9-6-2011) 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Fire chief, § 4.6. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; emergency services, ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Smoke detectors, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-922; explosive and inflammable substances, fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1113; fuel-burning equipment, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1116; municipal regulation of the making of fires, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1118; local fire/EMS departments and fire companies, Code of Virginia, § 27-6.1 et seq.; local fire marshals, Code of Virginia, § 27-30 et seq.; relief for firefighters, Code of Virginia, § 27-39 et seq.; effect of Statewide Fire Prevention Code, Code of Virginia, § 27-97; explosives, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-137 et seq.; fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-142 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Violations of chapter. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 7-1) 
Sec. 38-2. - General duties of chief of police at fires. 
    The chief of police or his designees shall attend all fires in the town and shall so direct traffic and enforce traffic regulations in the vicinity of the fire as to expedite the approach and work of the fire department. He shall also safeguard property during the progress of the fire. 
(Code 1982, § 7-2) 
Sec. 38-3. - Establishment and maintenance of fire lines at scene of fire. 
    The fire chief shall establish fire lines where needed during any fire, and the chief of police shall be responsible for maintaining such lines until the emergency has passed. 
(Code 1982, § 7-3) 
Sec. 38-4. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  Painting. All fire hydrants located within the town shall be painted in accordance with standards established by the fire marshal. 
(b)  Obstructing. No person shall plant, erect, place or maintain any shrub, bush, tree, fence, pole, structure or other obstruction of any nature, not otherwise provided for in this Code, within four feet of any fire hydrant. 
(Code 1982, §§ 7-4, 7-5) 
Sec. 38-5. - Designation, marking of fire lanes; obstruction. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall designate fire lanes on public streets and roads and on private property used for apartment complexes or nursing, retirement or convalescent homes, or for commercial, industrial or educational purposes, as follows: 
(1)  Fire lanes shall be established for the purpose of regulating parking in front of or adjacent to fire hydrants and for access by firefighting equipment and other emergency vehicles. 
(2)  Marking and approved signs to designate such lanes shall be provided by the owner or agents of the property involved, under guidelines established by the fire marshal and this section. 
(b)  A fire lane shall be designated where, in the opinion of the fire marshal, it is desirable that certain roads, areas and building access and egress facilities be kept clear for fire department and ambulance emergency equipment and other equipment provided for fire protection. Fire lanes shall be a minimum of ten feet in width from the curb, where curbs are in existence, or from the pavement edge, where no curbs are in existence. 
(c)  Signs, as required to designate fire lanes, shall be as follows: 
(1)  The design of the signs shall be such as is approved in the Virginia Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and shall include the language: "No Parking-Fire Lane." 
(2)  The signs shall be located so that there is at least one sign for every 100 feet of fire lane. However, should the fire marshal determine that additional signs are necessary, then the owner shall locate such signs as the fire marshal determines are necessary in order to provide that the signs are in a proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. 
(3)  The signs shall be placed as follows: 
a.  Pavement edge to sign edge: 
1.  Rural: not less than six feet nor more than ten feet. 
2.  Urban: not less than one foot nor more than three feet. 
b.  Curb face to sign edge, rural or urban: not less than one foot nor more than three feet. 
c.  Pavement top to sign bottom: 
1.  Rural: five feet. 
2.  Urban: seven feet. 
d.  Curb top to sign bottom: 
1.  Rural: five feet. 
2.  Urban: seven feet. 
(4)  Posts for signs, where required, shall be metal and securely mounted. 
(d)  The curb or pavement edge of all fire lanes shall be painted yellow. Any existing marking in the area designated as a fire lane shall be obliterated or painted over in a manner approved by the fire marshal. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, in any manner, any fire lane designated pursuant to this section. This subsection shall not apply to the parking of a motor vehicle in such a fire lane, that subject being covered by section 90-103. 
(Code 1982, § 7-7) 
Sec. 38-6. - Permit for blasting operations. 
    No person shall blast or carry on any blasting operations within the town without having first secured a permit so to do from the town manager. Blasting or blasting operations conducted pursuant to such a permit shall be carried on subject to such conditions as may be expressed in the permit. 
(Code 1982, § 7-8) 
Secs. 38-7-38-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 38-21. - Adopted. 
(a)  The Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code is hereby adopted by reference pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 27-94 et seq., as if fully set forth verbatim in this section, based upon the 1996 edition of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code. 
(b)  The Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code shall control if there is any conflict with this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 7-20) 
Sec. 38-22. - Enforcement. 
    The county fire marshal shall continue, and his reappointment is hereby confirmed, as the designated fire official for the town for the effective enforcement of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code. 
(Code 1982, § 7-21) 
Secs. 38-23-38-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SMOKE DETECTORS 

Sec. 38-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dwelling unit means a residential building or that part of a residential building which is intended to be used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one person or by two or more persons maintaining a common household to the exclusion of all others. 
    Rental agreement means all agreements, written or oral, and valid rules and regulations which establish the terms and conditions concerning the rental payment, use and occupancy of a dwelling unit and premises. 
    Residential building means: 
(1)  Any building containing one or more dwelling units; 
(2)  Any hotel or motel regularly used, offered for, or intended to be used to provide overnight sleeping accommodations for one or more persons; or 
(3)  Roominghouses regularly used, offered for, or intended to be used to provide overnight sleeping accommodations. 
    Residential rental property means a dwelling unit and the structures of which it is a part, and facilities and appurtenances therein and grounds, areas and facilities held out for the use of tenants generally or whose use is promised to the tenants. 
    Smoke detector means a device which detects particles or products of combustion other than heat. 
    Tenant means a person entitled under a rental agreement to occupy a dwelling unit to the exclusion of others. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 7-27, 1-21-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-42. - Installation. 
    Each owner of residential rental properties as defined in section 38-41 shall install smoke detectors according to the directions and specifications of the manufacturer of the smoke detector. Smoke detectors shall be located in all areas specified in the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 7-28, 1-21-1997) 
Sec. 38-43. - Maintenance. 
    The owner shall maintain each smoke detector which is located in a common area of that residential rental building. The occupant of a unit in a residential rental building shall test and maintain each smoke detector in that unit, except that if an occupant who is not an owner gives written notice to the owner that a smoke detector in the unit is not functional, the owner shall provide, within five days after receipt of that notice, any maintenance necessary to make the smoke detector functional. Battery operated smoke detectors shall be tested at least once each month. All others shall be tested at lease semiannually. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 7-29, 1-21-1997) 
Sec. 38-44. - Certificate to be provided to tenants. 
    The owner of rental dwelling units shall, at the beginning of each tenancy, furnish the tenant with a certificate that all required smoke detectors are present, have been inspected and are in good working order. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 7-30, 1-21-1997) 
Sec. 38-45. - Compliance by owners of rental properties. 
    The owners of rental property shall be responsible for compliance with this article. Inspections to determine compliance may be conducted by inspectors of the county fire marshal's office and/or certified fire inspectors with town fire department. Inspections will occur as a result of complaints, knowledge of noncompliance and/or after an incident occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 7-31, 1-21-1997) 
Sec. 38-46. - Penalty for violations of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-13 for each offense, and a separate offense shall deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 7-32, 1-21-1997) 
Secs. 38-47-38-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 38-66. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect public health, safety and welfare by regulating open burning within the town to achieve and maintain, to the greatest extent practicable, a level of air quality that will provide comfort and convenience while promoting economic and social development. This article is intended to supplement the applicable regulations promulgated by the state air pollution control board and other applicable regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 7-42, 3-4-1997) 
Sec. 38-67. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automobile graveyard means any lot or place which is exposed to the weather and upon which more than five motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, and which it would not be economically practical to make operative, are placed, located or found. 
    Clean burning waste means waste which does not produce dense smoke when burned and is not prohibited to be burned under this article. 
    Construction waste means solid waste which is produced or generated during construction of structures. Construction waste consists of lumber, wire, sheetrock, broken brick, shingles, glass, pipes, concrete, and metal and plastics if the metal or plastics are a part of the materials of construction or empty containers for such materials. Paints, coatings, solvents, asbestos, any liquid, compressed gases or semiliquids, and garbage are not construction wastes and the disposal of such materials must be in accordance with the regulations of the state waste management board. 
    Debris waste means stumps, wood, brush and leaves from land clearing operations. 
    Demolition waste means that solid waste which is produced by the destruction of structures and their foundations and includes the same materials as construction waste. 
    Garbage means rotting animal and vegetable matter accumulated by a household in the course of ordinary day-to-day living. 
    Hazardous waste means refuse or combination of refuse which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed or otherwise managed. 
    Household refuse means waste material and trash normally accumulated by a household in the course of ordinary day-to-day living. 
    Industrial waste means all waste generated on the premises of manufacturing and industrial operations such as, but not limited to, those carried on in factories, processing plants, refineries, slaughterhouses and steel mills. 
    Junkyard means an establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk, or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard, and the term shall include garbage dumps and sanitary fills. 
    Landfill means a sanitary landfill, an industrial waste landfill, or a construction/demolition/debris landfill. See Solid Waste Management Regulations (VR 672-20-10) for further definitions of these terms. 
    Local landfill means any landfill located within the jurisdiction of a local government. 
    Open burning means the burning of any matter in such a manner that the products resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or chimney. 
    Open pit incinerator means a device used to burn waste for the primary purpose of reducing the volume by removing combustible matter. Such devices function by directing a curtain of air at an angle across the top of a trench or similarly enclosed space, thus reducing the amount of combustion byproducts emitted into the atmosphere. The term also includes trench burners, air curtain destructors and over draft incinerators. 
    Refuse means trash, rubbish, garbage and other forms of solid or liquid waste including, but not limited to, wastes resulting from residential, agricultural, commercial, industrial, institutional, trade, construction, land clearing, forest management and emergency operations. 
    Salvage operation means any operation consisting of a business, trade or industry participating in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material, such as, but not limited to, reprocessing of used motor oils, metals, chemicals, shipping containers or drums, and specifically including automobile graveyards and junkyards. 
    Sanitary landfill means an engineered land burial facility for the disposal of household waste which is so located, designed, constructed and operated to contain and isolate the waste so that it does not pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment. A sanitary landfill also may receive other types of solid wastes, such as commercial solid waste, nonhazardous sludge, hazardous waste from conditionally exempt small quantity generators, and nonhazardous industrial solid waste. See Solid Waste Management Regulations (VR 672-20-10) for further definitions of these terms. 
    Smoke means small gasborne particulate matter consisting mostly, but not exclusively, of carbon, ash and other material in concentrations sufficient to form a visible plume. 
    Special incineration device means a pit incinerator, conical or teepee burner, or any other device specifically designed to provide good combustion performance. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 7-43, 3-4-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-68. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or the use of a special incineration device for disposal of refuse except as provided in this article. 
(b)  No owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or the use of a special incineration device for disposal of rubber tires, asphaltic materials, crankcase oil, impregnated wood or other rubber or petroleum based materials except when conducting, bona fide firefighting instruction at firefighting training schools having permanent facilities. 
(c)  No owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or the use of a special incineration device for disposal of hazardous waste or containers for such materials. 
(d)  No owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or the use of a special incineration device for the purpose of a salvage operation or for the disposal of commercial/industrial waste. 
(e)  Open burning or the use of special incineration devices permitted under the provisions of this article does not exempt or excuse any owner or other person from the consequences, liability, damages or injuries which may result from such conduct; nor does it excuse or exempt any owner or other person from complying with other applicable laws, articles, regulations and orders of the governmental entities having jurisdiction, even though the open burning is conducted in compliance with this article. In this regard special attention should be directed to Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1142 of the Forest Fire Law of Virginia, the regulations of the state waste management board, and the state air pollution control board's regulations for the control and abatement of air pollution. 
(f)  Upon declaration of an alert, warning or emergency stage of an air pollution episode as described in part VII of the regulations for the control and abatement of air pollution or when deemed advisable by the state air pollution control board to prevent a hazard to, or an unreasonable burden upon, public health or welfare, no owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or use of a special incineration device; and any in process burning or use of special incineration devices shall be immediately terminated in the designated air quality control region. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 7-44, 3-4-1997) 
Sec. 38-69. - Exemptions. 
    The following activities are exempted to the extent covered by the state air pollution control board's regulations for the control and abatement of air pollution: 
(1)  Open burning for training and instruction of government and public firefighters under the supervision of the designated official and industrial in-house firefighting personnel; 
(2)  Open burning for camp fires or other fires that are used solely for recreational purposes, for ceremonial occasions, for outdoor noncommercial preparation of food, and for warming of outdoor workers; 
(3)  Open burning for the destruction of any combustible liquid or gaseous material by burning in a flare or flare stack; 
(4)  Open burning for forest management and agriculture practices approved by the state air pollution control board; and 
(5)  Open burning for the destruction of classified military documents. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 7-45, 3-4-1997) 
Sec. 38-70. - Permissible acts. 
(a)  Open burning is permitted for the disposal of leaves and tree, yard and garden trimmings located on the premises of private property, provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The burning takes place on the premises of the private property. 
(2)  The location of the burning is not less than 300 feet from any occupied building unless the occupants have given prior permission, other than a building located on the property on which the burning is conducted. 
(3)  No regularly scheduled public or private collection service for such trimmings is available at the adjacent street or public road. 
(b)  Open burning is permitted for the disposal of household refuse by homeowners or tenants, provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The burning takes place on the premises of the dwelling. 
(2)  Animal carcasses or animal wastes are not burned. 
(3)  Garbage is not burned. 
(4)  The location of the burning is not less than 300 feet from any occupied building unless the occupants have given prior permission, other than a building located on the property on which the burning is conducted. 
(5)  No regularly scheduled public or private collection service for such refuse is available at the adjacent street or public road. 
(c)  Open burning is permitted for the disposal of debris waste resulting from property maintenance, from the development or modification of roads and highways, parking areas, railroad tracks, pipelines, power and communication lines, buildings or building areas, sanitary landfills, or from any other clearing operations which may be approved by the county fire marshal, provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  All reasonable effort shall be made to minimize the amount of material burned, with the number and size of the debris piles approved by the county fire marshal. 
(2)  The material to be burned shall consist of brush, stumps and similar debris waste and shall not include demolition material. 
(3)  The burning shall be at least 500 feet from any occupied building unless the occupants have given prior permission, other than a building located on the property on which the burning is conducted. 
(4)  The burning shall be conducted at the greatest distance practicable from highways and air fields. 
(5)  The burning shall be attended at all times and conducted to ensure the best possible combustion with a minimum of smoke being produced. 
(6)  The burning shall not be allowed to smolder beyond the minimum period of time necessary for the destruction of the materials. 
(7)  The burning shall be conducted only when the prevailing winds are away from any city, town or built-up area. 
(d)  Open burning is permitted for the disposal of debris on the site of local landfills provided that the burning does not take place on land that has been filled and covered so as to present an underground fire hazard due to the presence of methane gas, and provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The burning shall take place on the premises of a local sanitary landfill which meets the provisions of the regulations of the state waste management board. 
(2)  The burning shall be attended at all times. 
(3)  The material to be burned shall consist only of brush, tree trimmings, yard and garden trimmings, clean burning construction waste, clean burning debris waste, or clean burning demolition waste. 
(4)  All reasonable effort shall be made to minimize the amount of material that is burned. 
(5)  No materials may be burned in violation of the regulations of the state waste management board or the state air pollution control board. The exact site of the burning on a local landfill shall be established in coordination with the regional director and the county fire marshal, and no other site shall be used without the approval of these officials. The county fire marshal shall be notified of the days during which the burning will occur. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 7-46, 3-4-1997) 
Sec. 38-71. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. When open burning of debris waste (section 38-70(c)) or open burning of debris on the site of a local landfill (section 38-70(d)) is to occur within the town, the person responsible for the burning shall obtain a permit from the county fire marshal prior to the burning. Such a permit may be granted only after confirmation by the county fire marshal that the burning can and will comply with the provisions of this article and any other conditions which are deemed necessary to ensure that the burning will not endanger the public health and welfare and to ensure compliance with any applicable provisions of the state air pollution control board's regulations for the control and abatement of air pollution. The permit may be issued for each occasion of burning or for a specific period of time deemed appropriate by the county fire marshal. 
(b)  Conditions. Prior to the initial installation (or reinstallation, in cases of relocation) and operation of special incineration devices, the person responsible for the burning shall obtain a permit from the county fire marshal, such permits to be granted only after confirmation by the county fire marshal that the burning can and will comply with the applicable provisions in regulations for the control and abatement of air pollution and that any conditions are met which are deemed necessary by the county fire marshal to ensure that the operation of the devices will not endanger the public health and welfare. Permits granted for the use of special incineration devices shall, at a minimum, contain the following conditions: 
(1)  All reasonable effort shall be made to minimize the amount of material that is burned. Such efforts shall include, but are not limited to, the removal of pulpwood, sawlogs and firewood. 
(2)  The material to be burned shall consist of brush, stumps and similar debris waste and shall not include demolition material. 
(3)  The burning shall be at least 300 feet from any occupied building unless the occupants have given prior permission, other than a building located on the property on which the burning is conducted, and burning shall be conducted at the greatest distance practicable from highways and air fields. If the county fire marshal determines that it is necessary to protect public health and welfare, he may direct that any of the above cited distances be increased. 
(4)  The burning shall be attended at all times and conducted to ensure the best possible combustion with a minimum of smoke being produced. Under no circumstances should the burning be allowed to smolder beyond the minimum period of time necessary for the destruction of the materials. 
(5)  The burning shall be conducted only when the prevailing winds are away from any city, town or built-up area. 
(6)  The use of special incineration devices shall be allowed only for the disposal of debris waste, clean burning construction waste, and clean burning demolition waste. 
(7)  Permits issued under this subsection shall be limited to a specific period of time deemed appropriate by the county fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 7-47, 3-4-1997) 
Sec. 38-72. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Any violation of this article is punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Each separate incident may be considered a new violation. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 7-48, 3-4-1997) 
Sec. 38-73. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  The county fire marshal is hereby directed to enforce the provisions of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code and this article. The county fire marshal shall establish such procedures or requirement as may be necessary for the administration and enforcement of such code and this article. The county fire marshal is hereby authorized to issue a summons for any violation of the provisions of the code, pursuant to the provisions of section F-106.9 of such code. The county fire marshal shall coordinate enforcement activities with the town dispatch and zoning administrator. The county fire marshal shall assign and detail such members of the town fire department as inspectors or other assistants as deemed necessary in administering and enforcing the provisions of such code and this article. 
(b)  Violations of such code constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. If any fire shall originate as a result of a violation by any person of this article, such person shall, in addition to the penalty, be liable to the town for the full amount of all expenses incurred by the town and any other governmental unit in suppressing such fire, such amount to be recoverable by civil action brought by the county fire marshal or town attorney on behalf of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 7-49, 3-4-1997) 
Chapter 46 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; solid waste, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference- Certain local regulations pertaining to food and beverage containers prohibited, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1425; state funds for drug enforcement, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1715; local ordinances regulating smoking, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2803 et seq.; regulation of well covers, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-318; inspection warrant for inspecting or testing for toxic substances, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-393 et seq.; sanitation in transportation terminals, festivals, fairs, service stations, etc., Code of Virginia, § 32.1-202. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Mosquito control. 
(a)  Collections of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed are hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the public health, and it shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit, within the town, any collection of standing water or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is treated so as to effectually prevent such breeding. 
(b)  No person owning or in possession of any lot, house, building, structure or enclosure shall allow or suffer to exist, in or upon such premises, any stagnant water, animal or vegetable matter or other substance liable to become putrid, offensive, annoying or unhealthy. Persons owning or in possession of any real estate shall provide proper and adequate drainage therefore so that no offensive, baneful or disagreeable liquids shall flow or seep into any street. 
(c)  All tanks, engines, automobile parts and tires, receptacles and containers capable of holding water or any source of stagnant water whatever, where mosquitoes may breed shall be kept thoroughly drained and dry. 
(d)  Swimming facilities shall be maintained in a manner, which will not create a nuisance or hazard to the public safety and well being, and the pool area shall be adequately secured against unauthorized entry by the public in general. The impounded water shall, at all times, be treated in a manner which will prevent the growth of algae and the breeding of mosquitoes or other vermin. All ponds or pools of stagnant water and all foul or dirty water or liquid when discharged through any drain, pipe, or spout, or thrown into or upon any street, public place or lot to the injury or annoyance of the public shall constitute a nuisance. 
(e)  The town manager or his authorized agent shall have the right to cause inspections to be made from time to time to determine whether any conditions exist or activity is being practiced which constitutes a nuisance. Such agent shall cause an investigation to be made upon complaint made by any responsible person. Such agent shall have the right to enter upon private premises for the purpose specified by this section, upon compliance with all applicable provisions of law. Unless it appears probable that advance warning would defeat the purpose of such entry, occupants of premises to be entered shall be given reasonable notice in advance, and in any case, it shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any owner or occupant to prevent such entry which is sought to be made in compliance with law. 
(f)  If at any time the town manager or his authorized agent shall find that an activity or practice, which constitutes a nuisance, is occurring within the town, he shall promptly and by the most expeditious means notify the violator to cease and desist forthwith. 
(g)  If at any time the agent shall find a violation of this section, he shall give notice in writing to the owner, occupant or person in charge of the premises upon which such condition exists, stating therein the condition which constitutes a violation and directing the addressee to remedy the condition within the time stated in such notice, which shall be not more than ten (10) days. It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any such owner, occupant or person in charge to fail to comply with the term of such notice. 
(h)  Upon the failure of any person to whom notice has been given to comply with the terms of such notice, the authorized agent may direct the appropriate town officials to remedy the condition which is the subject of such notice, and the expense incurred by the town in so doing shall be charged to the addresses of such notice, to be collected in the same manner as town taxes. 
(i)  Abatement by the town of any condition, which constitutes a nuisance and requires reimbursement to the town of expenses incurred thereby, shall not bar prosecution for maintenance of a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 772, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-2. - Discarding or abandoning iceboxes, refrigerators or other similar containers; precautions required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, abandon, leave or allow to remain in any place any icebox, refrigerator or other container, device or equipment of any kind with an interior storage area of more than two cubic feet of clear space which is airtight, without first removing the doors or hinges from such icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment which is being used for the purpose for which it was originally designed, or is being used for display purposes by any retail or wholesale merchant, or is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. 
(c)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 12-48) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-319. 
Secs. 46-3-46-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SMOKING POLICY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Virginia Indoor Clean Air Act, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2800 et seq. 

Sec. 46-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bar or lounge area means any establishment or portion of an establishment where one can consume alcoholic beverages and hors d'oeuvres but excluding any such establishment or portion of the establishment having tables or seating facilities where, in consideration of payment, meals are served. 
    Educational facility means any building used for the instruction of enrolled students including, but not limited to, any day care center, nursery school, public or private school, college, university, medical school, law school or vocational school. 
    Health care facility means any institution, place, building or agency required to be licensed under state law including, but not limited to, any hospital, nursing facility or nursing home, boardinghome, adult care residence, supervised living facility or ambulatory medical and surgical center. 
    Private workplace means any office or work area which is not open to the public in the normal course of business except by individual invitation. 
    Proprietor means the owner or lessee of the public place who ultimately controls the activities within the public place. The term "proprietor" includes corporations, associations or partnerships as well as individuals. 
    Public conveyance or public vehicle means any air, land or water vehicle used for the mass transportation of persons in intrastate travel for compensation including, but not limited to, any airplane, train, bus or boat that is not subject to federal smoking regulations. 
    Public place means any enclosed, indoor area used by the general public including, but not limited to, any building owned or leased by the commonwealth or any agency thereof of any locality, public conveyance or public vehicle, restaurant, education facility, hospital, nursing facility or nursing home, other health care facility, library, retail store of 15,000 square feet or more, auditorium, arena, theater, museum, concert hall or other area used for a performance or an exhibit of the arts or sciences, or any meeting room. 
    Restaurant means any building, structure or area, excluding a bar or lounge area, having a seating capacity of 50 or more patrons, where food is available for eating on the premises in consideration of payment. 
    Smoke or smoking means the carrying or holding of any lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment, or the lighting, inhaling or exhaling of smoke from a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind. 
    Theater means any indoor facility or auditorium, open to the public, which is primarily used or designed for the purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage production, musical recital, dance, lecture or other similar performance. 
(Code 1982, § 12-71) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-22. - Town buildings. 
    The town shall provide reasonable no smoking areas, considering the nature of the use and the size of the building, in any building owned or leased by the town or any agency thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 12-72) 
Sec. 46-23. - Prohibited areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any of the following places: 
(1)  Elevators regardless of capacity; 
(2)  Common areas in an educational facility including, but not limited to, classrooms, libraries, hallways, auditoriums and public meeting rooms; 
(3)  Any part of a restaurant designated as a no smoking area; 
(4)  Indoor service lines and cashier areas; and 
(5)  School buses and public conveyances. 
(Code 1982, § 12-73) 
Sec. 46-24. - Reasonable no smoking areas designated. 
(a)  The proprietors or persons who manage or otherwise control any building, structure, space, place or area governed by this article shall designate reasonable no smoking areas, considering the nature of the use and size of the building, in the following places: 
(1)  Retail and service establishments of 15,000 square feet or more serving the general public including, but not limited to, department stores, grocery stores, drugstores, clothing stores and shoe stores; 
(2)  Rooms in which a public meeting or hearing is being held; 
(3)  Places of entertainment and cultural facilities including, but not limited to, theaters, concert halls, gymnasiums, auditoriums, other enclosed areas, art galleries, libraries and museums; 
(4)  Indoor facilities used for recreational purposes; and 
(5)  Other public places. 
(b)  Smoking areas shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Designated smoking areas shall not encompass so much of the building, structure, space, place or area open to the general public that reasonable no smoking areas, considering the nature of the use and the size of the building, are not provided; 
(2)  Designated smoking areas shall be separate to the extent reasonably practicable from those rooms or areas entered by the public in the normal use of the particular business or institution; and 
(3)  In designated smoking areas, ventilation systems and existing physical barriers shall be used to minimize the permeating of smoke into no smoking areas. However, this article shall not be construed as requiring physical modifications or alterations to any structure. 
(Code 1982, § 12-74) 
Sec. 46-25. - Restaurants. 
(a)  Any restaurant having a seating capacity of 50 or more persons shall have a designated no smoking area sufficient to meet customer demand. 
(b)  In determining the extent of the no smoking area, the following shall not be included as seating capacity: 
(1)  Seats in any bar or lounge area of a restaurant; and 
(2)  Seats in any separate room or section of a restaurant which is used exclusively for private functions. 
(Code 1982, § 12-75) 
Sec. 46-26. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Provisions of this article shall not be construed to prohibit regular smoking in the following areas: 
(1)  Bars and lounge areas; 
(2)  Retail tobacco stores; 
(3)  Restaurants, conference or meeting rooms and public and private assembly rooms while these places are being used for private functions; 
(4)  Office or work areas which are not entered by the general public in the normal course of business or use of the premises; 
(5)  Areas of enclosed shopping centers or malls that are external to the retail stores therein, are used by customers as a route or travel from one store to another and consist primarily of walkways and seating arrangements; and 
(6)  Lobby areas of hotels, motels and other establishments open to the public for overnight accommodation. 
(Code 1982, § 12-76) 
Sec. 46-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 890, adopted July 7, 2009, repealed § 46-27, which pertained to private employer; self-regulations and derived from Code 1982, § 12-77. 
Sec. 46-28. - Posting of signs. 
    Any person who owns, manages or otherwise controls any building or area in which smoking is regulated by this article shall post in an appropriate place, in a clear, conspicuous and sufficient manner, smoking permitted signs, no smoking signs or no smoking section available signs. 
(Code 1982, § 12-78) 
Sec. 46-29. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article may be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $25.00. No person shall smoke in a designated no smoking area. Any person who continues to smoke in such area after being asked to refrain from smoking may be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $25.00. 
(Code 1982, § 12-79) 
Sec. 46-30. - Enforcement of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by any department of the town duly designated by the town council including, without limitation, the police department and the town manager's office. 
(Code 1982, § 12-80) 
Sec. 46-31. - Construction. 
    This article shall not be construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise prohibited or restricted by other applicable provisions of the law. 
(Code 1982, § 12-81) 
Secs. 46-32-46-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RODENT CONTROL 

Sec. 46-40. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
    Hardware cloth. The term "hardware cloth" shall mean wire screening of such thickness and spacing as to afford reasonable protection against the entrance of rats and mice. 
    Owner or manager. Whenever any person is in actual possession of or has charge, care or control of any property within the town, as executor, administrator, trustee, guardian or agent, such person shall be deemed and taken to be the owner of such property, within the true intent and meaning of this article, and shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article to the same extent as the owner, and notice to any such person of any order or decision of the director of health shall be deemed and taken to be a good and sufficient notice, as if such person were actually the owner of such property, except that whenever an entire premises or building is occupied as a place of business, such as a store, factory, warehouse, rooming house, junk yard, lumber yard or any other business under a single management, the person in charge of such business shall be considered the owner or manager. 
    Rat harborage. The term "rat harborage" shall mean any place where rats can live and nest without fear of frequent molestation or disturbance. 
    Ratproof container. A "ratproof container" is a container constructed of concrete or metal, or lined with metal or other material that is impervious to rats, the openings into which are tight-fitting to prevent the entrance of rats. 
    Ratproofing. The term "ratproofing" shall mean the closing of openings in building foundations and openings under and around doors, windows, vents and other places, which could provide means of entry for rats, with concrete, sheet iron, hardware cloth or other types of ratproofing material approved by the director of health. 
(Ord. No. 822, 8-16-05) 
Sec. 46-41. - Violations of article generally. 
    A violation or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor on the following schedule: 
(1)  First violation: class 4 misdemeanor. 
(2)  Second and further violation: class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 822, 8-16-05) 
Sec. 46-42. - Right of entry to enforce article; abatement of violations. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the duty placed on owners and managers of private property by other provisions of this article, the director of health, or his authorized agent, shall have the authority, whenever, in his sound opinion, an emergency exists affecting or likely to affect the public health and reasonable need therefore appears, to enter and go upon any vacant and unimproved property, or into any abandoned or unoccupied building, and into any vacant building or structure which has been condemned and placarded by authorized officials, for the purpose of controlling or abating any condition on such property or in such building or structure which is known to constitute a rat harborage, a place for the feeding of rats or a route regularly used for the travel of rats on such property, and to cause such action to be taken on such property or in such building or structure as to effectively control or abate any condition found to exist contrary to any provision contained in this article. 
(b)  The town manager, or his authorized agent, shall give the owner of any property violating this article a written notice directing the owner to effectively control or abate any condition found to exist contrary to any provision contained in this article within 10 days from the date of the notice. 
(c)  The town manager shall be authorized to promulgate policies, rules, and regulations with respect to the abatement, except that the establishment of fees shall be the responsibility of town council. Such policies, rules, and regulations shall be intended to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to promote good sanitation and cleanliness, and to protect the environment and shall be enforceable as it fully set forth herein. 
(d)  If the owner of any property fails to comply with a notice given pursuant to subsection (b) above, the town manager or his authorized agent may have any condition on private property mentioned on subsection (a) of this section be controlled or abated by agents or employees of the town. The cost to the town of controlling or abating any condition on private property mentioned in subsection (a) of this section shall constitute a lien on such private property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in Code of Va., tit. 58.1, ch. 39, arts. 3 (§ 58.1-3940, et seq.), and 4 (§ 58.1-3965, et seq.) as amended. 
(Ord. No. 822, 8-16-05) 
Sec. 46-43. - Elimination of rat harborages. 
    Whenever accumulations of rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, car bodies or any other materials provide rat harborage, the person owning or in control of such materials shall cause the materials to be removed or so stored so as to eliminate the rat harborage. Lumber, boxes and similar materials shall be neatly piled and such piles shall be raised at least one foot above the ground. When the owner of the materials cannot be found, after reasonable search, the owner or manager of the premises on which the materials are stored shall be responsible for disposal or proper piling of the materials. 
(Ord. No. 822, 8-16-05) 
Cross reference- General provisions relative to accumulations of trash, garbage, etc., or growth of weeds, § 62-2. 
Sec. 46-44. - Accumulations of materials serving as rat food. 
    No person shall place, or allow to accumulate, any materials that may serve as a food for rats in a site accessible to rats. Any waste material that may serve as food for rats shall be stored in ratproof containers. 
(Ord. No. 822, 8-16-05) 
Cross reference- General provisions relative to accumulations of trash, garbage, etc., or growth of weeds, § 62-2. 
Sec. 46-45. - Extermination. 
    Whenever rat holes, burrows or other evidences of rat infestation are found on any premises or in any building within the town, it shall be the duty of the owner or manager of such property to exterminate the rats or to cause the rats to be exterminated. Within 10 days after extermination, the owner or manager shall cause all of the rat holes or burrows in the ground to be filled with earth, ashes or other suitable material. 
(Ord. No. 822, 8-16-05) 
Sec. 46-46. - Ratproofing of buildings. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner or manager of any building in the town to make such building reasonably ratproof, to replace broken basement windows and, when necessary, to cover the basement window openings with hardware cloth or other suitable material for preventing rats from entering the building through such window openings. 
(b)  The owner or manager of any premises upon which sheds, barns, or similar buildings are located shall eliminate the rat harborages from within and under such buildings by ratproofing, raising the buildings above the ground, or by some other suitable method, or such sheds, barns, coops or other buildings shall be razed. 
(Ord. No. 822, 8-16-05) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
Chapter 50 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Virginia Fair Housing Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.1 et seq.; authority of town to enact fair housing ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-20. - Reserved. 
Chapter 58 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Manufactured home park standards, app. B, § 5-19; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; planning, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 94; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference- Regulation of location of manufactured homes, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2247; campgrounds, Code of Virginia, § 35.1-1 et seq.; Virginia Industrialized Building Safety Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-70 et seq.; Virginia Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-85.2 et seq.; Manufactured Housing Licensing and Transaction Recovery Fund Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-85.16 et seq.; Manufactured Home Lot Rental Act, Code of Virginia, § 55-248.41 et seq. 

Sec. 58-1. - Violations of chapter. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 23-1) 
Sec. 58-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Trailer means any trailer, trailer coach or camp automobile, or any unit used for living and sleeping purposes, and which may be, or is, intended for transport from one place to another, whether by motive power or otherwise. 
    Trailer camp means any campsite, campground, trailer court or any place, lot or tract of land upon which is located one or more trailers, or is held out for the location of any trailer, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment for such trailer camp. 
    Trailer space means a unit of land used or intended to be used by one trailer, whether in a trailer camp or not. 
(Code 1982, § 23-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-3. - Trailers on property outside trailer camp. 
    Where applicable, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as covering the parking of individual trailers on individual lots not in automobile trailer camps, as well as automobile trailer camps; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the temporary parking of a single trailer on the premises of a member of the immediate family of the occupants of the trailer for 90 days in the event of illness requiring the occupants of the trailer to be located temporarily near their family or in case of fire or other disaster making it necessary to locate on the property of a member of the immediate family, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Written consent shall first be secured from all property owners in the block on the street on which the trailer is to be located. 
(2)  Plumbing shall be connected to the sewer and water lines of the main dwelling or to the town's water and sewer lines and approved by the health department in either case. 
(3)  A permit shall be obtained from the town council after the other requirements of this section have been met. 
(Code 1982, § 23-3) 
Chapter 62 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Courts, ch. 22; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Crimes and offenses generally, Code of Virginia, title 18.2; local ordinances prohibiting obscenity, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-389. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Attempt to commit misdemeanor. 
    Every person who attempts to commit an offense which is a misdemeanor shall be punishable by the same punishment prescribed for the offense the commission of which was the object of the attempt. 
(Code 1982, § 12-1) 
Sec. 62-2. - Accumulation of trash, garbage, etc., or growth of weeds. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property within the town to permit the accumulation thereon of any trash, garbage, refuse, litter, debris, materials or inoperable machinery, machinery parts, equipment, appliances, motor vehicle tires (four tires or more), or any other substances which might restrict the ingress or egress from any exit door of a structure, attract or harbor varmints (snakes, skunks, rats), and/or mosquitoes, and might endanger the health or safety of other residents of the town. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any of property within the town to permit the growth of any grass, weeds, or other foreign growth to a height of 12 inches or more. 
(c)  The town manager, or his authorized agent, shall give the owner of any property violating this section a written notice directing the owner to remove from such property the offensive condition within ten days from the date of the notice. Failure to comply with such notice shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(d)  If the owner of any property fails to comply with a notice given pursuant to subsection (c) above, the town manager or his authorized agent may have the trash, garbage, refuse, litter, inoperable machinery, equipment, and appliances, motor vehicle tires, or machinery parts, debris or other dangerous, harmful substances removed, or the grass, weeds or foreign growth cut, by agents or employees of the town. The cost of removal or cutting shall be chargeable to and paid by the owners of the property and may be collected by the locality as taxes are collected. 
(e)  Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in articles 3 (§ 58.1-3940, et seq.), and 4 (§ 58.1-3965, et seq.), of chapter 39 of title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. The town may waive any such liens in order to facilitate the sale of the property. Such liens may be waived only as to a purchaser who is unrelated by blood or marriage to the owner and who has no business association with the owner. All such liens shall remain a personal obligation of the owner at the time the liens were imposed. 
(Ord. No. 722, 5-2-2000) 
Sec. 62-3. - Scalping tickets to athletic and other events; exceptions; punishment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to resell for profit any ticket for admission to any sporting event, theatrical production, lecture, motion picture, musical concern, or any other event open to the public, for which tickets are ordinarily sold, regardless of whether the event shall take place within the corporate limits of the Town of Vinton. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any event sponsored by a religious, charitable, or educational organization where all or a portion of the admission price reverts to the sponsoring group and the resale for profit of such ticket is authorized by the sponsor of the event and the manager or any owner of the facility in which the event is being held. 
(c)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. The sale of each individual ticket shall be considered a separate offense, regardless of whether multiple tickets are sold in a single transaction. 
(Ord. No. 704, 2-16-1999) 
Secs. 62-4-62-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING MORALS AND DECENCY 

Sec. 62-21. - Urinating or defecating in public. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in or on any sidewalk, street or in any public place, or in any place where other persons are present, unless such urination or defecation be in a bathroom, restroom or other facility specifically designed for such purpose. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 12-52) 
Sec. 62-22. - Public profanity and intoxication; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to profanely curse or swear in public. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated in public, whether such intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug, or other intoxicating drug of whatever kind. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 723, 5-16-2000) 
Secs. 62-23-62-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 62-41. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; or where the minor is in attendance at or is participating in sports, theatrical or other recreational activities not promoted or conducted for private gain but constantly and directly supervised by one or more adults; or where the minor is in attendance at places of amusement, if the entertainment is censored by an authorized governmental agency, or where one or more police officers are in regular attendance throughout the period of entertainment or performance. 
(c)  Each violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 12-3) 
Secs. 62-42-62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 62-61. - Concealing or compounding offenses. 
    If any person, knowing of the commission of an offense, shall take any money or reward, or an engagement therefor, upon an agreement or understanding, expressed or implied, to compound or conceal such offense, or not to prosecute therefor, or not to give evidence thereof, he shall, if such offense is a felony, be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor, and if such offense is not a felony, unless it is punishable merely by forfeiture to him, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 12-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-462. 
Secs. 62-62-62-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 62-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 888, adopted June 16, 2009, repealed § 62-81, which pertained to carrying loaded firearms in public places and derived from Code 1982, § 25-2. 
Sec. 62-82. - Discharging firearms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to discharge any firearm within the town, except while legally hunting or except at an authorized shooting range. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer in the discharge of his official duties, nor to any other person whose discharge of a firearm is justifiable or excusable at law in the protection of his life or property, or is otherwise specifically authorized by law. 
(Code 1982, § 25-3) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to regulate or prohibit discharge of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1113; discharging firearms in streets or public places, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-280, 18.2-286. 
Sec. 62-83. - Discharging pneumatic gun, bow. 
(a)  No person shall, anywhere within the town, discharge an arrow, shot, stone, gravel, BB, pellet, paintball, or any similar object from a pneumatic gun, bow, or other similar instrument except as authorized by this article. For the purpose of this section, "pneumatic gun" means any implement designed as a gun that will expel a BB, pellet, paintball, or similar object by action of pneumatic pressure. 
(b)  Pneumatic guns, bows, and other similar instruments may be used at facilities approved for shooting ranges, or other property where firearms or bows may be discharged lawfully, or on or within private property with permission of the owner or legal possessor. Use thereof must be conducted with reasonable care to prevent a projectile from crossing the bounds of the property. "Reasonable care" means that the gun is being discharged so that the projectile will be contained on the property by a backstop, earthen embankment, or fence. The discharge of projectiles across the bounds of the property shall create the rebuttable presumption that the use of the pneumatic gun or bow was not conducted with reasonable care. Minors may use such instruments only under the following conditions: 
(1)  Minors under the age of 16 must be supervised by a parent, guardian, or other adult supervisor approved by the parent or guardian and shall be responsible for obeying all laws, regulations, and restrictions governing the use thereof. 
(2)  Minors 16 years of age and older must have the written consent of a parent or guardian and shall be responsible for obeying all laws, regulations, and restrictions governing the use thereof. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 25-4; Ord. No. 917, 9-6-2011) 
Chapter 70 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 94; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference- Planning, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2200 et seq.; land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2240 et seq.; zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2280 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1-70-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Boards and commissions, § 4.13. 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-136 et seq. 

Sec. 70-21. - Created. 
    Pursuant to state law, a planning commission for the town is hereby created. 
(Code 1982, § 2-75) 
State Law reference- Duty of council to create planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2210. 
Sec. 70-22. - Composition; appointment and term of members. 
    The planning commission shall be composed of five members, who shall be appointed by the town council, all of whom shall be residents of the town and owners of real property qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions of community growth and development. One member of the commission may be a member of the town council, and one member may be a member of the administrative branch of government of the town. The term of each of these two members shall be coextensive with the term of office to which he has been elected or appointed, unless the town council, at the first regular meeting each year, appoints others to serve as their representatives. The remaining members of the commission shall serve for staggered terms of four years each. 
(Code 1982, § 2-76) 
State Law reference- Composition of local planning commission and appointment and terms of members, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212. 
Sec. 70-23. - Compensation of members. 
    All members of the planning commission shall serve as such without compensation, but the town council may provide for reimbursement of actual expenses incurred by members of the commission. 
(Code 1982, § 2-77) 
Sec. 70-24. - Removal of members. 
    Any member of the planning commission may be removed from office for malfeasance in office. 
(Code 1982, § 2-78) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212. 
Sec. 70-25. - Filling of vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the planning commission, however caused, shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term only. 
(Code 1982, § 2-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212. 
Sec. 70-26. - Functions, powers, duties and limitations. 
    The planning commission shall have the functions, powers and duties, and be subject to the limitations, which are prescribed by state law. 
(Code 1982, § 2-80) 
Chapter 74 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, § 86-246 et seq. 
State Law reference- Local regulation of automobile graveyards and junkyards, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-903; municipal regulation of pawnshops and secondhand dealers, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1114; junkyards, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-348; pawnbrokers generally, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4000 et seq.; precious metals dealers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4100 et seq.; permit for trading in secondhand building fixtures, Code of Virginia, §§ 59.1-117, 59.1-118; report by dealer in junk or secondhand personal property to chief of police or sheriff, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-121; sale or exchange of secondhand watches, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-131 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1-74-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEALERS IN SECONDHAND GOODS 

Sec. 74-21. - Register of purchases. 
(a)  Required; contents. Every person who is a dealer in or in the business of purchasing secondhand or used silver, silver-plated, gold, goldplated or pewter flatware, tableware or other similar household items, watches, jewelry, guns and coins shall keep, at his place of business, a register in which he shall record, with respect to each purchase of any of such items, the following information: 
(1)  A complete and accurate description of the goods, articles or things purchased, including the number of items. 
(2)  The time and date of receiving the same. 
(3)  The amount of money paid for the same. 
(4)  The name and complete and accurate address of the person selling the goods, articles or things, which information shall be taken from a valid driver's license or special identification card issued by the state division of motor vehicles, together with a particular description of such person. 
(b)  Open to inspection by law enforcement officers. The register required by subsection (a) of this section shall be open to inspection by any federal, state or local law enforcement officer during business hours. 
(Code 1982, §§ 15-22, 15-23) 
Sec. 74-22. - Examination, search and possession of merchandise by law enforcement officers. 
    Every person who is a dealer in or is in the business of purchasing any of the items enumerated in section 74-21(a), and every person in the employ of such person, shall admit to his premises, during business hours, any federal, state or local law enforcement officer to examine any item purchased and to search for and to take into possession any article known by such officer to be missing or known or believed by such officer to have been stolen. 
(Code 1982, § 15-24) 
Sec. 74-23. - Purchases from minors. 
    No person who is a dealer in or is in the business of purchasing any of the items enumerated in section 74-21(a) shall purchase, buy or receive, directly or indirectly, any such items from any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1982, § 15-25) 
Sec. 74-24. - Penalty for violation. 
    A violation of the requirements of this article shall be a class 1 misdemeanor. 
Secs. 74-25-74-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS 

Sec. 74-30. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, unless the context requires a different meaning: 
    Coin means any piece of gold, silver, or other metal fashioned into a prescribed shape, weight, and degree of fineness, stamped by authority of a government with certain marks and devices, and having a certain fixed value as money. 
    Dealer means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaged in the business of (i) purchasing secondhand precious metals or gems; (ii) removing in any manner precious metals or gems from manufactured articles not then owned by the person, firm, partnership, or corporation; or (iii) buying, acquiring, or selling precious metals or gems removed from manufactured articles. "Dealer" includes all employers and principals on whose behalf a purchase is made, and any employee or agent who makes any purchase for or on behalf of his employer or principal. 
    The definition of "dealer" shall not include persons engaged in the following: 
(1)  Purchases of precious metals or gems directly from other dealers, manufacturers, or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories, provided that the selling dealer has complied with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Purchases of precious metals or gems from a qualified fiduciary who is disposing of the assets of an estate being administered by the fiduciary. 
(3)  Acceptance by a retail merchant of trade-in merchandise previously sold by the retail merchant to the person presenting that merchandise for trade-in. 
(4)  Repairing, restoring or designing jewelry by a retail merchant, if such activities are within his normal course of business. 
(5)  Purchases of precious metals or gems by industrial refiners and manufacturers, insofar as such purchases are made directly from retail merchants, wholesalers, dealers, or by mail originating outside the commonwealth. 
(6)  Persons regularly engaged in the business of purchasing and processing nonprecious scrap metals which incidentally may contain traces of precious metals recoverable as a by-product. 
    Gems means any item containing precious or semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry. 
    Precious metals means any item except coins composed in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum, or platinum alloys. 
(Ord. No. 982 , 11-15-2016) 
Sec. 74-31. - Records to be kept; copy furnished to local authorities. 
(a)  Every dealer shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of each purchase of precious metals or gems. The record of each purchase shall be retained by the dealer for at least 24 months and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  A complete description of all precious metals or gems purchased from each seller. The description shall include all names, initials, serial numbers, or other identifying marks or monograms on each item purchased, the true weight or carat of any gem, and the price paid for each item; 
(2)  The date, time, and place of receiving the items purchased; 
(3)  The full name, residence address, work place, home and work telephone numbers, date of birth, sex, race, height, weight, hair and eye color, and other identifying marks of the person selling the precious metals or gems; 
(4)  Verification of the identification by the exhibition of a government-issued identification card bearing a photograph of the person selling the precious metals or gems, such as a driver's license or military identification card. The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon; 
(5)  A statement of ownership from the seller; and 
(6)  A digital image of the form of identification used by the person involved in the transaction. 
(b)  The information required by subdivisions (a)(1) through (a)(3) shall appear on each bill of sale for all precious metals and gems purchased by a dealer, and a copy shall be mailed or delivered within 24 hours of the time of purchase to the chief law-enforcement officer of the locality in which the purchase was made. 
(Ord. No. 982 , 11-15-2016) 
Sec. 74-32. - Officers may examine records or property; warrantless search and seizure authorized. 
    Every dealer or his employee shall admit to his place of business during regular business hours the town chief of police or his designee or any law-enforcement officer of the state or federal government. The dealer or his employee shall permit the officer to (i) examine all records required by this article and any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer to be missing or stolen, and (ii) search for and take into possession any article known to him to be missing, or known or believed by him to have been stolen. 
(Ord. No. 982 , 11-15-2016) 
Sec. 74-33. - Credentials and statement of ownership required from seller. 
    No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems without first (i) ascertaining the identity of the seller by requiring an identification issued by a governmental agency with a photograph of the seller thereon, and at least one other corroborating means of identification, and (ii) obtaining a statement of ownership from the seller. 
    The town council may determine the contents of the statement of ownership. 
(Ord. No. 982 , 11-15-2016) 
Sec. 74-34. - Prohibited purchases. 
(a)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who is under the age of 18. 
(b)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who the dealer believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of such items, unless the seller has written and duly authenticated authorization from the owner permitting and directing such sale. 
(Ord. No. 982 , 11-15-2016) 
Sec. 74-35. - Dealer to retain purchases. 
(a)  The dealer shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a minimum of 15 calendar days from the date on which a copy of the bill of sale is received by the chief of police. Until the expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter, or dispose of a purchased item in whole or in part, or remove it from the town. 
(b)  If a dealer performs the service of removing precious metals or gems, he shall retain the metals or gems removed and the article from which the removal was made for a period of 15 calendar days after receiving such article and precious metals or gems. 
(Ord. No. 982 , 11-15-2016) 
Sec. 74-36. - Record of disposition. 
    Each dealer shall maintain for at least 24 months an accurate and legible record of the name and address of the person, firm, or corporation to which he sells any precious metal or gem in its original form after the waiting period required in section 74-35. This record shall also show the name and address of the seller from whom the dealer purchased the item. 
(Ord. No. 982 , 11-15-2016) 
Sec. 74-37. - Bond or letter of credit required of dealers when permit obtained. 
(a)  Every dealer shall secure a permit from the town as required in section 74-39 and each dealer at the time of obtaining such permit shall enter into a recognizance to the town secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this commonwealth, in the penal sum of $10,000.00, conditioned upon due observance of the terms of this article. In lieu of a bond, a dealer may cause to be issued by a bank authorized to do business in the commonwealth a letter of credit in favor of the town for $10,000.00. 
(b)  A single bond upon an employer or principal may be written or a single letter of credit issued to cover all employees and all transactions occurring at a single location. 
(Ord. No. 982 , 11-15-2016) 
Sec. 74-38. - Private action on bond or letter of credit. 
    Any person aggrieved by the misconduct of any dealer which violated the provisions of this article may maintain an action for recovery in any court of proper jurisdiction against the dealer and his surety. Recovery against the surety shall be only for that amount of the judgment which is unsatisfied by the dealer. 
(Ord. No. 982 , 11-15-2016) 
Sec. 74-39. - Permit required; method of obtaining permit; no convictions of certain crimes; approval of weighing devices; renewal; permanent location required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the activities of a dealer as defined herein within the town without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police. 
(b)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108, the dealer shall file a permit application form with the chief of police which includes the dealer's full name, any aliases, address, age, date of birth, sex, and fingerprints; the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant's employer, if any; and the location of the dealer's place of business. Upon filing this application and the payment of a $200.00 application fee, the dealer shall be issued a permit by the chief of police or his designee, provided that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within seven years prior to the date of application. The permit shall be denied if the applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked under any ordinance similar in substance to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Before a permit may be issued, the dealer must have all weighing devices used in his business inspected and approved by local or state weights and measures officials and present written evidence of such approval to the chief of police or his designee. 
(d)  This permit shall be valid for one year from the date issued and may be renewed in the same manner as such permit was initially obtained with an annual permit fee of $200.00. No permit shall be transferable. 
(e)  If the business of the dealer is not operated without interruption, with Saturdays, Sundays, and recognized holidays excepted, the dealer shall notify the chief of police of all closings and reopenings of such business. The business of a dealer shall be conducted only from the fixed and permanent location specified in his application for a permit. 
(f)  The chief of police may waive the permit fee for retail merchants that are not required to be licensed as pawnbrokers under Code of Virginia, Chapter 40 (§ 54.1-4000 et seq.), provided the retail merchant has a permanent place of business and purchases of precious metals and gems do not exceed five percent of the retail merchant's annual business. 
(Ord. No. 982 , 11-15-2016) 
Sec. 74.40. - Exemptions from chapter. 
(a)  The chief of police may waive by written notice implementation of any one or more of the provisions of this article, except section 74-34, for particular numismatic, gem, or antique exhibitions or craft shows sponsored by nonprofit organizations, provided that the purpose of the exhibitions is nonprofit in nature, notwithstanding the fact that there may be casual purchases and trades made at such exhibitions. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to the sale or purchase of coins. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any bank, branch thereof, trust company or bank holding company, or any wholly owned subsidiary thereof, engaged in buying and selling gold and silver bullion. 
(Ord. No. 982 , 11-15-2016) 
Sec. 74-41. - Penalties; first and subsequent offenses. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor for the first offense. Upon conviction of any subsequent offense he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Upon the first conviction of a dealer for violation of any provision of this article, the chief of police may revoke the dealer's permit for one full year from the date the conviction becomes final. Such revocation shall be mandatory for two full years from the date the conviction becomes final upon a second conviction. 
(Ord. No. 982 , 11-15-2016) 
Chapter 76 - SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; licenses, § 86-246 et seq. 
State Law reference- Regulation of certain vendors, permit fee, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-913; authority of town to regulate or prohibit peddling, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1114. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 76-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Solicitor means a person who goes from door to door visiting multiple-family or single-family dwellings for the following purposes: 
(1)  To solicit or accept orders for goods, wares, merchandise or services, or subscriptions for magazines or periodicals; or 
(2)  To accept or request donations for any charitable purposes. 
(Code 1982, § 12-109; Ord. No. 657, § 12-109, 12-3-1996) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 76-2. - Violations of chapter. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 12-110) 
Sec. 76-3. - Entering premises under false pretenses. 
    No person shall enter into or upon a residential premises in the town under false pretenses. 
(Code 1982, § 12-111) 
Sec. 76-4. - Entering posted premises. 
    No person shall enter upon any residential premises for soliciting, when the owner or occupant has displayed a no soliciting sign on such premises. 
(Code 1982, § 12-112) 
Sec. 76-5. - Remaining on premises after request to leave. 
    No solicitor shall remain in or on any residential premises after the owner or occupant has requested such person to leave. 
(Code 1982, § 12-113) 
Sec. 76-6. - Employment of overly aggressive or abusive tactics. 
    No solicitor shall employ overly aggressive or abusive sales tactics. 
(Code 1982, § 12-114) 
Secs. 76-7-76-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 

Sec. 76-21. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the practice of soliciting in the town without a current permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person who visits any residence at the request or invitation of the owner or occupant thereof. 
(2)  Persons soliciting subscriptions to any newspaper for home delivery within the town. 
(3)  Route delivery persons who make deliveries at least once a week to regular customers and whose solicitation is only incidental to their regular deliveries. 
(4)  Persons selling fresh farm products. 
(5)  Persons licensed by the state under the provisions of Code of Virginia, title 38.2 (insurance). 
(6)  Charitable organizations exempted by Code of Virginia, § 57-63. 
(Code 1982, § 12-121) 
Sec. 76-22. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit required by this chapter shall file an application therefor with the chief of police. Such application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, local and permanent addresses, social security number, age, race, weight, height, color of hair and eyes, and any other distinguishing physical characteristics of the applicant. 
(2)  The nature or purpose for which solicitations will be made and the nature of the goods, wares, merchandise or services offered for sale. 
(3)  The name, permanent address, and business identification number of the employer or organization represented. 
(4)  A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor, and if so, the penalty or punishment assessed therefor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly give false information or fail to provide correct information in an application filed pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1982, § 12-222) 
Sec. 76-23. - Fee. 
    A fee of $20.00 to cover the costs of investigation of the applicant and the processing of the application shall be paid to the town treasurer when the application for a permit under this chapter is filed, with the exception that all charitable organizations not exempted under section 66-41(b)(6) shall pay a fee of $10.00. Such fees shall not be returnable under any circumstances. 
(Code 1982, § 12-123) 
Sec. 76-24. - Issuance. 
    Upon the filing of a proper application and payment of the prescribed fee, the chief of police shall issue a permit required by this chapter, unless the application shows that the applicant has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, or unless the applicant has given false or misleading information. 
(Code 1982, § 12-124) 
Sec. 76-25. - Term. 
    A permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, unless earlier revoked as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 12-125) 
Sec. 76-26. - To be carried on person and displayed upon demand. 
    A person to whom a permit is issued under this chapter shall carry the permit with him at all times while engaged in soliciting and shall display the permit to any person who shall demand to see the permit while he is so engaged. 
(Code 1982, § 12-126) 
Sec. 76-27. - Revocation. 
(a)  A permit issued under this chapter may be revoked by the chief of police, if the holder thereof violates any provision of this chapter or is convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude. No permit shall be so revoked until the chief of police has conducted a hearing on the matter at which the permittee shall be entitled to appear, in person or by attorney, and present evidence on his behalf Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given the permittee by personal service or by certified or registered mail directed to his local address, as shown on the permit application, at least five days prior to the hearing. 
(b)  A person whose permit is revoked pursuant to this section may appeal such action to the town council, by filing a written notice of appeal within five days after the revocation. The council shall hear the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of the notice. 
(Code 1982, § 12-127) 
Chapter 78 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 46; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 94. 
State Law reference- Local contracts for the supply of solid waste to resource recovery facilities, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1412; removal of trash, garbage, weeds, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-901; waste and recycling, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-927 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Violations of chapter generally. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 14-1) 
Sec. 78-2. - Containers generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner, lessee or occupant of every residence and every building or place of business in the town to provide, at all times, suitable and sufficient sanitary refuse containers which shall be leakproof with tightfitting tops and handles, and in conjunction with such containers, other containers, such as plastic bags, of adequate strength to hold and retain all garbage and liquid substances, and whatever rubbish may be mixed therewith, from such building, residence or place of business. 
(b)  Each owner, lessee or occupant of every residence and every building or place of business shall deposit, in the containers required by this section, any refuse, garbage, liquid substances and rubbish of any sort to be collected and disposed of. 
(c)  The sanitation workers of the town shall not be required to empty any refuse container which, together with its contents, weighs in excess of 50 pounds. 
(Code 1982, § 14-2) 
Sec. 78-3. - Location of containers. 
(a)  The refuse containers referred to in section 78-2 shall be kept upon the premises at a location to the side or rear of a dwelling house or place of business satisfactory to the town manager. During the hours and days designated by the town manager for the collection of refuse, each resident and business proprietor shall place their refuse containers on their streetside property line or at the curb for pickup. If subject dwelling house or place of business has an alley directly behind the property, then in such event, refuse containers shall be maintained thereon for ready pickup by sanitary workers. Any handicapped or severely ill person shall notify the town manager to arrange a special refuse collection. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, in the central business section of the town, as provided in the zoning ordinance, merchants and persons living over stores shall place their refuse containers upon the sidewalks of the town during the hours and days designated by the town manager for the collection of refuse. 
(Code 1982, § 14-3) 
Sec. 78-4. - Collection by town. 
(a)  The town manager shall be authorized to promulgate policies, rules and regulations with respect to refuse collection, except that the establishment of fees shall be the responsibility of town council. Such policies, rules and regulations shall be intended to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to promote good sanitation and cleanliness, and to protect the environment and shall be enforceable as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  Refuse that can be collected in a load packer truck shall be collected and disposed of according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Residential customers, including single-family, duplexes and mobile homes, shall receive once-per-week refuse collection at no charge. 
(2)  Businesses, apartments and institutions generating not more than 12 cans, being 30 gallons each, of refuse per week shall receive free once-per-week refuse collection. Heavy duty garbage bags may be substituted for cans. Under certain conditions related to public health and safety, as determined from time to time by the town manager, refuse may be collected more frequently. In no event shall more than 12 cans be collected in any week. 
(3)  All businesses, apartments, and institutions generating more than the 12-can-per-week limit shall secure a private vendor for their collection needs. 
(c)  Refuse that cannot be collected in a load-packer truck, hereinafter referred to as bulk refuse, such as tree trunks and limbs not to exceed two feet in diameter, shrubbery trimmings, leaves, brush, appliances, and furniture will be collected by the town as follows: Any person desiring such collection shall so advise the town office, requesting that a town truck pick up the specified refuse. All such refuse shall be placed at the curb or edge of the street adjoining the property of the person requesting the service. The refuse shall be placed so that mail delivery and other services, and access to adjoining properties, shall not be impeded. Bulk refuse will not be picked up in alleys. There shall be a charge for such service in such amount as is prescribed, from time to time, by the town council, and the person requesting the service shall pay such charge before the refuse is collected. 
(d)  In no event shall hazardous waste or household hazardous waste, as defined in Code of Va., § 10.1-1400, as amended, be placed out for collection or be collected by the town. 
(e)  (1)  Prohibited items include: tree stumps or root balls, dead animals, automobile or motorcycle parts, machinery, waste material produced in the construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition of buildings, homes, industrial plants, pavements and structures including but not limited to, lumber, concrete, asphalt, fencing, roofing materials, plaster, gypsum board, piping and all other similar items, herbicides, insecticides, household cleaners, or any other material deemed unsafe for collection. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the above subsection, not more than four un-mounted automobile tires will be collected from a household per calendar year at no charge. 
(f)  When discarding iceboxes, refrigerators, or other similar containers, the requirements of section 46-2 of the town code shall be strictly adhered to. 
(g)  Only refuse generated within town limits may be disposed of under this ordinance. 
(h)  All contractors, required to be licensed by state law, who perform major work on a property and produce waste material from this work shall be responsible for removing the waste from the property and legal disposing of it in an approved landfill or other facility. 
(Ord. No. 811, 3-15-05) 
Sec. 78-5. - Dumping unsightly matter on public property, highway, right-of-way, park, or private property; civil penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to drop, dump, deposit, discard, or otherwise dispose of trash, garbage, refuse, litter, cigarette butts, newspapers, fliers, food containers, or other unsightly matter, on public property, including a public highway, right-of-way, property adjacent to such highway or right-of-way, park, or on private property without the written consent of the owner thereof or his agent. 
(b)  When any person is issued a citation for a violation of this section and the matter alleged to have been dumped or disposed of has been ejected from a motor vehicle, the issuing officer may comply with the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-936-37. 
(c)  When a violation of the provisions of this section has been observed by any person and the matter dumped or disposed of has been ejected or discarded from a motor vehicle, the owner or operator of such motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the person ejecting or disposing of such matter. However, such presumption shall be rebuttable by competent evidence. 
(d)  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00. The citation shall inform the violator that he or she may avoid a trial by paying this penalty by mail or in person to the treasurer of the town within 14 calendar days following the date of the citation. 
(e)  If the person cited with a violation of this section does not elect to pay the penalty within 14 calendar days, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided by law. A finding of liability shall not be deemed a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the lawful disposal of such matter in trash receptacles and landfills. 
(Ord. No. 987 , 6-20-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 987 , adopted June 20, 2017, amended § 78-5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 78-5 pertained to dumping unsightly matter on highway, right-of-way or private property, and derived from Code 1982, § 14-5. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions and authority of town to adopt above section, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-346. 
Sec. 78-6. - Coordination with mandatory refuse recycling program. 
(a)  The town has established a mandatory refuse recycling program by the adoption of the town council of Ordinance No. 523 on March 6, 1990, the same being incorporated in the town Code as article II of this chapter. 
(b)  This chapter shall be read and interpreted in keeping with the provisions of the mandatory refuse recycling program. The town manager shall resolve any conflict with respect to particular owners, sites for collection, location of containers and variances required for the efficient and effective operation of refuse collection services for the residents, merchants and business people of the town. 
(Code 1982, § 14-6) 
Sec. 78-7. - Illegal dumping; penalty. 
    Any person who shall dump or otherwise dispose of trash, garbage, waste or other refuse, or unsightly matter in any town dump, dumpster, dump truck, disposal area or waste management facility in violation of rules posted by the town manager, or his designee, governing the disposal of trash, garbage, waste or other refuse or unsightly matter in any dump, dumpster, dump truck, disposal area or waste management facility shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 697, 9-15-1998) 
Secs. 78-8-78-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECYCLING 

Sec. 78-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Recyclable materials means newspapers, magazines, cardboard, glass bottles and jars, aluminum cans, plastic containers and any other additional items as designated by the town manager intended to be discarded by persons who receive town refuse collection services. 
(Code 1982, § 14-21) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-27. - Collection of recyclable refuse. 
(a)  This section applies to occupants of single-family homes and multifamily dwellings and to commercial establishments from which the town collects refuse. 
(b)  A person shall not place recyclable material designated by the town manager for recycling collection in a refuse receptacle that the town's compaction truck collects for landfill disposal unless newspapers are soiled or the glass is broken. Dirty or soiled paper, broken glass or partially filled containers are not to be added to the recyclable materials. 
(c)  The town or a contractor of the town shall collect recyclable material on a schedule specified by the town manager. However, recyclable material will not be collected on that day if: 
(1)  Weather conditions or emergencies have made roadways impassable; or 
(2)  The day falls on a legal holiday. Collection will be resumed on the next following workday. 
(d)  A person shall place the container of recyclable materials on the public right-of-way next to the edge of pavement. The recyclable material shall not interfere with parking or traffic. A person shall not place the recyclables next to the curb before 4:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled collection. After being emptied, the recycling containers shall be removed from the edge of pavement by the occupants before midnight the day of collection. The town manager may designate a single place next to the edge of pavement for residents of multifamily dwellings and commercial establishments to place recyclable materials. 
(e)  In cases where the public right-of-way is inaccessible, the town manager shall designate an appropriate place near the edge of pavement for placement of the recyclables. Examples of these placements include the foot of driveways, alleys, walkways or steps to the house or the edge of the front lawn. 
(f)  A person shall tie newspapers in a bundle or take other action to prevent newspapers from being blown away by the wind. The bundle shall not weigh more than 25 pounds and shall be placed in the prescribed container provided by the town. On wet days, a person shall place the newspaper bundle in a plastic bag such as to protect its contents from weather. 
(g)  The town, as an initial incentive, shall provide a recycling collection container to each residential unit and commercial establishment required to participate in the recycling program. It is intended that the recycling collection container will remain at the location of the residential unit or commercial establishment where it is originally issued. Recycling participants must purchase additional containers from the town to replace those lost or damaged. The cost of the container will equal the price paid by the town for the container. A serial number shall identify to whom the container has been issued. Residents who move into the town after the program has begun will purchase the recycling container at cost from the town if the originally issued container was not left with the property. Residents may purchase additional containers at cost to store the recyclable materials generated by their household or commercial establishment if one container is not sufficient. 
(h)  A person shall place newspapers, magazines, cardboard, glass bottles and jars, aluminum beverage cans and plastic containers in the collection container provided to residents and commercial establishments by the town. Glass bottles, jars and aluminum cans shall be emptied before being placed in the respective recycling container. It is recommended that aluminum cans can be flattened, but this is not required. Glass bottles and jars should not be broken before placement in the collection container. It is recommended that plastic containers be flattened (depressed) and the cap replaced to maintain the flattened shape. 
(i)  The town manager may designate addition material for residents to include in the recycling collection container. 
(j)  A person shall not use the recycling collection containers for any other purpose except the storing of recyclable items prior to collection. 
(k)  Only the town, its contractor or the person who placed the recycling container next to the designated collection point may recover recyclable materials. No scavenging or unauthorized collection of recyclable materials from the designated collection point shall be permitted. A violation of this subsection shall be a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(l)  The town manager is authorized to amend these requirements and provide special exceptions on a case-by-case basis for individuals who, due to frail health, age, incapacity or handicap, are unable to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(m)  The town manager is authorized to provide for more frequent collection at residential or commercial locations where recyclable materials are generated in such volume as to make more frequent collection desirable and warranted. Each authorization shall be made up on a reviewable, case-by-case basis. 
(Code 1982, § 14-22) 
Sec. 78-28. - Penalty for noncompliance. 
(a)  Before issuing a criminal citation for an infraction under this article, warning notices shall be given to the responsible occupant or owner as follows: 
(1)  First violation. The town manager or the manager's representative shall issue a warning notice to the responsible person. 
(2)  Second violation. The refuse shall not be collected on the date of the violation, and the town manager or the manger's representative shall issue a second warning notice to the person responsible. The first and second warning notice shall describe the violation, include instructions for the proper sorting of recyclables from refuse, state that all occupants of single-family houses, multifamily dwellings and commercial establishments from which the town collects refuse must participate in the recycling program and inform the person responsible for the violation and for subsequent violations of the penalty. The warning notice shall be personally delivered to the person responsible for the violation or mailed by certified letter to the address where the violation occurred. 
(3)  Third violation. The refuse shall not be collected on the date of the violation, and the town manager or the manager's representative shall prepare an affidavit citing the facts of the violation. A code enforcement officer shall issue a criminal citation for the infraction to the responsible occupant or owner. 
(4)  Penalty. Any violation under this article in which a criminal citation is issued shall be punished as a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The following shall apply with respect to infractions: 
(1)  Failure to abate the cited violation at the time of a subsequent infraction shall cause the violation to be treated as a repeat violation. 
(2)  Any individual or corporate owner who receives a citation and who wishes to stand trial shall not receive additional citations until the court rules on the citation for which the defendant is standing trial. 
(3)  In cases where the town manager has determined that extreme danger exists to persons or property or extreme unsanitary conditions exist, the warning notice shall be dispensed with, and the town manager shall obtain a court order to take corrective action. However, nothing shall be construed to prohibit the town manager from taking what action he finds appropriate to protect the public health and safety both under the laws of the town and the commonwealth. 
(4)  The town manager or the manager's representative shall have authority to enforce all provisions of this article. Officers of the police department are deemed representatives of the town manager. 
(Code 1982, § 14-23(a)(1)-(3), (5), (b)) 
Chapter 79 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
INTRODUCTION 
    The Town of Vinton finds that inadequate management of stormwater runoff from land-disturbing activities and development in watersheds increases flood flows and velocities, erodes and/or silts stream channels, pollutes water, overloads existing drainage facilities, undermines floodplain management in downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, and threatens public safety. More specifically, surface water runoff can carry pollutants into receiving waters. The Roanoke River and many of its tributaries inside the town are listed as impaired waters by the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ). 
    Many future problems can be avoided through proper stormwater management, and the town is dedicated to preventing the damaging effects that uncontrolled stormwater may present. The lands and waters of Town of Vinton are valuable natural resources that need to be protected. The town finds that it is in the public interest to establish a stormwater management program. 
    Pursuant to Virginia Code § 62.1-44.15:27, this ordinance is part of an initiative to integrate the town's stormwater management requirements with the town's erosion and sediment control (Chapter 35) and floodplain management (Appendix B. Zoning Ordinance, Article IV, Division 13, Section 4-65 through Section 4-73) requirements into a unified stormwater program. The unified stormwater program is intended to facilitate the submission and approval of plans, issuance of permits, payment of fees, and coordination of inspection and enforcement activities into a more convenient and efficient manner for both the Town of Vinton and those responsible for compliance with these programs. 
( Ord. No. 970, § 1, 4-19-2016 ) 
ARTICLE I. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 970, §§ 1, 3, adopted April 19, 2016 , amended former Art. I, Divs. 1-9, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 952, adopted May 20, 2014 . 

Sec. 79-1. - Title and authority. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Stormwater Management Ordinance of the Town of Vinton, Virginia." The Town of Vinton, Virginia, hereby adopts the Stormwater Management Ordinance of the County of Roanoke, Virginia, in its entirety as set forth in Roanoke County Code, Chapter 23, Stormwater Management, as amended from time to time, which shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the Town of Vinton. 
(b)  Pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:27 of the Code of Virginia, the Town of Vinton hereby establishes a Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) for land-disturbing activities and adopts the applicable regulations that specify standards and specifications for VSMPs promulgated by the State Water Control Board (state board) for the purposes set out in Section 23-1.2 of Roanoke County Code, Chapter 23. The Town of Vinton hereby designates Roanoke County as the local Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Authority within the corporate limits of the town and its director of community development as the administrator of the town's Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
(c)  The Town of Vinton designates Roanoke County, Virginia, as its agent for the purpose of enforcing all stormwater facility maintenance agreements, agreements in lieu of a stormwater management plan, and stormwater management plans in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
( Ord. No. 970, § 1, 4-19-2016 ) 
Secs. 79-2-79-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL AND STEEP SLOPE DEVELOPMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 970, §§ 1, 3, adopted April 19, 2016 , amended former Art. II, §§ 79-49-79-59, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 952, adopted May 20, 2014 . 

Sec. 79-49. - Title, purpose and authority. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Erosion and Sediment Control and Steep Slope Development Ordinance of the Town of Vinton, Virginia." The purpose of this article is to conserve the land, water, air and other natural resources of the county by establishing requirements for the control of erosion and sedimentation, and by establishing requirements for development of steep slopes, and by establishing procedures whereby these requirements shall be administered and enforced. This article is authorized by the Code of Virginia, title 10.1, chapter 5, article 4 (§ 10.1-560 et seq.), known as the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law. 
(b)  Pursuant to Commonwealth of Virginia enabling legislation, Article 2.4, Chapter 3.1 of the Title 62.1; and Code of Chapter 756 and 793; Roanoke County is the local Virginia Erosion Sediment Control Program (VESCP) Authority within the county and the town, and regulates stormwater runoff from construction sites. 
( Ord. No. 970, § 1, 4-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 79-50. - Applicability of chapter in town. 
    The provisions of Roanoke County Code, Chapter 8.1, Erosion and Sediment Control, as amended from time to time, shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the town. Administrative procedures and review fees may be established to accommodate the review of plans for development located within the town. 
( Ord. No. 970, § 1, 4-19-2016 ) 
Secs. 79-51-79-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 952, adopted May 20, 2014 , amended the Code by adding Art. III as herein set out. Section numbering and catchlines have been provided as necessary to preserve the format used in this Code. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 79-65. - Title and authority 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Illicit Discharge Ordinance of the Town of Vinton, Virginia." 
(b)  This article establishes the town's illicit discharge program that regulates non-stormwater discharges to its regulated MS4, consistent with state regulations promulgated pursuant to the law. 
(c)  The Town of Vinton hereby designates the town manager as the administrator of the illicit discharge program. 
( Ord. No. 952, 5-20-2014 ) 
Sec. 79-66. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the town by protecting property and state waters through the prohibition of illicit discharges of non-stormwater within the town's regulated MS4 area; subject to certain exceptions. 
( Ord. No. 952, 5-20-2014 ) 
Sec. 79-67. - Applicability. 
    This article is applicable to any non-stormwater discharge that enters, or has the potential of entering, the town's regulated MS4 area. 
( Ord. No. 952, 5-20-2014 ) 
Sec. 79-68. - Compatibility with other requirements. 
    This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance shall be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall apply. 
( Ord. No. 952, 5-20-2014 ) 
Sec. 79-69. - Severability. 
    If the provisions of any division, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any division, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
( Ord. No. 952, 5-20-2014 ) 
Secs. 79-70-79-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Secs. 79-76. - Words and terms defined. 
    The following words and terms as used in this article shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Administrator means the position responsible for administering the illicit discharge program on behalf of the Town of Vinton. The administrator shall be the town manager or his/her designee. 
    Best management practice or BMP means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, including both structural or non-structural practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land-disturbing activities. 
    Clean Water Act or CWA means the federal Clean Water Act (33 United States Code 1251 et seq.), formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public Law 97-117, or any subsequent revisions thereto. 
    Control measure means any best management practice or other method used to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to surface waters. 
    County means the County of Roanoke, Virginia. 
    Department means the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ). 
    Discharge means to dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, dump, pump, leak, or place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, dumped, pumped, leaked, or placed by any means. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge to the town's MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to a VPDES or VSMP permit (other than the VSMP permit for discharges from the MS4), discharges resulting from firefighting activities, and discharges identified by and in compliance with 9VAC25-870-400 D 2 c (3). 
    Municipal separate storm sewer means a conveyance or system of conveyances otherwise known as a municipal separate storm sewer system or "MS4," including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, drop inlets, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, storm drainage pipes, or other drainage structures: 
(1)  Owned or operated by Town of Vinton; 
(2)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
(3)  That is not a combined sewer; and 
(4)  That is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW). 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system or MS4 means all municipal separate storm sewers that are located within the Town of Vinton. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) means the federal program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring, and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pre-treatment requirements under the Clean Water Act (CWA). 
    Person means any individual, firm, organization, partnership, association, organization or other entity, including governmental entities, or any combination thereof, or any agent or employee of any such entity. 
    State waters means all water, on the surface and under the ground, wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands. 
    Stormwater means precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways, which may include rainfall runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
    Town means Town of Vinton, Virginia. 
    Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) means the program issued by the Commonwealth of Virginia for imposing and enforcing pre-treatment requirements pursuant to the Clean Water Act (CWA). 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) means a program approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, that has been established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities, which shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized in this article, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of this article and associated regulations. 
( Ord. No. 952, 5-20-2014 ) 
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES 

Secs. 79-77. - Illicit and allowable discharges. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article to allow any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except as described in subsection (c) below, that enters, or has the potential of entering, the MS4. 
(b)  Illicit discharges include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Discharging, or causing or allowing to be discharged, sewage, industrial wastes, yard wastes, or other wastes, into the storm sewer system, or any component thereof, or onto driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, the ground, or any other areas draining to the storm sewer system. 
(2)  Connecting, or causing or allowing connection of any sanitary sewer to the storm sewer system, including any sanitary sewer connected to the storm sewer as of the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(3)  Connecting, or causing or allowing any connection to the storm sewer system, without a valid VSMP, VPDES, or NPDES permit, any structure that conveys any liquid other than stormwater or discharges listed in subsection (c), including, but not limited to, pipes, drains, sanitary sewer lines, washing machine drains, or floor drains. 
(4)  Prohibitions (2) and (3) listed in this subsection expressly include, without limitations, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection. 
(5)  Throwing, placing, or depositing, or causing to be thrown, placed, or deposited in the storm sewer system anything that impedes or interferes with the free flow of stormwater therein, or adversely affects water quality. 
(c)  The following non-stormwater discharges are allowable under this article: 
(1)  Discharges or flows covered by a separate individual or general VPDES or VSMP permit for non-stormwater discharges; 
(2)  Individual non-stormwater discharges or flows that have been identified in writing by the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality as de minimis discharges that are not significant sources of pollutants to state waters and do not require a VPDES permit; 
(3)  Non-stormwater discharges or flows as listed in the following categories, unless they are identified by the administrator or Virginia Water Control Board, as significant contributors of pollutants. 
a.  Water line flushing; 
b.  Landscape irrigation; 
c.  Diverted stream flows or rising groundwater; 
d.  Uncontaminated ground water infiltration; 
e.  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
f.  Discharges from potable water sources; 
g.  Foundation drains; 
h.  Air conditioning condensate; 
i.  Irrigation water; 
j.  Springs; 
k.  Water from crawl space pumps; 
l.  Footing drains; 
m.  Lawn watering; 
n.  Individual residential car washing; 
o.  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
p.  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
q.  Street wash water; and 
r.  Firefighting activities 
(4)  The discharge of material resulting from a spill that is necessary to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage. The responsible party shall take all reasonable steps to minimize or prevent any adverse effect on human health or the environment. This provision does not transfer liability for the spill itself from the party(ies) responsible for the spill, nor relieve the party(ies) responsible for a spill from the reporting requirements of 40 CFR Part 117 and 40 CFR Part 302 (2001). 
(d)  In the event any of the activities listed in sub-paragraph (c)(3) of this section are found to be a significant contributor of pollutants to be discharged into the MS4, the administrator shall so notify the person performing such activities, and shall order that such activities be ceased or be conducted in such a manner as to avoid the discharge of pollutants into the MS4. The failure to comply with any such order shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 952, 5-20-2014 ) 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTIONS AND MONITORING 

Sec. 79-78. - Authority and access for inspections and monitoring. 
(a)  The administrator and/or his/her authorized agent shall have the authority to carry out all inspections and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance and/or noncompliance with this article, and to enforce the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The administrator and/or his/her authorized agent shall have the authority, at his/her sole discretion, to require a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) from any person whose property discharges, or has the potential to discharge, to the MS4. 
(c)  The administrator and/or his/her duly authorized employees, agents, or representatives of the town, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be authorized to enter any public property or to request entry into private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this ordinance, including, but not limited to taking samples of discharges, inspecting monitoring equipment, inspecting and copying documents relevant to the enforcement of this ordinance, and such other items as may be deemed necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
If the person in charge of the property refuses to allow the administrator and/or his/her authorized agent to enter in accordance with subsection (c), then the administrator and/or his/her authorized agent may present sworn testimony to a magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction and request the issuance of an inspection warrant to enter the property for the purpose of making such inspections and investigations. The administrator and/or his/her authorized agent shall make a reasonable effort to obtain consent from the owner or person in charge of the property prior to seeking the issuance of an inspection warrant under this section. 
(d)  The administrator and/or his/her authorized agent shall have the authority to require any person responsible for a discharge to the MS4 to document that such discharge meets and is in compliance with the requirements of this article. This includes, but is not limited to, the ability of the administrator and/or his/her authorized agent to require such person to provide monitoring reports, test results, and such other matters as may be deemed necessary to show that such discharge is in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. The cost of any required documentation shall be the responsibility of the person responsible for the discharge. 
(e)  The failure of any person to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall constitute a violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 952, 5-20-2014 ) 
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 79-79. - Violations; penalties and remedies. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is subject to punishment by a fine of not more than $2,500.00 per violation per day and confinement in jail for not more than 12 months, either or both. 
(b)  Each day during which a violation of this article occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation of this article. 
(c)  Any person who commits any of the acts prohibited by this article or violates any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to the town for all costs of testing, containment, cleanup, abatement, removal, disposal, and any other related costs or expenses that the town may incur in connection with the enforcement of this article and/or the prohibition and/or correction of a violation of this article. 
(d)  The administrator and/or his/her authorized agent may bring legal action to enjoin a violation of this article and the existence of any other remedy shall be no defense to any such action. 
(e)  In addition to any of the remedies set forth above, the administrator and/or his/her authorized agent may seek to impose, or have imposed by the appropriate authority, any of the remedies provided for by § 62.1-44.15:48, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, which are incorporated herein by reference. 
(f)  In any court action that may result from enforcement of this article, a judge hearing the case may direct the person responsible for the violation or the property owner to correct the violation and each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(g)  Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any record, report, or other document, either filed or requested pursuant to this ordinance, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required or used by the administrator and/or his/her authorized agent under this article in monitoring discharges, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(h)  The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative, not exclusive, and it shall be no defense to any action that one or more of the remedies set forth in this section has been sought or granted. 
( Ord. No. 952, 5-20-2014 ) 
Chapter 82 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; building numbers, § 14-136 et seq.; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; planning, ch. 70; solicitors, ch. 76; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 94; vehicles for hire, ch. 98; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference- Streets and alleys, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2000 et seq.; state highway plat book, Code of Virginia, § 17.1-238; state highway system, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-25 et seq.; local authority over highways, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-224 et seq.; pipelines and other works in streets, roads, alleys, etc., Code of Virginia, § 56-257 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Violations of chapter. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 18-1) 
Sec. 82-2. - Certain ordinances relating to streets not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, accepting, dedicating or vacating any street or alley in the town, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 18-2) 
Sec. 82-3. - Prerequisites to acceptance of street for maintenance by town. 
    No street shall be accepted for care and maintenance by the town unless such street has been graded and surfaced in accord with the requirements of the state department of highways and transportation and dedicated by the recording of a plat, drawn to scale, showing such street, in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county, at the expense of the owner of the property. No such acceptance shall take place until the plat of the street has been accepted and approved by the council. 
(Code 1982, § 18-3) 
Sec. 82-4. - Specifications for work on streets by town forces. 
    The town manager shall have authority to prescribe specifications for work done on town streets by the town forces. Such specifications shall be kept on file in the office of the town manager. 
(Code 1982, § 18-4) 
Sec. 82-5. - Curb cuts and removals and driveway installations to be at property owner's expense. 
    All curb cuts, curb removals and driveway installations shall be done entirely at the expense of the property owner. 
(Code 1982, § 18-6) 
Sec. 82-6. - Removal of ground, dirt or stone from street or alley. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up or carry away from any street or alley within the town any ground, dirt or stone, without the written permission of the town manager. 
(Code 1982, § 18-7) 
Sec. 82-7. - Obstructions generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, upon any street, alley or sidewalk, any box, crate, lumber, wood, stone or other obstruction of any kind or character. This section shall not be construed to apply to building material placed on a street, sidewalk or alley pursuant to section 82-8. 
(Code 1982, § 18-8) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to prevent obstruction of public ways, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2009. 
Sec. 82-8. - Placing building materials on street or sidewalk. 
    No person shall place building materials upon the street, sidewalk or alley for use in connection with construction work, unless he shall have first obtained a permit from the town manager to do so, and unless he shall place such materials in the space assigned and in the manner directed by the town manager. 
(Code 1982, § 18-9) 
Sec. 82-9. - Use of sidewalks by contractors or builders. 
    When any building or wall is being erected, repaired or demolished, the sidewalks in front thereof may, subject to section 82-8, be occupied and used by the contractor or builder in connection with such work for such period of time as may be reasonable; provided, however, that reasonable means are taken for the protection and safe passage of pedestrians and vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1982, § 18-10) 
Sec. 82-10. - Trees, plants or shrubs projecting over street or sidewalk from abutting property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying property abutting a street or sidewalk to allow any tree, plants or shrubs growing on such property to project over the street or sidewalk in such manner as to obstruct or interfere with the safe passage of vehicles or pedestrians. 
(Code 1982, § 18-11) 
Sec. 82-11. - Tampering with or damaging street trees. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to tamper with, damage, injure or destroy any of the trees along the streets of the town planted and maintained by the town. 
(Code 1982, § 18-12) 
Sec. 82-12. - Fence or wall gates and doors on or near sidewalks. 
    Every gate or door built or constructed in any fence or garden or yard wall, upon or within two feet of the line of any public sidewalk in the town, shall be hung so as to open inward. 
(Code 1982, § 18-13) 
Sec. 82-13. - Cellar doors or gratings in sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or construct or cause to be constructed any cellar door or grating in or upon any paved sidewalk within the town, unless such door or grating shall be constructed on a level with the pavement. The owner of such door or grating shall be required to keep the same in a safe condition for pedestrians walking over the same. 
(Code 1982, § 18-14) 
Sec. 82-14. - Open cellarways, areaways or other similar places in sidewalks to be guarded. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any cellarway, areaway or other place of like character opening on or in a public sidewalk in the town to remain open, unless properly guarded by bars or otherwise. 
(Code 1982, § 18-15) 
Sec. 82-15. - Duty of owners or occupants of abutting property to remove snow from sidewalks. 
    The tenant or occupant, and in case there shall be no tenant or occupant, the owner or any person having the care of any building or lot of land abutting on any curbed or paved sidewalk shall, during the first eight hours of daylight following the time when snow or ice ceases to fall or form, cause the same to be removed from such curbed or paved sidewalk. 
(Code 1982, § 18-16) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115. 
Sec. 82-16. - Moving snow onto sidewalk or street. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove snow from any building or lot of land by removing the snow to any sidewalk or street. 
(Code 1982, § 18-17) 
Sec. 82-17. - Use of roller skates, skateboards and bicycles in certain designated areas prohibited. 
(a)  It is prohibited to use roller skates and skateboards and/or ride bicycles or electric power assisted bicycles on designated sidewalks or crosswalks, including those of any church, school, recreational facility, or any business property open to the public where such activity is prohibited. 
(b)  A person riding a bicycle or an electric power assisted bicycle on a sidewalk, or across a roadway on a crosswalk, shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing any pedestrian. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not more than $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 757, 2-5-02) 
Sec. 82-18. - Property owners and town to share cost of installation of curbs, gutters and sidewalks. 
    One-half of the cost of the installation of curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be paid by the property owner and the town will bear the remaining one-half of the cost of such installation. When the approximate cost of the installation is determined by the town, the property owner shall pay his one-half to the town treasurer prior to the installation. Any adjustment that is necessary will be made after the final cost has been determined, and the property owner shall pay the balance due the town upon receipt of a statement of account from the town. 
(Ord. No. 762, 4-16-02) 
Secs. 82-19-82-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 82-36. - Article not applicable to work done by town. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to work done by town forces under the supervision of the town manager. 
(Code 1982, § 18-28) 
Sec. 82-37. - Permit. 
(a)  No person, unless specially authorized by the council, shall take up or remove any portion of the surface of any sidewalk or street, or excavate in any street or sidewalk of the town, without a written permit from the town manager, who shall not refuse such permit to any applicant, except for cause. In case of refusal, the applicant may appeal to the council. 
(b)  Before a permit required by this section is granted, the town manager may require a deposit sufficient to pay for resurfacing the street or sidewalk to be disturbed, the amount of such deposit to be determined by the town manager. 
(c)  Every person who shall make application for a permit under this section shall be deemed to have assented thereby to all the provisions and terms of this article and to the right of the town to collect, from the deposit made pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the actual cost of replacing the pavement, sidewalk or street surface. 
(Code 1982, § 18-29) 
Sec. 82-38. - Work to be prosecuted without delay; notice of completion. 
    It shall be the duty of every person to whom a permit required by this article is granted to institute at once, and prosecute without delay, the work for which such permit was obtained, and promptly, on its completion, give written notice thereof to the town manager. 
(Code 1982, § 18-30) 
Sec. 82-39. - Barriers and warning lights; responsibility for damages. 
    Any person to whom a permit required by this article is granted shall place guards or barriers around the excavation in question and shall protect it by warning lights at night. Such person shall be responsible for damages to persons or property caused by such excavation until it is taken in charge by the town manager. 
(Code 1982, § 18-31) 
Sec. 82-40. - Replacing surface. 
    No pavement, sidewalk or street surface shall be replaced, after being taken up pursuant to a permit required by this article, by any person except under the direction of the town manager. If the applicant fails to resurface the street or sidewalk disturbed promptly and in a manner approved by the town manager, the town manager is authorized to cause such work to be done at the expense of the applicant. 
(Code 1982, § 18-32) 
Secs. 82-41-82-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE FEE 

Sec. 82-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Access lines means residence and business telephone lines and other switched common lines connecting a customer's, or end user's, premises located in the town to the end office switch, but does not include local, state and federal government lines, access lines used to provide service to users as part of the Virginia Universal Service Plan, interstate and intrastate dedicated WATS lines, special access lines, off-premises extensions, official lines used by certified providers of telecommunications service for administrative, testing, intercept and verification purposes, or commercial mobile radio service lines. 
    Certificated provider of telecommunications service or certificated provider means a public service corporation holding a certificate issued by the state corporation commission to provide local exchange or interexchange telephone service. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 18-51, 6-16-1998) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-62. - Public rights-of-way use fee. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-468.1, the town elects to adopt the public rights-of-way fee provided for by such code section. Accordingly, there is hereby imposed upon each access line of every certificated provider of telecommunications service a public rights-of-way use fee in the amount to be established under Code of Virginia, § 56-468.1. 
(b)  Every certificated provider that provides local exchange telephone service to end users in the town shall collect the public rights-of-way use fee on a per access line basis by adding the fee to each end user's monthly bill for local exchange telephone service. 
(c)  Until the end user pays the public rights-of-way use fee to the certificated provider, the fee shall constitute a debt of the user that is owed to the town. Whenever an end user fails or refuses to pay the fee, the certificated provider shall notify the treasurer of the user's identity and the total amount of fees that the user has refused or failed to pay. Such notification of unpaid use fees shall be provided to the treasurer within two months after the end of each calendar quarter. 
(d)  After an end user pays the public rights-of-way use fee to the certificated provider, the collected fee shall be deemed to be held in trust by the provider until remitted to the treasurer. Within two months after the end of each calendar quarter, the certificated provider shall remit directly to the treasurer all public use fees that it has collected from end users during the quarter. 
(e)  Every certificated provider shall keep complete records showing all public rights-of-way use fees collected in each calendar quarter. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the treasurer or the treasurer's designee. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall: 
(1)  Relieve any certificated provider from complying with the requirements and restrictions imposed by this article, or by other law or regulations, regarding its use of and activities within public rights-of-way in the town including, but not limited to, the placement, construction, repair, maintenance and removal of its facilities, and street or roadway repairs in the manner required by this article and other applicable statutes, ordinances or regulations; provided, however, that such requirements are no greater than those imposed on all providers of telecommunication services and nonpublic providers of cable television, electric, natural gas, water and sanitary sewer services; and further provided that any permit or other permission required by this code or town regulations that is sought by a certificated provider regarding its use of and activities within public rights-of-way in the town shall be granted or denied within 45 days of the submission of a complete application; and any denial shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the reasons for the denial and the actions required to cure the denial; 
(2)  Affect the amount payable by a certificated provider for the right to place facilities or otherwise use property of the town other than public rights-of-way; 
(3)  Affect the authority of the town to impose a franchise fee upon cable television franchisees, or the obligation of such franchisees to pay the franchise fee imposed upon them; or 
(4)  Affect the authority of the town to impose a franchise fee upon persons who locate facilities or otherwise use public rights-of-way for purposes other than the provision of local exchange or interexchange telephone service or the provision of cable television service. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 18-52, 6-16-1998) 
Sec. 82-63. - Effective date and retroactive effect. 
(a)  This article shall become effective July 1, 1998, and shall remain in effect until repealed, provided that the rate of the public rights-of-way fee hereby imposed shall be altered annually pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 56-468.1. As soon as practicable following its adoption, the town manager shall send a copy of this article to the registered agent for each certificated provider which offers services within the town. 
(b)  The public rights-of-way use fee established in this article shall apply to all undetermined and unpaid use fees owed by any certificated provider for the period prior to July 1, 1998. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 18-53, 6-16-1998) 
Secs. 82-64, 82-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC TREES 

Sec. 82-66. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting and removal of trees on public properties. Further, it is the purpose of this article to enhance the quality of life in the town by protecting trees and by minimizing the loss of tree coverage on public properties. 
(Ord. No. 778, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 82-67. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Diameter-at-breast-height means the tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. 
    Dripline means a vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the tree canopy or shrub branch to the ground. 
    Property line means the right-of-way line of a street or highway. 
    Property owner means the person owning real property as shown by the county assessors' maps and/or records in the clerk's office of the circuit court for the county. 
    Public property means all lands owned by the town, including but not limited to public parks and property of other town building and facilities, and includes all greenway easements donated to or owned by the town. The term "public property" shall exclude public utility, drainage, and stormwater easements and town water and sewer easements. 
    Public utility company means any corporation, company, individual, association or cooperative that is a "public utility" as defined in Code of Virginia, § 56-232, as amended. 
    Street or highway means the entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
    Topping means the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs, not lateral growth, larger than one-third the size of the limbs being removed. Topping permanently affects the structure, health, and aesthetics of the tree negatively. 
    Tree means any self-supporting woody plant, usually having a single, main woody trunk and producing a more or less distinct and elevated head with many branches. For the purpose of this article, a tree shall include all shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing on any public property as defined in this article. 
    Tree committee means the committee consisting of the assistant town manager, director of public works, and director of planning and zoning, that is given the general powers and duties to administer the provisions of this article. 
    Treelawn means that part of a street or highway, not covered by a sidewalk or other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 778, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 82-68. - Applicability. 
    This article provides full power and authority over all trees located on public property. 
(Ord. No. 778, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 82-69. - Authorization required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or cultivate any trees within a public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit therefore from the tree committee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, destroy, harm or otherwise disturb any tree on public property without first receiving written approval from the tree committee. 
(c)  In the case of emergencies, such as windstorms, ice storms, or other disasters, written approval may be waived by the tree committee during the emergency period so as not to hamper work to restore order to the Town. 
(Ord. No. 778, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 82-70. - Obstruction. 
(a)  Duty of occupant. It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees or other vegetation, to prune such trees or vegetation in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the streetlights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection, or obstruct view of any traffic control devices, including but not limited to signs and traffic signals. Suggested minimum vertical clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be eight feet over sidewalks, and 16 feet over all streets. Suggested minimum horizontal distance to any traffic signal equipment, traffic control signs, or utility lines should be ten feet. 
(b)  Notice to prune. Should any person or persons owning real property bordering on any street fail to prune trees as hereinabove provided, the department of public works with advice from the tree committee shall order such person or persons, within 14 days after receipt of written notice, to so prune such trees. 
(c)  Failure to comply. When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply within the specified time, the town or other tree maintenance crews authorized by the town shall have the right to prune for such clearance over town right-of-ways for safety and accessibility as needed, and the exact cost thereof shall be recoverable from such person so failing to comply through the town property taxes and/or filed as a lien against the said real estate. 
(Ord. No. 778, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 82-71. - Abuse or mutilation of public trees or shrubs. 
    Unless specifically authorized by the tree committee, it shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree on public property; attach any rope, wire, nails, staples, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any tree on public property; allow any gas, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree on public property. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor and, in addition thereto, shall be responsible for the cost of repair or replacement of any public tree so damaged. 
(Ord. No. 778, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 82-72. - Protection of trees. 
(a)  Trees that are to remain after construction of public buildings, facilities, driveways, roads, utilities or other below or above ground public structures must be protected from construction activities and heavy equipment to ensure their survival. 
(b)  All public trees near any excavation or construction shall be guarded with a fence, frame, or box not less than four feet high and eight feet square or a distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches (diameter measured at breast height), whichever is greater, and all building material, dirt, or other debris be kept outside the barrier. 
(c)  The tree committee shall establish guidelines for trees that are to remain on public property and that are within or in close proximity to the immediate construction activity area. 
(d)  No person, including public utility companies and town departments, shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches or lay any driveway or street within a radius of ten feet from any tree on public property without first obtaining written approval from the tree committee. This provision does not apply to the maintenance and repair of existing public utility and town water and sewer utility facilities. 
(e)  All trees on public property shall be pruned or trimmed only in accordance with the standards established by the American National Standard or ANSI A300 "Pruning Standards." This includes all public utility companies and town departments or their subcontractors involved in maintenance on town property or easements. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or town department to top any tree on public property. Trees severely damaged by wind, ice or snow storms or other disasters, or certain trees under utility wire or other obstruction where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the tree committee. 
(g)  No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain upon any public place of the town, any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials that may impede the free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing thereon, except by written permit of the department of public works. In the event of emergency or in order to repair existing utilities, these written permits may be waived. 
(Ord. No. 778, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 82-73. - Removal, planting, replanting, and replacement. 
(a)  Whenever practical, the town shall replace a tree or trees in a treelawn when such trees are removed for street paving or widening of the portion of a street or highway used for vehicular traffic. 
(b)  No person, other than the town, shall remove a tree from the treelawn for the purpose of construction, or for any other reason, without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the tree committee, and without replacing the removed tree or trees to the satisfaction of the tree committee. The person or property owner shall bear the cost of removal and replacement of all trees removed and shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(c)  All stumps of trees removed from public property shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 778, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 82-74. - Enforcement. 
    The tree committee shall have the general powers and duties to: 
(1)  Direct, manage, supervise and control the planting, removal, and protection of all trees on public property. 
(2)  Protect all trees on public property so as to prevent the spread of disease or pests and to reduce unreasonable risks to persons and/or property. 
(3)  Require the preparation of a tree protection plan for the town construction projects, when deemed appropriate and necessary. 
(4)  Administer the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 778, 12-17-02) 
Sec. 82-75. - Review by the town manager 
    The town manager shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and decisions of the tree committee. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the tree committee to the town manager who may hear the matter and make a final decision. 
(Ord. No. 778, 12-17-02) 
Chapter 83 - SURPLUS PROPERTY AND UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
ARTICLE. I. - SURPLUS PROPERTY 

Sec. 83-1. - Disposal of surplus property. 
(a)  All town departments shall submit to the town manager, at such time and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all property and/or supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped. 
(b)  The town manager shall have the authority to transfer surplus stock to any town department as he sees fit. 
(c)  The town manager shall have the authority to sell all property and/or supplies which have become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new property and/or supplies. 
(d)  With the approval of town council, the town manager may donate surplus property to such charitable institutions and organizations specified in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-953. 
(e)  All sales of property pursuant to this section shall be sold on the basis of competitive bids, wherever feasible, to obtain the highest price. The town manager may require sealed bids in his discretion. 
(Ord. No. 718, 2-15-2000) 
Secs. 83-2-83-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE. II. - UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY IN POSSESSION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 83-10. - Definitions. 
    As used herein "unclaimed personal property" shall mean any personal property belonging to another which has been acquired by the police department pursuant to the duties of its employees, which is not needed in any criminal prosecution, which has not been claimed by its rightful owner and which the state treasurer has indicated will be declined if remitted under The Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act (Code of Virginia, § 55-210.1 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 718, 2-15-2000) 
Sec. 83-11. - Authority to sell. 
    Any unclaimed personal property which has been in the possession of the police department and is unclaimed for a period of more than 60 days may be disposed of by the chief of police by public sale, subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 718, 2-15-2000) 
Sec. 83-12. - Prerequisites to sale. 
    Prior to the sale of any unclaimed property pursuant to this article, the chief of police, or his duly authorized agent shall make reasonable attempts to notify the rightful owner of the property, obtain from the Commonwealth's attorney, in writing, a statement advising that the property is not needed in any criminal prosecution, and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, once a week for two successive weeks, notice that there will be a public sale of such unclaimed personal property. Such property shall be described generally in the notice, together with the date, time and place of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 718, 2-15-2000) 
Sec. 83-13. - Disposition of sale proceeds. 
    The chief of police, or his duly authorized agent, shall pay from the proceeds of any sale made pursuant to this article, the costs of advertisement, removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens and notice of sale. The balance of such funds shall be deposited with the town treasurer for the account of the police department and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. If no claim has been made by the owner for such funds within 60 days of the sale, the remaining funds shall be deposited in the general fund of the town. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the town within three years from the date of the sale and, if timely application is made therefor, the town shall pay the remaining proceeds of the sale to the owner, without interest or other charges. No claim shall be made nor any suit, action or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds after three years from the date of sale. 
(Ord. No. 718, 2-15-2000) 
Sec. 83-14. - Bicycles and mopeds. 
    Any bicycles or mopeds which have been in the possession of the police department unclaimed for more than 60 days may be sold, in accordance with the provisions of this article or, in the discretion of the chief of police, may be donated to a charitable organization. 
(Ord. No. 718, 2-15-2000) 
Chapter 86 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance appropriating funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to any public improvement or assessments therefore saved from repeal, § 1-8(3); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-156 et seq.; utilities, ch. 94; vehicles for hire, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Municipal taxes and assessments, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1104; taxation generally, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1 et seq.; priority of taxes in distribution of assets of person or corporation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-6 et seq.; Setoff Debt Collection Act, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-520 et seq.; local sales and use taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605 et seq.; local bank franchise tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1208 et seq.; local taxes generally, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3000 et seq.; enforcement, collection, refunds, remedies and review of local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3900 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Lists of delinquent taxes and uncollected taxes. 
(a)  The town treasurer shall, not later than August 1 of each year, prepare: 
(1)  A list of real estate which is delinquent for the nonpayment of the taxes thereon. 
(2)  A list of such taxes assessed on tangible personal property, machinery and tools and merchants' capital, and other subjects of taxation by the town, other than real estate, as the treasurer is unable to collect. 
(b)  Following their submission to the town council, the lists of subsection (a) of this section may be published once in a newspaper published in the town, but if there is no newspaper published in the town, then in some newspaper having general circulation therein and at the town courthouse for a period of 30 days. 
(Code 1982, § 19-7; Ord. No. 684, § 19-7, 11-4-1997) 
Sec. 86-2. - Payment of administrative costs and attorney's fees. 
(a)  In the event any tax assessed in this chapter is not paid on or before the date the same is due and the tax bill is declared delinquent, administrative costs and reasonable attorney's or collection agency's fees shall be assessed at a rate not to exceed 20 percent of the delinquent tax bill. Such administrative costs shall be in addition to all penalties and interest, and shall not exceed $20.00 for taxes collected subsequent to the filing of a warrant or other legal document but prior to judgment, and $25.00 for taxes collected subsequent to judgment. Attorney's fees shall be added only if such delinquency is collected by action at law or suit in equity. 
(b)  No tax assessment or tax bill shall be deemed delinquent and subject to collection procedures during the pendency of any administrative appeal under the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3980, so long as the appeal is filed within 90 days of the date of assessment, and for 30 days after the date of the final determination of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 731, 7-5-2000) 
Secs. 86-3-86-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-21. - Annual levy of real and personal property taxes; valuation of property. 
    The town council shall, annually, at the time provided in the Charter, fix the tax rates on all real and personal property subject to taxation within and by the town and shall assess such taxes as may be required to provide for the needs and purposes of the town. In determining the valuation of property in the town, reference shall be had to the records of the commissioner of revenue of the county. 
(Code 1982, § 19-1) 
Sec. 86-22. - When real estate taxes due and payable; penalty and interest on delinquencies. 
(a)  Town taxes. All town taxes on real estate shall be due and payable during the year for which the same are assessed in two approximately equal installments, due one-half on or before June 5, and one-half on or before December 5, of such year. 
(b)  Penalty for failure to pay. Any person who shall fail to pay a tax or installment shall, in addition to the tax to be paid, be assessed a penalty of ten percent of the tax past due on such real estate or the sum of $10.00, whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of tax due. 
(c)  Interest on delinquency. If any installment of taxes on real estate is not paid on or before the date the same is due and payable, interest at the rate of ten percent per annum, commencing on January 1 of the next year following that for which such taxes are assessed, shall be assessed on the principal and penalties. For the second and subsequent years of delinquency, interest shall be at the rate computed and authorized under Code of Virginia, § 58-847. 
(Code 1982, § 19-3) 
Secs. 86-23-86-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXEMPTION FOR ELDERLY OR DISABLED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for this division, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210 et seq. 

Sec. 86-36. - Exemption of real property tax on property of certain elderly or disabled persons; condition; application. 
(a)  The commissioner of revenue shall, upon application made and within the limits hereinafter provided, grant an exemption of the tax on real property occupied as the sole dwelling house of a person holding title or partial title thereto and being no less than 65 years of age or determined to be totally and permanently disabled, as set out in this section. A dwelling unit jointly owned by a husband and wife may qualify if either spouse is over 65 or is permanently and totally disabled. 
(b)  In addition to an exemption on real property, the commissioner of revenue is hereby granted the authority to grant an exemption of property taxes on mobile homes which shall be deemed to be real estate, if the owner's intention is that the mobile home is permanently affixed. This determination shall be made based on the following facts: 
(1)  The owners of the mobile home have some interest, in whole or in part, in the land upon which the mobile home is situated; or that the mobile home be situated upon land in which the owner's spouse, parent or child has such an interest; and further, that the mobile home is connected to permanent water and sewer lines or other facilities such as a well and septic system; or 
(2)  Regardless of the ownership of the land upon which the mobile home rests, as defined in subsection (a)(1) of this section, it rests on a permanent foundation and consists of two or more mobile units which are connected in such a manner that they cannot be towed together on a highway, or consists of a mobile unit and other connected rooms or additions which must be removed before the mobile unit can be towed on a highway. 
(c)  The persons seeking an exemption shall file an application for exemption, in affidavit form, with the commissioner of revenue between February 1 and March 31, to be exempt for the current year. Such application shall set forth the combined income of the owners and their relatives living in the dwelling on such property for the preceding calendar year. To be eligible for the exemption the owners and their relatives living in the dwelling shall not have a combined income which exceeds from all sources $50,000.00 per annum; provided, however, that the first $6,500.00 of income of each relative, other than the spouse of any owner, who is living in the dwelling, shall not be included in such total. In addition, the owners and the spouse of any owner, shall not have a total combined net worth, including all equitable interest, which exceeds $100,000.00 as of December 31 of the immediately preceding calendar year. The amount of net worth specified in this section shall not include the value of the sole dwelling house and up to one acre of land. 
(d)  Any false statement made in connection with the filing of an application under this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. The commissioner of revenue shall make such further inquiry of persons seeking an exemption as may be reasonably necessary to determine their qualification therefor. All such further inquiries shall be answered under oath. All information received by the commissioner of revenue in connection with any application for an exemption is deemed to be confidential and shall not be revealed, other than in the official administration of this section. 
(e)  Individuals claiming an exemption because they have attained the age of 65 years shall be required to file an initial application and make affidavit thereof. This initial application will be valid for a period of three years, and on intervening years, once the exemption is granted, these persons will be required only to make an annual certification, on forms to be supplied by the commissioner of revenue, that the information on the last preceding affidavit filed has not changed so as to violate the limitations and conditions provided in this section. 
(f)  If such person applying for an exemption is under 65 years of age and claiming total or permanent disability, he shall be required to submit annually the required affidavit and, in addition, each annual affidavit shall have attached to it a certification by the Social Security Administration, the Department of Veterans Affairs or the Railroad Retirement Board, or if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two medical doctors who are either licensed to practice medicine in the commonwealth or are military officers on active duty who practice medicine with the United States Armed Forces, to the effect that the person is permanently and totally disabled, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3217. However, a certification pursuant to 42 USC 423(d) by the Social Security Administration so long as the person remains eligible for such social security benefits shall be deemed to satisfy such definition in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3217. The affidavit of at least one of the doctors shall be based upon a physical examination of the person by such doctor. The affidavit of one of the doctors may be based upon medical information contained in the records of the Civil Service Commission which is relevant to the standards for determining permanent and total disability as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3217. 
(Code 1982, § 19-4; Ord. No. 679, § 19-4, 9-2-1997; Ord. No. 752, 8-21-2001) 
Sec. 86-37. - Termination. 
    Changes in respect to income, financial worth, ownership of property or other factors occurring during the taxable year for which the affidavit or certification is filed, and having the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions provided in this division, shall nullify any exemption for the then current taxable year and the taxable year immediately following; provided, however, that a change in ownership to a spouse who is less than 65 years of age or who is not permanently and totally disabled, which results solely from the death of his qualified spouse, shall result in a prorated exemption for the then current taxable year. Such prorated portion shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the exemption by a fraction, wherein the number of complete months of the year such property was properly eligible for such exemption is the numerator and the number 12 is the denominator. 
(Code 1982, § 19-5) 
Sec. 86-38. - Amount; records; procedure; authority. 
(a)  The amount of exemption is that portion of the tax which represents the increase in tax liability since the year the taxpayer reached age 65 years or became disabled, or the year such ordinance became effective, whichever is later. The tax exemption for the elderly became effective for those who reached age 65 on or before December 31, 1974, in 1974. The tax exemption for those who became totally and permanently disabled on or before December 31, 1977, became effective for the 1977 tax year. 
(b)  The commissioner of revenue shall indicate on the land books of the county the amount of tax exemption granted pursuant to the provisions of this section. The commissioner, with the approval of the council, shall develop rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this section, as are determined necessary. 
(c)  Sections 86-36-86-38 shall be construed to allow those personnel administering the program all authority granted to the town by Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3210-58.1-3218. 
(Code 1982, § 19-6) 
Secs. 86-39-86-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Proration of personal property tax, § 2.4. 

Sec. 86-51. - Established. 
    Except as noted in sections 86-53 and 86-55, there shall be a personal property tax on the assessed value of all tangible personal property with a situs in the town for each year at rates established annually in the town's budget enacted by the town council. 
(Code 1982, § 19-130) 
Sec. 86-52. - Situs. 
    The situs for personal property shall be as set forth in the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1982, § 19-131) 
State Law reference- Situs for taxation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3511 et seq. 
Sec. 86-53. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Household goods and personal effects such as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3504 shall be exempt from taxation. The items affected by this exemption are described as follows: 
(1)  Bicycles. 
(2)  Household and kitchen furniture including gold and silver plates, plated ware, watches and clocks, sewing machines, refrigerators, automatic refrigerating machinery of any type, vacuum cleaners and all other household machinery, books, firearms and weapons of all kinds. 
(3)  Pianos, organs, and all other musical instruments; phonographs, record players, and records to be used therewith; and radio and television instruments and equipment. 
(4)  Oil painting, pictures, statuary; curios, articles of virtue and works of art. 
(5)  Diamonds, cameos or other precious stones and all precious metals used as ornaments or jewelry. 
(6)  Sporting and photographic equipment. 
(7)  Clothing and objects of apparel. 
(8)  Antique motor vehicles as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, which may not be used for general transportation purposes. 
(9)  All other tangible personal property used by an individual or a family or household incident to maintaining an abode. 
(b)  The classification set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall apply only to such property owned and used by an individual or by a family or household incident to maintaining an abode. 
(Code 1982, § 19-132) 
Sec. 86-54. - Returns. 
(a)  Except where personal property taxes are prorated as provided by law, all persons owning personal property subject to taxation under this division must file annually a personal property tax return for the current tax year with the commissioner of the revenue on or before February 1. Any person who shall fail to file such a return on or before February 1 of the year for which the tax is to be assessed shall, in addition to the tax to be paid, be assessed a penalty of ten percent of the tax due. 
(b)  Returns for tangible personal property tax on motor vehicles and trailers which acquire a situs within the town or which has its title transferred after January 1 shall be filed within 60 days of the date on which the situs is acquired or title transferred, of the year for which the tax is to be assessed. Any person who shall fail to file such return on or before the date due of the year for which the tax is to be assessed shall, in addition to the tax to be paid, be assessed a penalty of ten percent of the tax due. 
(c)  May 31 of each year is fixed as the final date for applying for an annual motor vehicle license and paying for the motor vehicle license fee for the ensuing vehicle license year, but no license shall be issued to any person, firm, corporation or business, licensed or unlicensed, until all tangible personal property taxes have been paid by such applicant whether assessed on such motor vehicle or other motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or mobile home subject to a personal property tax. 
(d)  Provided there has been no change in status or situs of any motor vehicle or trailer and that a personal property tax return on any such motor vehicle or trailer has previously been filed with the commissioner, no returns of tangible personal property on motor vehicles or trailers with a situs within the town on January 1 need be filed with the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Code 1982, § 19-133; Ord. No. 851, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 902, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 86-55. - When due and payable. 
(a)  Except for personal property taxes that are prorated by law, payment of personal property taxes for the current year shall be due on or before May 31 of the tax year. 
(b)  When any person, after January 1, acquires a motor vehicle or trailer with a town situs, the tax shall be assessed on such motor vehicle or trailer for the portion of the tax year during which the new owner owns the property and has its situs in the town. The tax shall be due on May 31 or within 30 days after presentation or mailing of the bill from the town treasurer, whichever is later. 
(Code 1982, § 19-134) 
Sec. 86-56. - Proration of taxes; credits; refunds; tax classification. 
(a)  There shall be a personal property tax at a rate established each year by the town council on motor vehicles and trailers (referred to in this section as "taxable property") which have a situs within the town on January 1 of each year or which acquire a situs within the town on or after January 2 of each year. When taxable property acquires a situs within the town on or after January 2, the personal property tax for the year shall be assessed to the owner prorated on a monthly basis for the portion of the tax year during which the taxable property has situs within the town. When taxable property with a situs in the town is transferred to a new owner within the town, the personal property tax shall be assessed to the new owner and prorated on a monthly basis for the portion of the tax year during which the new owner owns the taxable property. For purposes of proration, a period of more than one-half of a month shall be counted as a full month and a period of less than one-half of a month, shall not be counted. For purposes of proration, the first through the 15th will be considered as the first half of the month and the 16th to the end of the month will be considered the second half of the month. 
(b)  When any taxable property loses its situs within the town after the tax day or after the day which it acquired a situs or its title is transferred to a new owner, the taxpayer shall, from that time, be relieved from personal property tax on such tangible property, prorated on a monthly basis, and receive a credit against taxable property newly transferred to the taxpayer, or a credit against personal property taxes outstanding against the taxpayer, or refund of personal property taxes already paid on a monthly basis, upon application to the commissioner of the revenue; provided, however, that application is made within three years from the last date of the tax year during which the taxable property lost its situs or had its title transferred. A credit shall be extended or refund made after such tax is relieved. Such refund shall be made within 30 days of the date such tax is relieved. No refund shall be made if the motor vehicle or trailer acquires a situs within the commonwealth in a nonprorating locality. 
(c)  Any person who moves from a nonprorating locality to the town after January 1 shall be entitled to a personal property tax exemption for the remainder of the year for each motor vehicle on which he paid personal property taxes to a nonprorating locality. If the owner replaces for any reason the original vehicle upon which taxes were paid to the nonprorating locality for the same tax year, the town shall provide a credit against the total tax due on the replacement vehicle in an amount equal to the tax paid to the nonprorating locality for the period of time commencing with the disposition of the original vehicle and continuing through the close of the tax year in which the owner incurred tax liability to the nonprorating locality for the original vehicle. 
(d)  No refund of less than $2.00 shall be issued to a taxpayer, unless specifically requested by the taxpayer. 
(e)  The items of property set forth below are each declared to be a separate class of property and shall constitute a classification for local taxation separate from other classifications of tangible property provided in this chapter: 
(1)  A separate tangible personal property tax classification is hereby established for one motor vehicle owned and regularly used by a veteran who has either lost, or lost the use of, one or both legs, or an arm, or who is blind or who is permanently and totally disabled as certified by the Department of Veterans Affairs. In order to qualify for the classification, the veteran shall provide a written statement to the commissioner of revenue or other assessing officer from the Department of Veterans Affairs that the veteran has been so designated or classified as to meet the requirements of this subsection; and that this disability is service-connected. For purposes of this subsection, a person is blind if he meets the provisions of the Code of Virginia, § 46.2-739, as amended. 
(2)  The town council may levy a tax on the property enumerated in subsection (1) at different rates from the tax levied on other tangible personal property. The rates of tax and the rates of assessment shall not exceed that applicable to the general class of tangible personal property. 
(3)  For the tax year commencing January 1, 1994, and for all tax years thereafter, unless otherwise changed, the rate of taxation on the property enumerated in subsection (1) shall be at a percentage of the rate of tax applicable to the general class of tangible personal property to be established annually. 
(Code 1982, § 19-135; Ord. No. 669, § 19-135, 6-3-1997; Ord. No. 724, 5-16-2000) 
Sec. 86-57. - Penalty and interest on delinquencies. 
(a)  Any person who shall fail to pay any tangible personal property tax when the same is due shall be assessed and shall pay, along with such tax, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of such unpaid tax. 
(b)  If any tax on tangible personal property is not paid on or before the date the same is due, interest at the rate of ten percent (commencing on the first day following the due date of the year for which such tax was assessed) shall be assessed and collected on the principal of and penalties on such tax; provided, however, that for the second and subsequent years of delinquency, such interest shall be at the rate established pursuant to section 6621 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or ten percent, whichever rate is greater. 
(c)  If any tax on tangible personal property is not paid on or before the date the same is due and the tax bill is declared delinquent, collection agency fees and attorney's fees not exceeding 20 percent of the delinquent tax bill shall be assessed and collected. Such attorney's fees shall be added only if such delinquency is collected by action at law or suite in equity. 
(d)  No tax assessment or tax bill shall be deemed delinquent and subject to the collection procedures prescribed in this section during the pendency of any administrative appeal under section Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3980, so long as the appeal is filed within 90 days of the date of the assessment and for 30 days after the date of the final determination of the appeal. 
(Code 1982, § 19-136) 
Sec. 86-58. - Personal Property Tax Relief Act implementation. 
(a)  Purpose; definitions; relation to other ordinances. 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to provide for the implementation of the changes to the personal property tax relief act ("PPTRA") effected by legislation adopted during the 2004 Special Session I and the 2005 Regular Session of the General Assembly of Virginia. 
(2)  Terms used in this section that have defined meanings set forth in PPTRA shall have the same meanings as set forth in Code of Va., § 58.1-3523, as amended. 
(3)  To the extent that the provisions of this section conflict with any prior ordinance or provision of this Code, this section shall control. 
(b)  Method of computing and reflecting tax relief. 
(1)  For tax years commencing in 2006, the town adopts the provisions of item 503.E of the 2005 appropriations act, providing for the computation of tax relief as a specific dollar amount to be offset against the total taxes that would otherwise be due but for PPTRA and the reporting of such specific dollar relief on the tax bill. 
(2)  The town council shall, by resolution, set the percentage of tax relief at such a level that it is anticipated fully to exhaust PPTRA relief funds provided to the town by the commonwealth. 
(3)  Personal property tax bills shall set forth on their face the specific dollar amount of relief credited with respect to each qualifying vehicle, together with an explanation of the general manner in which relief is allocated. 
(c)  Allocation of relief among taxpayers. 
(1)  Allocation of PPTRA relief shall be provided in accordance with the general provisions of this section, as implemented by the specific provisions of the town's annual resolution relating to PPTRA relief. 
(2)  Relief shall be allocated in such as manner as to eliminate personal property taxation of each qualifying vehicle with an assessed value of $1,000.00 or less. 
(3)  Relief with respect to qualifying vehicles with assessed values of more than $1,000.00 shall be provided at a percentage, annually fixed by town resolution and applied to the first $20,000.00 in value of each such qualifying vehicle, that is estimated fully to use all available state PPTRA relief. The rate shall be established annually by town resolution. 
(d)  Transitional provisions. 
(1)  Pursuant to authority conferred in item 503.D of the 2005 appropriations act, the town treasurer is authorized to issue a supplemental personal property tax bill, in the amount of 100 percent of tax due without regard to any former entitlement to state PPTRA relief, plus applicable penalties and interest, to any taxpayer whose taxes with respect to a qualifying vehicle for tax year 2005 or any prior tax year remain unpaid on September 1, 2006, or such date as state funds for reimbursement of the state share of such bill have become unavailable, whichever earlier occurs. 
(2)  Penalty and interest with respect to bills issued pursuant to subsection (1) of this section shall be computed on the entire amount of tax owed. Interest shall be computed at the rate provided in section 86-57, above, of this Code from the original due date of the tax. 
(Code 1982, § 14-4; Ord. No. 755, 9-4-01; Ord. No. 830, 12-6-05) 
Secs. 86-59-86-62. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MACHINERY AND TOOLS TAX 

Sec. 86-63. - Tax established. 
    There shall be a machinery and tools tax on all machinery and tools with a situs in the town, and used in manufacturing, mining, water well drilling, processing or reprocessing, radio or television broadcasting, dairy, dry cleaning and laundry businesses. Provided, however, that the machinery and equipment used by farm wineries as defined in section 4.1-100 of the Code of Virginia shall be exempt from such tax. 
(Ord. No. 763, 4-16-02) 
Sec. 86-64. - Tax rate and valuation. 
    The machinery and tools tax rate shall be one dollar per one $100.00 value. Valuation of machinery and tools shall be at 25 percent of the original total capitalized costs, for years one through five from the date of purchase or acquisition, and at 20 percent of the original total capitalized costs for year six through ten from the date of purchase or acquisition, and at 15 percent of the original total capitalized costs for all years after the tenth year from the date of purchase or acquisition. 
(Ord. No. 763, 4-16-02) 
Sec. 86-65. - Certain motor vehicles and delivery equipment. 
    All motor vehicles which are registered pursuant to section Code of Virginia, § 46.2-600 with the department of motor vehicles and owned by persons engaged in those businesses set forth in section 86-63 of this article shall be taxed as tangible personal property in accordance with section 86-51 of this chapter. All other motor vehicles and delivery equipment owned by persons engaged in those businesses set forth in section 86-63 of this article shall be included in and taxed as machinery and tools. 
(Ord. No. 763, 4-16-02) 
Sec. 86-66. - Returns, when due and payable, penalties and interest. 
    Tax returns, when the returns are due and when the taxes are payable, and penalties and interest shall be the same as for personal property taxes generally, as established in division 3 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 763, 4-16-02) 
Secs. 86-67-86-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BANK FRANCHISE TAX 

Sec. 86-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bank means as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1201. 
    Net capital means a bank's net capital computed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1205. 
(Code 1982, § 19-21) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-77. - Imposed; amount. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq., there is hereby imposed upon each bank located within the boundaries of the town a tax on net capital equalling 80 percent of the state rate of franchise tax set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1204. 
(b)  If any bank located within the boundaries of the town also has offices that are located outside of the corporate limits of the town, the tax imposed by this section upon such branch shall be apportioned as provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1211. 
(Code 1982, § 19-22) 
Sec. 86-78. - Returns and schedules. 
(a)  On or after January 1 of each year, but not later than March 1 of any year, all banks whose principal offices are located within the town shall prepare and file with the commissioner of revenue of the county a return, as provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1207, in duplicate, which shall set forth the tax on net capital computed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq. The commissioner of revenue shall certify a copy of the bank's return and schedules and shall forthwith transmit such certified copy to the state department of taxation. 
(b)  If the principal office of a bank is located outside the corporate boundaries of the town and such bank has branch offices located within the town, in addition to the filing requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section, any bank conducting such branch business shall file with the commissioner of revenue of the county a copy of the real estate deduction schedule, apportionment and other items which are required by Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-1207, 58.1-1211 and 58.1-1212. 
(Code 1982, § 19-23) 
Sec. 86-79. - Payment. 
    Each bank, on or before June 1 of each year, shall pay into the treasurer's office of the town all taxes imposed pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1982, § 19-24) 
Sec. 86-80. - Penalty upon bank for failure to comply with article. 
    Any bank which fails to file a return or pay the tax required by this article, or fails to comply with any other provision of this article, shall be subject to a penalty of five percent of the tax due. If the commissioner of the revenue is satisfied that such failure is due to providential or other good cause, such return and payment of tax shall be accepted exclusive of such penalty, but with interest determined in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-15. 
(Code 1982, § 19-25) 
Secs. 86-81-86-111. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAX ON PURCHASERS OF UTILITY SERVICE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 94. 
State Law reference- Consumer utility taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - ELECTRIC-NATURAL GAS-WATER CONSUMER'S TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 736, adopted Oct. 17, 2000, repealed division 1, sections 86-101-86-111, in its entirety and replaced it with a new division 1, sections 86-112-86-115. Former division 1 pertained to general provisions and derived from the Code of 1982, §§ 19-36-19-46; and from Ord. No. 671, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 17, 1997. 

Sec. 86-112. - Definitions. 
    Consumer means every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representatives or permittees, makes a taxable purchase of electricity or natural gas services in this jurisdiction. 
    Gas utility means a public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service in the state. 
    CCF means the volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of 100 cubic feet. 
    Kilowatt hours (kWh) delivered means 1,000 watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called cogenerators) as defined in Code of Virginia § 56-594, it means kWh supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kWh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, company or other entity. 
    Pipeline distribution company means a person, other than a pipeline transmission company which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas, manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or byproducts thereof to a purchaser for purposes of furnishing heat or light. 
    Residential consumer means the owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes, including but not limited to, apartment houses and other multiple-family dwellings. 
    Service provider means a person who delivers electricity or water to a consumer or a gas utility or pipeline distribution company which delivers natural gas to a consumer. 
    Used primarily means related to a larger portion of the use for which electric or natural gas utility service is furnished. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 764, 6-4-02) 
Sec. 86-113. - Electric utility consumer tax. 
(a)  In accordance with Virginia Code § 58.1-3814, effective January 1, 2004, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider, classified as determined by such provider, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers: Such tax shall be $0.00900 on each kWh delivered monthly to residential consumers by a service provider not to exceed $1.80 monthly. 
(2)  Nonresidential consumers: Such tax on nonresidential consumers as set forth below: 
a.  Commercial consumers - Such tax shall be $0.00610 on each kWh delivered monthly to commercial consumers, not to exceed $600.00 monthly. 
b.  Industrial consumers - Such tax shall be $0.00640 on each kWh delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed $600.00 monthly. 
(3)  The conversion of tax pursuant to this division to monthly kWh delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(b)  Exemptions: The following consumers of electricity are exempt from the tax imposed by this section 86-113. 
(1)  Any church or religious body entitled to exemption pursuant to article 4 of chapter 36 of title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia (§ 58.1-3650 et seq.). 
(2)  The United States of America, the commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the electricity consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers electricity and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to the town in accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814(F) and (G), and Code of Virginia § 58.1-2901. If any consumer received and pays for electricity but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify the town of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to the town. 
Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to the town. 
(d)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this division if submitted 12 times per year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bi-monthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The kWh will be divided by two; 
(2)  A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; 
(3)  The tax determined by (2) shall be multiplied by two; 
(4)  The tax in (3) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax." 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 783, 6-3-03) 
Sec. 86-114. - Local natural gas utility consumer tax. 
(a)  Residential consumers: Such tax on residential consumers of natural gas shall be $0.12183 on each CCF delivered monthly to residential consumers, not to exceed $1.80 per month. 
(b)  Nonresidential consumers: Such tax on non-residential consumers shall be at the rates per month shown for each CCF delivered by a pipeline distribution company or a gas utility for the classes as set forth below: 
(1)  Commercial consumers. Such tax shall be $0.12183 on each CCF delivered monthly to commercial consumers, not to exceed $600.00 monthly. 
(2)  Industrial consumers. Such tax shall be $0.12183 on each CCF delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed $600.00 monthly. 
(c)  The conversion of tax pursuant to this division to monthly CCF delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(d)  Exemptions. The following consumers of natural gas shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section 86-114: 
(1)  Any church or religious body entitled to exemption pursuant to article 4 of chapter 36 of title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia (§ 58.1-3650 et seq.). 
(2)  The United States of America, the commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(e)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the natural gas consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers natural gas and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814(H) and (I), and Code of Virginia § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for natural gas billed but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. 
Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. 
(f)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this division if submitted 12 times per year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bi-monthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The CCF will be divided by 2; 
(2)  A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; 
(3)  The tax determined by (2) shall be multiplied by two; 
(4)  The tax in (3) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax." 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 783, 6-3-03) 
Sec. 86-114.1. - Public water utility consumer tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the town a tax in the amount of 12 percent of the periodic charge made by the seller of public water against the purchaser. The tax imposed by this subsection shall not be deemed to apply to that part of the charge in excess of $15.00 per two-month period made by the seller to a purchaser for residential purposes. The tax imposed by this subsection shall not be deemed to apply to that part of the charge in excess of $5,000.00 per month made by the seller to a purchaser for industrial or commercial service. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following consumers of public water shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section 86.114.1. 
(1)  Any church or religious body entitled to exemption pursuant to Code of Virginia, article 4 of chapter 36 of title 58.1-3650 et seq. 
(2)  The United States of America, the commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the public water utility consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers water and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Virginia Code § 58.1-3814. If any consumer receives and pays for water billed but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for water and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. 
Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 764, 6-4-02) 
Sec. 86-115. - Penalties. 
    Any consumer of electricity, natural gas or public water failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed and levied under this division, and any officer, agent or employee of any service provider violating the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Each such failure, refusal, neglect or violation shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 764, 6-4-02) 
DIVISION 2. - TELEPHONE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 736, adopted Oct. 17, 2000, added a new division 2, sections 86-116-86-125, and renumbered existing division 2, sections 86-126-86-131 as division 3, sections 86-126-86-131. 

Sec. 86-116. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Purchaser means every person who purchases a telephone service. 
    Seller means every person who sells or furnishes a telephone service. 
    Telephone service means local exchange service and mobile local telecommunication service. Mobile local telecommunication service means any two-way mobile or portable local telecommunication service, including cellular mobile radio telecommunication service and specialized mobile radio. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 86-117. - Levied; amount; exclusions. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the town a tax in the amount of 12 percent of the monthly charge made by the seller against the purchaser with respect to local exchange telephone service as defined under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, except local messages which are paid for by inserting coins in coin operated telephones. The tax imposed by this subsection shall not be deemed to apply to that part of the charge in excess of $15.00 per month made by the seller to a purchaser for residential purposes. The tax imposed by this subsection shall not be deemed to apply to that party of the charge in excess of $5,000.00 per month made by the seller to a purchaser for industrial or commercial service. 
(b)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the town upon each and every purchaser or consumer of mobile local telecommunications services provided by a mobile service provider or by retailers of cellular telephone service a tax in the amount of ten percent of the monthly gross charge made by the seller against the purchaser with respect to each mobile local telecommunications service; provided, however, that the tax imposed by this section shall not be deemed to apply to that part of the charge in excess of $30.00 per month by any seller of such mobile local telecommunications service to any mobile service purchaser or consumer thereof. 
(c)  This tax is imposed or levied on a taxable purchaser by a purchaser or consumer of such service, if the purchaser's or consumer's service address is located in the town. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 746, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 764, 6-4-02) 
Sec. 86-118. - Exemptions. 
    The United States of America, the state and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and authorities thereof are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed by this article with respect to the purchase of telephone services used by such governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 86-119. - Computation. 
    In all cases where the seller collects the price for telephone services periodically, the tax imposed and levied by this article may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during such period; provided, however, that the amount of the tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 86-120. - Duty of purchaser to pay. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser to the seller, for the use of the town, at the time that the purchase price or charge for the telephone service shall become due and payable under the agreement between the purchaser and the seller. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 86-121. - Duty of seller to collect, report and remit. 
    It shall be the duty of every seller, in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency for the town, to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the town, the tax imposed and levied by this article at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for the telephone service. The taxes collected during each calendar month shall be reported and remitted for each seller to the town treasurer on or before the 25th day of the calendar month thereafter. The required report shall be in the form prescribed by the treasurer and shall include the name and address of any purchaser who has refused to pay the tax. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 86-122. - Seller's records. 
    Every seller shall keep complete records showing all purchases of telephone service in the town, which records shall show the price charged against each purchaser with respect to the purchase, the date thereof, the date of payment thereof and the amount of tax imposed under this article. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the town at reasonable times, and the duly authorized agents of the town shall have the right, power and authority to make transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 86-123. - Powers and duties of treasurer. 
    The town treasurer shall be charged with the power and the duty of collecting the taxes levied and imposed by this article and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury of the town. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 86-124. - Penalty for failure to pay and for violations of article. 
(a)  Any purchaser failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed and levied by this article and any seller violating the provisions of this article, and any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  A conviction under this section shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 86-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENHANCED EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- See editor's note at division 2. 

Sec. 86-126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    E-911 system means a telephone service which utilizes a computerized system to automatically route emergency telephone calls placed by dialing the digits "911" to the proper public safety answering point serving the jurisdiction from which the emergency telephone call was placed. An E-911 system includes selective routing of telephone calls, automatic telephone number identification, and automatic location identification performed by computers and other ancillary control center communications equipment. 
    Local telephone service means switched local exchange access service. 
    Public safety agency means a functional division of a public agency which provides firefighting police, medical or other emergency services or a private entity which provides such services on a voluntary basis. 
    Public safety answering point means a communications facility operated on a 24-hour basis which first receives E-911 calls from persons in an E-911 service area and which may, as appropriate, directly dispatch public safety service or extend, transfer or relay E-911 calls to appropriate public safety agencies. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 739, 2-6-01) 
Sec. 86-127. - Levied; notification to seller of implementation. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the town upon every purchaser of local telephone service a tax in the amount of $1.46 per month per telephone line. This tax shall be paid by the purchaser to the seller of local telephone service (referred to in this section as "seller") for the use of the town to pay the ongoing monthly maintenance costs of its E-911 system. 
(b)  The town manager shall notify the seller of the date on which the tax is to be implemented or amended. This notification will be sent by certified mail to the registered agent of the seller 120 days in advance of the date on which the tax is to be implemented or amended. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 739, 2-6-01) 
Sec. 86-128. - Collection and remittance of tax; records. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every seller in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency for the town to add the amount of the tax imposed under section 86-127 to all periodic bills it renders to nonexempt purchasers of local telephone service. The seller shall accept remittances of tax from purchasers at the time it collects the charges for local telephone service and shall report and pay over all tax collected in any calendar month to the town treasurer on or before the last day of the first calendar month thereafter. At this time, the seller shall notify the town treasurer of the name and address of all purchasers who refuse to pay the tax imposed by this article. The tax levied or imposed under this article shall become effective with the later of: 
(1)  Bills dated 60 days after a copy of the ordinance enacting this article is sent to the registered agent of the seller by certified mail; or 
(2)  Bills dated on or after October 1, 1987. 
(b)  Each and every seller shall keep records showing all purchases of local telephone service in the town. These records must show the dates of bills for local telephone service and the amount of tax appearing on each bill. These records shall be kept at the seller's offices for a period of three years for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the town at reasonable times during normal business hours. The duly authorized agents of the town shall have the right, power and authority to make copies thereof. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 86-129. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The United States of America, the state and the political subdivisions, agencies, boards, commissions and authorities of the United States and the state are hereby exempted from payment of the tax imposed and levied by this article. 
(b)  This tax shall not apply to any local telephone service where a periodic bill is not rendered. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 86-130. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any purchaser who willfully fails, refuses or neglects to pay the tax hereby imposed and any seller, or any officer, agent or employee thereof, who with full knowledge, willfully refuses to perform the duties imposed on it by section 86-128 with the intent of preventing the collection of the tax imposed by this article shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Each failure, refusal or neglect and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 86-131. - Compensation to seller for collection of tax. 
    Whenever the tax levied by this article is collected by the seller acting as a tax collecting medium or agency for the town in accordance with section 86-128(a), such seller shall be allowed as compensation for the collection and remittance of this tax, three percentum of the amount of tax due and accounted for. The seller shall deduct this compensation from the payments made to the town treasurer in accordance with section 86-128(a). 
(Ord. No. 736, 10-17-00) 
Secs. 86-132-86-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAX ON PREPARED FOOD AND BEVERAGES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 725, adopted June 6, 2000, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 86-151-86-165 and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1982, §§ 19-50-19-64. 
State Law reference- Excise tax on meals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 

Secs. 86-151-86-165. - Reserved. 
Sec. 86-166. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have, for the purposes of this article, the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cater means the furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for compensation. 
    Collector means the town treasurer or designee. 
    Food means all food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
    Food establishment means any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the town including but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption. 
    Meal means any prepared food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or exclude [excluded] herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
(Ord. No. 725, 6-6-2000) 
Sec. 86-167. - Levy. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the town on each person a tax at the rate of five percent on the amount paid for meal(s) purchased from any food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not. 
(Ord. No. 725, 6-6-2000; Ord. No. 818, 6-21-05) 
Sec. 86-168. - Collection of tax by seller. 
    Every person receiving any payment for food with respect to which a tax is levied hereunder shall collect and remit the amount of the tax imposed by this article from the person on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such food at the time payment for such food is made. 
    All tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust for the town. 
(Ord. No. 725, 6-6-2000) 
Sec. 88-169. - Exemptions; limits on application. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption: 
(1)  Factory-prepackaged candy, gum, nuts and other items of essentially the same nature. 
(2)  Factory-prepackaged donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and items of essentially the same nature; 
(3)  Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this provision, a bulk sale shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on-premises consumption (e.g. a whole cake, a gallon of ice cream); a bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption; 
(4)  Alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages sold in factory sealed containers; 
(5)  Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the Food Stamp Program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children; or 
(6)  Any food or food product purchased for home consumption as defined in the federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 U.S.C. § 2012, as amended except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items whether or not purchased for immediate consumption are excluded from the said definition of food in the federal Food Stamp Act: Sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, and nonfactory sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subparagraphs (d)(3), (4) and (5) hereinbelow. 
(b)  A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages. 
(c)  The tax imposed hereunder shall not be levied on the following purchases of food and beverages: 
(1)  Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee; 
(2)  Food and beverages sold by day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or employees; 
(3)  Food and beverages for use or consumption and which are paid for directly by the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth or the United States; 
(4)  Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof; 
(5)  Food and beverages furnished by a public or private nonprofit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the Commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations; 
(6)  Food and beverages sold on an occasional basis by a nonprofit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church, or religious body as a fundraising activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for nonprofit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes; or 
(7)  Food and beverages sold through vending machines. 
(Ord. No. 725, 6-6-2000; Ord. No. 733, 8-15-00) 
Sec. 86-170. - Gratuities and service charges. 
    Where a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax imposed by this article, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's account, provided in the latter case, the full amount of the gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller. 
    An amount or percent, whether designated as a gratuity, tip or service charge, that is added to the price of the food and beverages by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser, as a part of the selling price of the food and the beverages and is subject to the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 725, 6-6-2000) 
Sec. 86-171. - Report of taxes collected; remittance; preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person required by this article to pay to the town the taxes imposed by this article, to file a report thereof setting forth such information as the treasurer may prescribe and require, including all purchases taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. Such records shall be kept and preserved for a period of five years. The treasurer or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Ord. No. 725, 6-6-2000; Ord. No. 771, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 86-171.1. - Due date for filing report and remittance of taxes. 
    The due date for filing the return and remitting the taxes required by this article shall be the twentieth day of the month following the month in which the tax is collected by the seller. If the twentieth day of the month falls on a weekend or holiday, the due date for filing and remittance shall be the next regularly scheduled business day. 
(Ord. No. 771, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 86-171.2. - Penalty for late remittance, failure to file, or false return. 
(a)  If any seller whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to file any report required by this article, or to remit to the town treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to the tax owed a penalty in the amount of ten percent thereof if the failure is not for more than 30 days. An additional penalty of ten percent of the tax owed shall be added for each additional 30 days or fractions thereof that the tax remains unpaid, not to exceed 25 percent in the aggregate, with a minimum penalty of $2.00. 
(b)  In the case of a false return made with the intent to defraud the town of any tax due under this article, a penalty of 50 percent of the tax owed shall be assessed against the person required to collect such tax. 
(Ord. No. 771, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 86-172. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is $1,000.00 or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) above, any corporate or partnership officer, as defined in Virginia Code § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for, or pay over the meals tax imposed under this article, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, or who willfully evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 725, 6-6-2000) 
Secs. 86-173-86-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMISSIONS TAX[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Excise tax on admissions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 86-186. - Levied. 
    An admission tax is hereby levied on the price of admissions for any public amusement, entertainment, performance, exhibition, sport or athletic event occurring in the town in accordance with the classifications listed in this section, which tax shall be added to and collected by the seller along with the price of admission or other charge, as follows: 
(1)  Upon admissions to any event, the gross receipts of which go wholly to a charitable purpose, at the rate of zero percent; 
(2)  Upon admission to any event at a public or private elementary, secondary or college sponsored event, including events sponsored by a student organization sponsored by such school and athletic events authorized by such school at the rate of zero percent; 
(3)  Upon admission into any museum, botanical or similar garden or zoo at the rate of zero percent; 
(4)  Upon admission as a participant in any sporting event at the rate of five percent; and 
(5)  Upon admission to all other taxable events at the rate of 25 percent of the first dollar and at the rate of zero percent thereafter. 
(Code 1982, § 19-100; Ord. No. 808, 1-18-05) 
Sec. 86-187. - Collection; records. 
(a)  Every seller of admission to an event with respect to which an admissions tax is levied under section 86-186 shall collect the amount of tax imposed under that section from the purchaser on whom the same is levied at the time payment for such admission becomes due and payable, whether payment is to be made in cash or its equivalent, or a credit by means of a credit card or otherwise. The amount of tax owed by the purchaser shall be added to the cost of the admission by the seller who shall pay the taxes collected to the town as provided in this section. Taxes collected by the seller shall be held in trust by the seller until remitted to the town. 
(b)  Every seller of admissions with respect to which a tax is levied under section 86-186 shall prepare a return, upon such forms and setting forth such information as the treasurer may prescribe and require, showing the amount of admissions collected and the tax required to be collected, and shall sign and deliver such return to the treasurer with a remittance of such tax. Such return and remittance shall be made on or before the 20th day of each month, covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of any seller or admissions liable for collection and remittance of the taxes imposed by section 86-186 to keep and preserve for a period of three years, records showing all purchases for events in the town and identifying the price charged against each purchaser with respect to each admission, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon, and the amount of tax imposed and collected under this article. The treasurer shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of the seller, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this section and to make copies of all or any parts thereof. 
(d)  Whenever any seller required to collect and pay to the town a tax under this section shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under this section shall become immediately due and payable, and such person shall immediately make a return and pay the tax due. 
(e)  For the purpose of compensating sellers for the collection of the tax imposed by section 86-186, every seller shall be allowed three percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction on this monthly return; provided, however, that the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Code 1982, § 19-101) 
Sec. 86-188. - Enforcement; penalties; violations. 
(a)  The treasurer shall promulgate rules and regulations for the interpretation, administration and enforcement of sections 86-186 and 86-187. It shall also be the duty of the treasurer to ascertain the name of every seller liable for the collection of the tax imposed by section 86-186, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make the returns and remittances required by sections 86-187. The treasurer shall have all of the enforcement powers as authorized by the Code of Virginia for purposes of this article. 
(b)  If any seller, whose duty it is to do so, shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed by section 86-186 and to make within the time provided in section 86-187, the returns and remittances mentioned in such section, the treasurer shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the treasurer shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any seller who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such return and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such seller the tax and penalties provided for by these sections and shall notify such seller, by registered mail sent to his last known place of business, or the total amount of such tax and penalties, and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date such notice is sent. 
(c)  If any seller, whose duty it is to do so, shall fail to refuse to file any return required by section 86-187 or to remit to the treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid under section 86-186 within the time and in the amount specified in these sections, there shall be added to such tax by the treasurer a penalty in the amount of ten percent if the failure is not more than 30 days, with an additional ten percent of the total amount of tax owed for each additional 30 days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not to exceed 25 percent in the aggregate, with a minimum penalty of $2.00. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with the intent to defraud the town of any tax due under these sections, a penalty of 50 percent of the tax shall be assessed against the person required to collect such tax. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to comply with any provision of sections 86-186 and 86-187. Such violation shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax levied or assessed in connection with any return required by these sections but unpaid as of the date of conviction is $1,000.00 or less; a class 1 misdemeanor if the amount of tax levied or assessed in connection with any return required by these sections but unpaid as of the date of conviction is more than $1,000.00. 
(e)  Conviction of such violation shall not relieve any person from payment, collection or remittance of the taxes provided for in sections 86-186 and 86-187. Any agreement by any person to pay the taxes provided for in these sections by a series of installment payments shall not relieve any person of criminal liability for violation of these sections until the full amount of taxes agreed to be paid by such person is received by the treasurer. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation, and each day's continuance thereof, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1982, § 19-102) 
Secs. 86-189-86-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Excise tax on transient room rentals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 86-211. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hotel means, but is not limited to, any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any public or private hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, house, boardinghouse, dormitory, public or private club, apartment hotel, hostelry, mobile house or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof within the town which offers lodging for five or more persons at any one time and the owner and operator thereof offers lodging to any transient for compensation. 
    License inspector means a license inspector in the office of the treasurer of the town. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
    Operator means the person who is proprietor of the hotel or travel campground, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purpose of this section and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this section by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, person acting in a representative capacity, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Rent means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel or travel campground valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and service of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Room rental means the total charge made by any hotel or travel campground for lodging or space furnished to any transient. If the charge made by any hotel or travel campground to a transient includes any charge for services or accommodations in addition to that of lodging and/or use of space, then such portion of the total charge representing only lodging and/or space rental shall be distinctly set out and billed to such transient by such hotel or travel campground as a separate item. 
    Transient means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, for a period of less than 30 consecutive calendar days, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel, motel, boarding house, travel campground, or other facilities offering guest rooms for which charge is made shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 29 days has fully expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy, or the occupant has paid in advance for 30 or more days of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this article may be considered. 
    Travel campground means any area, site, lot, field or tract of land offering spaces for recreational vehicles or campsites for transient dwelling purposes, or temporary dwelling during travel or recreational or vacation uses. 
    Treasurer means the treasurer of the town. 
(Code 1982, § 19-111; Ord. No. 974, 6-21-2016 ) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-212. - Levied rate. 
    There is hereby imposed a transient occupancy tax payable by transients for the temporary occupancy in every hotels and travel campgrounds offering lodging in the town equivalent to seven percent of the amount of the charge for the occupancy of any room or space occupied. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the town which shall be collected and held in trust by the operator of the hotel or travel campground and remitted by the operator of the hotel or travel campground to the town. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator at the time the bill for lodging is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel or travel campground. 
(Code 1982, § 19-112; Ord. No. 974, 6-21-2016 ) 
Sec. 86-213. - Exemptions. 
    No tax shall be payable under this article in any of the following instances: 
(1)  On rooms or spaces rented for continuous occupancy by the same individual or group for 30 or more days in hotels and travel campgrounds. 
(2)  On room rental paid by any federal, state or town official or employee when on official business. 
(3)  On room rental paid to any hospital, medical clinic, nursing home, convalescent home or home for aged people. 
(4)  By any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury. 
(Code 1982, § 19-113) 
Sec. 86-214. - Collection. 
    Each operator receiving any payment for room rental with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of tax hereby imposed from the transient on whom the same is levied, or from the person paying for such room rental, at the time payment for such room rental is made. The taxes required to be collected under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the operator required to collect the taxes until remitted as required by this article. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel or travel campground shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 19-114) 
Sec. 86-215. - Reports and remittance of tax. 
    Each operator collecting the tax levied under this article shall make a report, upon such forms and setting forth such information as the treasurer may prescribe and require. Such report shall show the amount of room rental charges collected and the tax required to be collected, and shall sign and deliver the same to the treasurer, with a remittance of such tax. Such reports and remittances shall be made quarterly on or before October 31, January 31, April 30 and July 31 in each year, and shall cover the amount of tax collected during the three months immediately preceding the months in which such reports and remittances are required. If the remittance is by check or money order, the same shall be payable to the town. 
(Code 1982, § 19-115) 
Sec. 86-216. - Failure to collect, report or remit. 
    If any operator shall fail to refuse to collect the tax levied by this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, any report and remittance required by this article, the treasurer shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the treasurer shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report or remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this article, and shall notify such operator by registered mail sent to his last known place of address of the total amount of such tax, interest and penalties, and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1982, § 19-116) 
Sec. 86-217. - Penalties and interest. 
(a)  If any operator fails or refuses to remit to the treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid under this article within the time and amount specified in this article, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax, shall be imposed by the treasurer of the town. Further, if the tax remains delinquent and unpaid for a period of one month from the date same is due and payable, a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax and the initial ten percent penalty, shall be imposed. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this article shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month on the amount of the tax exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid in this section. 
(Code 1982, § 19-117) 
Sec. 86-218. - Recordkeeping. 
    It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the town of any tax imposed by this section to keep and preserve, for a period of two years, such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax, which records the treasurer shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1982, § 19-118) 
Sec. 86-219. - Cessation of business. 
    Whenever any operator required to collect and pay to the town a tax under this article shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under this article to the town shall become immediately due and payable, and such person shall immediately submit a report and pay the tax due. 
(Code 1982, § 19-119) 
Sec. 86-220. - Violations. 
    Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article, or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, shall be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. The punishment provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other remedy for the collection of taxes provided for by law. 
(Code 1982, § 19-120) 
Sec. 86-221. - Powers and duties of license inspector. 
    It shall be the duty of the license inspector to ascertain the name of every person operating a hotel or travel campground in the town liable for the collection of the tax levied by this article, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect the tax or to make, within the time provided by this article, the reports or remittances required in this article. The license inspector and his duly authorized deputies may have a summons issued for such person, and may serve a copy of such summons upon such person in the manner provided by law and shall make one return of the original to the general district court of the county. Police powers are hereby conferred upon the license inspector and his duly authorized deputies while engaged in performing their duties as such under the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 19-121) 
Sec. 86-222. - Refunds. 
(a)  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the town under this article, it may be refunded as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, provided that a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded is filed with the treasurer within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the treasurer. 
(b)  An operator may claim refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the treasurer that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
(c)  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the town filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the treasurer, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the treasurer that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
(d)  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Code 1982, § 19-122) 
Sec. 86-223. - Actions to collect. 
    Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provision of this article shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the town. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the town shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the town. Any person owing money to the town under the provisions of this article shall be liable in action brought in the name of the town for the recovery of such amount. 
(Code 1982, § 19-123) 
Secs. 86-224-86-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LICENSES[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 6; boarding kennels and pet shops, § 10-116 et seq.; fair housing, § 50-21 et seq.; secondhand goods, ch. 74; solicitors, ch. 76; utilities, ch. 94; vehicles for hire, ch. 98; GB general business district, app. B, art. IV, div. 6; CB central business district, app. B, art. IV, div. 7; M-1 limited industrial district, app. B, art. IV, div. 8; M-2 general industrial district, app. B, art. IV, div. 9; adult uses, app. B, art. V, div. 8; parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts, app. B, § 5-24. 
State Law reference- Sale of ice cream and similar products, state preemption, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-562.4; going-out-of-business sales, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-223, 18.2-224; licensing of bail bondsmen, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-152.1; professions and occupations, Code of Virginia, title 54.1; regulation of precious metals dealers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4111; records of firearms dealers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4200 et seq.; local license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq.; enforcement, collection, refunds, remedies and review of local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3900 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-246. - Statement of policy. 
    It is the purpose and policy of the town, in enacting this article imposing license taxes for the conduct of business in the town, and for the granting of privileges as defined and set forth in this article, to equalize, as far as practicable, the burden of such license taxation among those liable thereto, by adopting, for general application, but subject to the regulations, personal privileges and exceptions specifically set forth in this article, a system of license taxes measured by the volume of business done by the business, trade, profession, occupation or calling upon which the tax is levied. 
(Code 1982, § 11-2) 
Sec. 86-247. - Overriding conflicting ordinances. 
    Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the commonwealth and notwithstanding any other current ordinances or resolutions enacted by the council, whether or not compiled in this Code, to the extent of any conflict, the following provisions shall be applicable to the levy, assessment and collection of licenses required and taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and upon the persons, firms and corporations engaged therein within the town. 
(Code 1982, § 11-3) 
Sec. 86-248. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affiliated group means: 
(1)  One or more chains of includable corporations connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is an includable corporation if 
a.  Stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the includable corporations, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other includable corporations; and 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other includable corporations. As used in this subsection, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends. The term "includable corporation" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income. 
(2)  Two or more corporations if five or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.  At least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least 80 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation; and 
b.  More than 50 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than 50 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
When one or more of the includable corporations, including the common parent corporation, is a nonstock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this subsection shall refer to the nonstock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
    Assessment means a determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by an assessing official when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the assessing official or an employee of the assessing official, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be. 
    Assessor or assessing official means the treasurer for the town and any of the treasurer's duly authorized deputies, assistants, employees or agents and for the purpose of this article shall have the same meaning as "assessor," "assessing official" or "treasurer." 
    Base year means the calendar year preceding the license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
    Broker means an agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks, bonds, commodities or services, usually on a commission basis. 
    Business means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: 
(1)  Advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or 
(2)  Filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
    Commodity means staples such as wool, cotton, etc., which are traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in futures. 
    Contractor means as prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3714(D), whether such work is done or offered to be done by day labor, general contract or subcontract. 
    Dealer means any person engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for his own account, but does not include a bank, or any person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular business. 
    Definite place of business means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for 30 consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is not a definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
    Financial services means the buying, selling, handling, managing, investing and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities or other investments. Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but without limitation, the following: 
Buying installment receivables. 
Chattel mortgage financing. 
Consumer financing. 
Credit card services. 
Credit unions. 
Factors. 
Financing accounts receivable. 
Industrial loan companies. 
Installment financing. 
Inventory financing. 
Loan or mortgage brokers. 
Loan or mortgage companies. 
Safety deposit box companies. 
Security and commodity brokers and services. 
Stockbroker. 
Working capital financing. 
    Gross receipts means the whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the licensed privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq. 
    License year means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
    Personal services means rendering for compensation any repair, personal, business or other service not specifically classified as "financial, real estate or professional service" under this article, or rendered in any other business or occupation not specifically classified in this article unless exempted from local license tax by Code of Virginia, title 58.1. 
    Professional services means services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians, and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations and no others, as the state department of taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3701. The department shall identify and list each occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instruction and study, is used in its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The word "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 
    Purchases means all goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term shall also include the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. A wholesale merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine the cost of manufacture, or chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture. 
    Real estate services means providing with respect to the purchase, sale, lease, rental or appraisal of real property, unless the service is otherwise specifically provided for in this article, and such services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Appraisers of real estate. 
Escrow agents, real estate. 
Fiduciaries, real estate. 
Lessors of real property. 
Real estate agents, brokers and managers. 
Real estate selling agents. 
Rental agents for real estate. 
    Retailer or retail merchant means any person or merchant who sells goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser, but does not include sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users. 
    Security means as in the Securities Act, Code of Virginia, § 13.1-501 et seq., or in similar laws of the United States regulating the sale of securities. 
    Services means things purchased by a customer which do not have physical characteristics, or which are not goods, wares or merchandise. 
    Wholesaler or wholesale merchant means any person or merchant who sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial and industrial users which because of the quantity, price or other terms indicate that they are consistent with sales at wholesale. 
(Code 1982, § 11-4) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-249. - Adoption of state law. 
    As to all questions in regard to the duty and conduct of the treasurer in collecting and enforcing the taxes imposed by this article, and in regard to matters of construction, and for the definitions of terms used in this article which are not defined, and the rules and regulations applicable to putting the same in operation, for the assessment, levy and collection of taxes for the current year, reference is hereby made to the laws of the state, and more particularly to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq., or to so much thereof as is applicable to this article and is not inconsistent with it or the general ordinances of the town, and for the conduct and guidance of the treasurer of the town and other parties affected by this article, and for fixing their powers, rights, duties and obligations, the provisions of such laws, so far as applicable, are hereby adopted, without being specifically quoted or set forth in this section. 
(Code 1982, § 11-5) 
Sec. 86-250. - Levying of license taxes. 
(a)  For each and every year beginning with January 1 of each year and ending December 31 following, until otherwise changed, there are hereby levied and there shall be collected the annual license taxes hereafter set forth in this article, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, on persons conducting or engaging in any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling in the town as set forth in this article, which license taxes shall be for the support of the town government, the payment of the town debt and for other town purposes. 
(b)  Each and all of the taxes imposed in this article are in all cases imposed upon the privilege of doing business or exercising a trade, profession, occupation or calling within the town, including all phases of the business, profession, trade, occupation or calling conducted within the town. 
(Code 1982, § 11-6) 
Sec. 86-251. - License requirements. 
(a)  Every person engaging in the town in any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling (collectively "a business") as defined in this article, unless otherwise exempted by law, shall apply for a license for each such business if in the case of professional services, such person maintains a definite office in the town, or if such person does not maintain a definite office in the commonwealth but does maintain an abode in the town, which abode for the purposes of this article shall be deemed a definite place of business; or in the case of any other business, such person has a definite place of business or maintains an office in the town; or such person is engaged as a peddler or itinerant merchant, carnival or circus as specified in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3717, 58.1-3718 or 58.1-3728, respectively, or is a contractor subject to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715, or is a public service corporation subject to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731. A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business. A person engaged in two or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: 
(1)  Each business or profession is licensable at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of the town; 
(2)  All of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and 
(3)  The taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the assessor may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts. 
(b)  Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to beginning business, if he was not licensable in the town on or before January 1 of the license year, or no later than March 1 of the current license year if he had been issued a license for the preceding license year. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the assessing official. 
(c)  No business license under this article shall be issued until the applicant has produced satisfactory evidence that all delinquent business license, personal property, meals and transient occupancy taxes owed by the applicant to the town have been paid. 
(Code 1982, § 11-7; Ord. No. 756, 11-6-01) 
Sec. 86-252. - Issuance of license generally; not to be issued for conduct of activity at prohibited location; display of license. 
(a)  Upon payment of the prescribed tax and compliance with all applicable provisions of this article, and subject to all such provisions, the treasurer shall issue a license applied for under this article. Such license shall state that the person to whom it is issued is thereby licensed to carry on the business, trade, profession, occupation or calling therein named until December 31 following the date of such license or for the duration of the specific license granted. 
(b)  The treasurer shall not issue a license for conducting any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling at a location where the conduct of such business, trade, profession, occupation or calling at such location is prohibited by the zoning ordinance or any other ordinance of the town. 
(c)  Every person required to obtain a license, tag, sticker or sign under the provisions of this article, shall display the license, tag, sticker or sign in a conspicuous place at his regular place of business or profession in order that any authorized representative of the town may inspect the same at any and all reasonable times. All licensees who do not maintain a regular place of business shall either carry a license, tag, sticker or sign with them on their person or have the same affixed or attached to their truck, automobile or motor vehicle, and properly display the same when called upon to do so by any authorized representative of the town. 
(Code 1982, § 11-8; Ord. No. 851, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 86-253. - Extension of time for filing; penalties; interest; power of treasurer to collect tax. 
(a)  The assessing official may grant an extension of time, not to exceed 90 days, in which to file an application for a license, for good cause. The extension may be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax, subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, a penalty of ten percent of the portion paid after the due date. 
(b)  A penalty of ten percent of the tax may be imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the assessing official if both the application and payment are late; however, both penalties may be assessed if the assessing official determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of an additional tax made by the assessing official, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud or reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the assessing official is not paid within 30 days, the treasurer may impose a ten percent late payment penalty. The penalties shall not be imposed, or, if imposed, shall be abated by the official who assessed them, if the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control. 
    Acted responsibly means that the taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business, and the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered. 
    Events beyond the taxpayer's control include, but are not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the assessing official, who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he provided the erroneous information. 
(c)  Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the assessing official is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund of any tax paid under this article from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, in event of such adjustment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than 30 days from the date of the payment that created the refund, or the due date of the tax, or the date of the taxpayer's application for a refund, whichever is later. 
(d)  The treasurer shall have the same power to enforce the collection of license taxes that are now given or may hereafter be given to commissioners of the revenue and treasurers by the applicable provisions of the Code of Virginia, for the enforcement of state licenses. 
(Code 1982, § 11-9) 
Sec. 86-254. - Situs of gross receipts, general rule. 
    Whenever the tax imposed by this article is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a privilege subject to licensure at a definite place of business within this jurisdiction. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices as follows: 
(1)  The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which his services are performed or, if his services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
(2)  The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur or, if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled. However, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of it purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the state department of taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality. 
(3)  The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed. 
(4)  The gross receipts from the performance of personal services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then to the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled. 
(Code 1982, § 11-10) 
Sec. 86-255. - Apportionment of gross receipts; agreements between localities. 
(a)  Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of businesses on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to this jurisdiction solely because the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in the other jurisdiction. 
(b)  Agreements. The assessor may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of the state concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among the definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes on more than 100 percent of the its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the assessor shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. If an agreement cannot be reached, either the assessor or taxpayer may seek an advisory opinion from the state department of taxation pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3701; notice of the request shall be given to the other party. Notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3993, when a taxpayer has demonstrated to a court that two or more political subdivisions of the state have assessed taxes on gross receipts that may create a double assessment within the meaning of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3986, the court shall enter such orders pending resolution of the litigation as may be necessary to ensure that the taxpayer is not required to pay multiple assessments even though it is not then known which assessment is correct and which is erroneous. 
(Code 1982, § 11-11) 
Sec. 86-256. - Corrections of assessments; appeals; rulings. 
    The enforcement of the provisions of this article including limitations with respect thereto, the correction of any assessment under this article and any appeal by the town of a correction made by its assessing official or by any person assessed with taxes under this article and aggrieved by such assessment shall be pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3900 et seq.; provided, however, that: 
(1)  Any person assessed with a licensing tax under this article as the result of an audit may within the period provided in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3980 apply to the assessing official for a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The assessor may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the applications. The assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct. The assessor shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth its position. Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to seek correction and the specific procedure to be followed in the town (e.g., the name and address to which an application should be directed). 
(2)  When application is made within 90 days of any assessment, collection activity shall be suspended until 30 days after the final determination is issued by the assessor, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 86-253, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" includes a finding that the application is frivolous, or that a taxpayer desires to depart quickly from the town, to remove his property therefrom, to conceal himself or his property therein, or to do any other act tending to prejudice or to render wholly or partially ineffectual proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
(3)  Any taxpayer may request from the assessor a written ruling regarding the application of the tax to a specific situation. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if there is a change in the law, a court decision, or the assessor notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
(Code 1982, § 11-12) 
Sec. 86-257. - Recordkeeping and audits of business records; statements and other proof as to gross receipts; revocation due to false statements. 
(a)  Every person who is assessable with a license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the assessor to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the assessor to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the assessor in order to allow the assessor to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within the town. The assessor shall provide the taxpayer with the option of having the audit conducted in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. If the records are maintained outside the town, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the assessor's office upon demand. 
(b)  Where the license tax imposed by this article is measured by gross receipts, gross value, sales or purchases, the treasurer may require of the applicant for a license a statement under oath, as to the amount of his gross receipts, gross value, sales or purchases, and if the treasurer deems it advisable or necessary, he may demand of such person such other proof of the amount of his gross receipts, gross value, sales or purchases as may enable him to satisfactorily determine the same. The treasurer may decline to issue the license until such proof has been furnished. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make a false or misleading statement or give false testimony for the purpose of obtaining a license under this article. Any license issued because of any such statement or testimony shall be revoked, and no part of the license tax collected shall be refunded. 
(Code 1982, § 11-13) 
Sec. 86-258. - Exclusions and deductions from gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business or a profession. 
(b)  Exclusions enumerated. The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts: 
(1)  Amounts received and paid to the United States, the commonwealth or any county, city or town for the state retail sales or use tax, or for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes, for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels. 
(2)  Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable receipts even though the creation of such debt and factoring are a regular part of its business). 
(3)  Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the business to its customer. 
(4)  Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor. 
(5)  Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset. 
(6)  Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, and which the recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee's gross receipts, together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive. 
(7)  Withdrawals from inventory for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory, whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes. 
(8)  Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a licensable business not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business and to interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of the licensee's own funds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business. 
(Code 1982, § 11-14) 
Sec. 86-259. - Rates of license taxes. 
    Except as may be specifically otherwise provided by ordinance or other law, the annual license tax imposed under this article shall be the rate set forth as follows for the class of enterprise listed: 
(1)  For contractors and persons constructing for their own account for sale, $30.00 and an additional $0.16 per $100.00 of gross receipts in excess of $125,000.00. 
(2)  For financial services, $30.00 and an additional $0.58 per $100.00 of gross receipts in excess of $125,000.00. 
(3)  For real estate services, $30.00 and an additional $0.35 per $100.00 of gross receipts in excess of $8,570.00. 
(4)  For professional services, $30.00 and an additional $0.58 per $100.00 of gross receipts in excess of $125,000.00. 
(5)  For repair, personal services and other businesses and occupations not specifically listed or exempted in this article or otherwise by law (collectively, "business services"), $30.00 and an additional $0.36 per $100.00 of gross receipts in excess of $125,000.00. 
(6)  For carnivals, circuses, speedways, performances and other public exhibitions, $500.00 for each performance held within the town. 
(7)  For fortunetellers, clairvoyants and practitioners of palmistry, $250.00 per year. 
(8)  For permanent coliseums, arenas or auditoriums having a maximum capacity in excess of 10,000 persons, open to the public, $1,000.00 per year. 
(9)  For savings and loan associations and credit unions having their main office in the town, $50.00 per year. 
(10)  For retailers, $30.00 and an additional $0.20 per $100.00 of gross receipts in excess of $125,000.00. 
(11)  For wholesalers, $0.05 per $100.00 of purchases from the preceding year. 
(12)  For direct sellers as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3719.1 with total annual sales in excess of $4,000.00, $0.20 per $100.00 of total annual retail sales or $0.05 per $100.00 of total annual wholesale sales, whichever is applicable. 
(Code 1982, § 11-15; Ord. No. 995 , 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 86-260. - Exemptions from licensing requirements. 
    The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Newspaper carriers. 
(2)  Babysitters and child care attendants who regularly care for four or less children, or who otherwise do not meet the state health department requirements for a day care permit. 
(3)  Local nonprofit organizations and activities, which have as their purpose a charitable, recreational or social benefit to the community. 
(4)  Other activities and services, not otherwise covered under this article, which do not have a business intent. Evidence of business intent shall include, but not be limited to, one or more of the following: Advertising in a telephone or other directory services or communications media; signs advertising the purpose of the business or defining its location; distribution of business cards; or other means of business solicitation. 
(5)  Persons whose gross receipts in the preceding calendar year was less than $3,000.00 due to any personal or business service, real estate service or professional service. 
(Code 1982, § 11-16; Ord. No. 685, § 11-16, 1-6-1998) 
Sec. 86-261. - When license tax due and payable; expiration of license. 
(a)  The license tax shall be paid at the time the business license application is submitted on or before March 1 of each license year. 
(b)  In all cases where the person shall begin the business, profession, trade, occupation or calling upon which a license tax is imposed after January 1 of the license year, such license tax shall be due and payable by March 1 of that year or within 30 days of the commencement of the business, profession, trade, occupation or calling, whichever comes later. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, a license issued under this article shall expire on December 31 next following its issuance. 
(Code 1982, § 11-17) 
Sec. 86-262. - Estimates for determining tax; assessment of additional tax. 
(a)  Whenever any person begins a business, trade, profession or occupation on or after January 1 of any license year, the license tax imposed by this article, if not set at a fixed amount, shall be measured by the applicant's estimate of the purchases, sales, gross receipts or gross value that will be received, made, established, or produced from the commencement of the business, trade, profession or occupation to the end of the license year. Such person shall, within a period of 30 days from the commencement of the succeeding license year, or when applying for his license for such succeeding year, furnish the treasurer with the true amount of the gross receipts, gross value, sales or purchases for that part of the preceding year during which such person operated and thereupon pay the treasurer any additional amount of license tax due. Until such payment is made, there shall not be issued to such person any license permitting such person to carry on any business, profession, trade, occupation or calling within the town. 
(b)  Whenever the treasurer shall ascertain that any person should be assessed with any additional license tax pursuant to the provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of the treasurer to assess such person with such additional license tax as may be due. 
(Code 1982, § 11-18) 
Sec. 86-263. - Permit prerequisite to issuance for certain amusements. 
(a)  Before a license is issued for any carnival, circus, speedway, performance or public exhibition, the person proposing to exhibit such carnival, circus, speedway, performance or public exhibition shall make application in writing to the town manager, stating the nature of the carnival, circus, speedway, performance or public exhibition, and the location within the town where the same will be exhibited, and secure from the town manager a written permit therefor. If the town manager considers it undesirable or dangerous to permit such a carnival, circus, speedway, performance or public exhibition to exhibit anywhere within the town, he shall have full power to refuse to issue such permit. 
(b)  This section shall also apply to any parade or other advertisement that uses the town's streets. 
(c)  The treasurer shall not issue a license until the permit required by this section is secured from the town manager. 
(Code 1982, § 11-19) 
Sec. 86-264. - Violations of article. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to operate a business, profession, trade, occupation or calling within the town without first having obtained a license and before displaying such license as required by sections 86-251 and 86-252. Such violations shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who shall willfully fail or refuse to file a business license tax return as required by section 86-252 shall be guilty of a violation of law. Upon conviction for such failure, the person shall be punished for a class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is $1,000.00 or less and for a class 1 misdemeanor if the amount of the tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is more than $1,000.00. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to make a false statement with intent to defraud in any application, return or affidavit required by this article. In addition to the penalty provided for in section 86-257, such violation shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of the tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is $1,000.00 or less, or a class 1 misdemeanor if the amount of the tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is more than $1,000.00. 
(d)  Any person holding a license under this article to operate any business shall forfeit such license immediately upon conviction by any court of competent jurisdiction in the commonwealth of a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-248, relating to an imitation controlled substance or Code of Virginia, § 18.2-246.3, relating to money laundering. 
(Code 1982, § 11-20) 
Secs. 86-265-86-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL LICENSE TAX SCHEDULE 

Sec. 86-281. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  The license tax for persons manufacturing, bottling, selling or dispensing beverages of more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight shall be as follows: 
(1)  For each distiller's license, $1,000.00; provided, however, that no license shall be required where there is manufactured not more than 5,000 gallons of alcohol or spirits, either or both, during the license year. 
(2)  For each winery license, $1,000.00. 
(3)  For each brewery license, $1,000.00. 
(4)  For each bottler's license, $500.00. 
(5)  For each wholesale beer license, $50.00. 
(6)  For each wholesale wine distributor's license, $50.00. 
(7)  For each retail on-premises wine and beer license, $25.00. 
(8)  For each retail off-premises wine and beer license, $25.00. 
(9)  For each banquet license, $5.00. 
(b)  The license tax for persons manufacturing, bottling, selling or dispensing any beverage containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and not more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight, shall be as follows: 
(1)  For each manufacturer's license, $150.00. 
(2)  For each bottler's license, $100.00. 
(3)  For each wholesaler's license, $100.00. Every distributing house used in whole or in part by any person for distributing beverages among his retail stores must secure, in addition to the license provided for in this subsection, a wholesale merchant's license as provided for in section 86-289. 
(4)  For each retailer's license, $10.00. 
(c)  For each person holding mixed beverages restaurant and caterer's licenses, the tax shall be: 
(1)  Two hundred dollars per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for 50 to 100 persons; 
(2)  Three hundred dollars per annum, for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 100, but not more than 150 persons; 
(3)  Five hundred dollars per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 150 persons; 
(4)  Five hundred dollars per annum for each caterer; 
(5)  Mixed beverages special events licenses, $10.00 for each day of each event; and 
(6)  A private, nonprofit club operating a restaurant located on the premises of such club, $350.00 per annum. 
(d)  The terms used in this section shall have the same meanings set forth in Code of Virginia, § 4.1-100, unless a different meaning is clearly intended. 
(e)  All persons licensed under any provision of this section shall comply in every respect with all applicable provisions of Code of Virginia, title 4.1, and no license shall be issued by the town treasurer under the provision of this section, unless the applicant therefor presents to the treasurer the proper state license, as required by the provisions of Code of Virginia, title 4.1. 
(f)  If any person holds a town license under this section without, at the same time, holding the proper state license provided for in Code of Virginia, title 4.1, such town license shall, during the period such person does not hold the proper state license, confer upon such person no rights, powers or privileges under the provisions of this article. 
(g)  Any license tax imposed by this section shall be in addition to other license taxes and beverages mentioned in this section shall be considered goods, wares and merchandise for the purpose of such other license taxes. 
(h)  The license taxes required by this section shall not be prorated. No license issued under the provisions of this section shall be transferable from one person to another, but may be amended to show a change in the place of business. 
(i)  Any police officer shall, at all times during business hours, be allowed free access to every place where beverages are manufactured, bottled, distilled, brewed, stored, distributed, offered for sale or sold pursuant to a license under this section, for the purpose of examining and inspecting such premises. 
(Code 1982, § 11-32) 
State Law reference- Authority for above taxes, Code of Virginia, §§ 4.1-205, 4.1-233. 
Sec. 86-282. - Carnivals, circuses, animal shows, theatrical performances or other such amusements. 
(a)  On every carnival or similar organization there shall be a license tax of $500.00 for each day that an exhibition is given within the town. As used in this section, the word "carnival" is meant to include any lawful business, performance or amusement to be given in a tent, building, structure or enclosed grounds occupied by such carnival, without any exceptions. 
(b)  On any dog, pony, minstrel, trained animal or wild west, circus, menagerie or like show, there shall be a license tax as follows for every day or part of a day: On such shows requiring transportation by one to ten cars, $25.00; 11 to 20 cars, $50.00; 21 to 30 cars, $100.00; 31 to 40 cars, $150.00; 41 to 60 cars, $200.00; 61 to 70 cars, $225.00; and over 70 cars, $250.00. For each side show, there shall be a license tax of $3.00 per day. As used in this section, the word "cars" includes all cars of every description (passenger, baggage, animal, dining or freight) used in the transportation of such shows and includes motor vehicles used for such purposes, whether used in conjunction with railroad cars or not. 
(c)  On every sleight-of-hand performance, wire or rope dancing or like public exhibition, there shall be a license tax of $25.00 per day. 
(d)  Any performance, exhibition, circus, carnival, minstrel, menagerie, show or like undertaking that uses the town's streets for parades or other advertisements, even if exhibiting outside of but within one mile of the town, shall pay the appropriate license tax, as if the performance, exhibition, circus, carnival, minstrel, menagerie or show were exhibited within the town. If a street parade is advertised in connection with such performance, exhibition, circus, carnival, minstrel, menagerie, show or like undertaking and is not given, the same license tax shall be paid as if such street parade were actually given. 
(Code 1982, § 11-38) 
Sec. 86-283. - Coin machine operators and vending machines. 
(a)  Any person renting, leasing or otherwise furnishing or providing three to nine coin-in-slot machines shall obtain a coin machine operator's license for $190.00; for ten or more machines, such license will be $200.00, plus a gross receipts tax on receipts actually received by the operator from coin machines operated within the town. However, this section shall not be applicable to operators of weighing machines, automatic baggage, parcel checking machines or receptacles, nor to operators of vending machines which are so constructed as to do nothing but vend goods, wares and merchandise, or postage stamps or provide service only, nor to operators of viewing machines or photomat machines, or machines affording rides to children or for the delivery of newspapers. 
(b)  Vendors dispensing merchandise through vending machines shall obtain a retail merchant's license based on gross receipts received. 
(Code 1982, § 11-40) 
State Law reference- Amusement machines, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3720; license exemptions for coin machine operators, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3721. 
Sec. 86-284. - Distributing houses. 
    On every distributing house or place in town, other than the house or place of manufacture, operated by any person engaged in the business of a merchant for the purpose of distributing goods, wares and merchandise among his retail stores, a separate license shall be required and the goods, wares and merchandise distributed through such distributing house or place shall be regarded as purchases for the purpose of measuring the license tax. The tax shall be the same as the license tax imposed by section 86-259(11) on wholesalers. 
(Code 1982, § 11-42) 
Sec. 86-285. - Exhibition halls. 
    On every room or suite of rooms kept or rented for public exhibitions there shall be a license tax as provided in section 86-259(5). 
(Code 1982, § 11-43) 
Sec. 86-286. - Gasoline, fuel oil, kerosene and other burning fluids dealers. 
(a)  Every person who shall sell or solicit for the sale or receive or take orders for the sale and delivery of gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil or other burning fluids within the town shall pay a license tax of $0.20 per $100.00 of gross receipts in excess of $12,000.00 per year. 
(b)  This section applies to any merchant who keeps and maintains a regular place of business in the town for the purpose of sale, storage and delivery of gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil or other burning fluids, consisting of tanks and other necessary equipment for the storage, sale and delivery of gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil or other burning fluids. 
(Code 1982, § 11-47) 
Sec. 86-287. - Itinerant vendors generally; tax rate. 
(a)  Itinerant vendor defined. An itinerant vendor means any person who engages in, does, or transacts any temporary or transient business in the town, and who for the purpose of carrying on such business occupies any location for a period of less than one year. 
(b)  License display. A license certificate must be prominently displayed by an itinerant vendor. 
(c)  Tax rates enumerated. License tax rates shall be as follows: 
(1)  Itinerant vendors of family supplies, meals, or merchandise of a perishable nature or which are used for heating purposes (i.e. meals from food trucks/carts/temporary food establishments, produce, fruits, meats, seafood, perishable food, ice cream, sandwiches, beverages, vegetables, flowers, plants, ice, wood, coal, etc.): $50.00 per year. 
(2)  Itinerant vendors of general merchandise (not household supplies of a perishable nature, or supplies used for heating purposes as previously described): $500.00 per year or fraction thereof. 
(3)  In no event shall the tax rates specified in subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section exceed cumulatively $50.00 or $500.00 per year, respectively. 
(4)  Prior to the issuance of any business license to an itinerant merchant of family supplies, meals, or merchandise of a perishable nature, the applicant shall provide proof of any required permit or license from the health department. 
(d)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Any person licensed to operate in the Vinton Farmer's Market shall be exempt from the provisions of this section; provided, however, that any activities outside the Vinton Farmer's Market within the town shall be subject to licensure under the provisions of this section or other sections of this article. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to persons who sell or offer for sale, in person or by their employees, ice, wood, charcoal, or family supplies of a perishable nature grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale. Anyone exempt under this section must provide proof of such exemption. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to any person who holds not more than two garage or yard sales within any 12-month period, provided that such sale is held on residential property and only household or personal goods owned by the seller or his immediate family are being offered for sale. 
(Code 1982, § 11-48; Ord. No. 975, 7-5-2016 ) 
Sec. 86-288. - Peddlers generally; tax rate. 
(a)  Peddler defined. A peddler is any person who shall carry from place to place any goods, wares or merchandise and offer to sell or barter the same in the town. 
(b)  Exemptions; license display. This section shall not apply to a peddler at wholesale or those who sell or offer for sale in person, or by their employees, ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature or farm products grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale. This section shall not apply to those who sell to dealers or retailers only, a licensed wholesale dealer who sells and, at the time of such sale, delivers merchandise to retail merchants, a distributor or vendor of motor fuels and petroleum products, a farmer or farmers' cooperative association, and a manufacturer who is subject to state tax on intangible personal property who peddles at wholesale only the goods, wares or merchandise manufactured by him at a plant, whose intangible personal property is taxed by the commonwealth. License certificates must be prominently displayed by peddlers. 
(c)  Tax rates enumerated. License tax rates shall be as follows: 
(1)  Peddlers of general merchandise and goods not specifically exempted: $250.00 per month or fraction thereof, per person or vehicle. 
(2)  Peddlers who purchase for resale family supplies of a perishable nature or which are used for heating purposes (produce, fruits, seafood, perishable food, ice cream, meat, sandwiches, beverages, vegetables, flowers, plants, ice, wood, coal, etc.): $50.00 per month or fraction thereof, per person or vehicle. 
(3)  In no event shall the tax rate specified in subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section exceed cumulative, $500.00 per year. 
(d)  Direct sales exempted; exception. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no license tax shall be imposed on a direct seller, unless the total sales of such seller exceeds $4,000.00, per year. The rate of tax on a direct seller who resides in the town and whose total sales exceed $4,000.00, per year, shall be $0.20 per $100.00 of retail sales. 
(e)  Direct seller defined. A direct seller means any person who: 
(1)  Engages in the trade or business of soliciting the sale of consumer products primarily in private residences and maintains no public location for the conduct of such business; 
(2)  Receives remuneration for such activities, with substantially all of such remuneration being directly related to sales or other sales oriented services, rather than the number of hours worked; and 
(3)  Performs such activities pursuant to a written contract between such person and the person for whom the activities are performed and such contract provides that such person will not be treated as an employee with respect to such activities for federal tax purposes. 
(Code 1982, § 11-52) 
State Law reference- Town license tax for peddlers, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717 et seq. 
Sec. 86-289. - Restaurants. 
    Any person who shall cook, prepare or otherwise furnish, for compensation, food or refreshments of any kind, for casual visitors at his house or place of business, for consumption therein, and who does not furnish lodging, and who is not the keeper of a hotel or lodginghouse, shall be classified as a retail merchant for license tax purposes and shall be licensed as such. 
(Code 1982, § 11-59) 
Sec. 86-290. - Telephone companies. 
    On every person engaged in the business of transmitting telephone messages between points within the town and between the town and other points within the state, there shall be a license tax of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts accruing from sales to the ultimate consumer in the town. This section shall not be construed to impose a license tax on the business of transmitting telephone or telegraph messages for the United States government. Charges for long distance telephone calls are not included in gross receipts for purposes of license taxation. 
(Code 1982, § 11-62) 
State Law reference- Authority for above tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731. 
Sec. 86-291. - Water, gas and electric companies. 
    On every person selling water, gas or electricity for light, heat or power in the town, there shall be a license tax equal to one-half of one percent of the gross receipts accruing from sales to the ultimate consumer in the town; provided, however, that there shall be deducted any sums paid by such person to the town as a merchant's license tax. 
(Code 1982, § 11-65) 
State Law reference- Authority for above tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731. 
Secs. 86-292-86-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 851, adopted May 15, 2007, amended the Code by repealing former div. 3, §§ 86-311-86-327, in its entirety. Former div. 3 pertained to vehicle licenses, and derived from the Code of 1982, §§ 11-94-11-109; Ord. No. 649, adopted June 4, 1996; Ord. No. 654, adopted August 20, 1996; Ord. No. 747, adopted June 5, 2001; Ord. No. 758, adopted February 19, 2002; Ord. No. 765, adopted June 4, 2002; Ord. No. 788, adopted July 15, 2003. 

Secs. 86-311-86-327. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3.1. - VEHICLE LICENSE FEES[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of town to impose license tax or fee on vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752. 

Sec. 86-328. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, trailer and semitrailer normally garaged, stored, or parked or acquiring a situs within the town and capable of being operated on the streets, highways, roads, or other traveled ways in the town shall be licensed in accord with the provisions of this article and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any such vehicle on the streets, highways, roads or other traveled ways in the town, unless such vehicle is so licensed for the current year. If it cannot be determined where any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is normally garaged, stored or parked, or if the owner is a student attending an institution of higher education, the situs shall be the domicile of its owner. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers owned by the commonwealth, by any political subdivision of the commonwealth or by the United States government, or to vehicles used exclusively for agricultural or horticultural purposes or vehicles held for sale by any manufacturer or dealer. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a license for any vehicle exempt from same under any provision of the laws of the commonwealth. 
(Ord. No. 851, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 86-329. - License year. 
    The license year under this article shall commence on June 1 and expire on May 31 of each year and each license issued upon the payment of the license fee prescribed by this article shall expire at the end of the license year in which such license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 851, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 86-330. - Levy and amount of fee; special provisions for antique vehicles; exceptions. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual license fee on every motor vehicle, trailer and semitrailer required to be licensed under this article. The annual license fee imposed by this section shall be in addition to any other county license tax or fees, including personal property tax. 
(b)  On every motor vehicle, trailer and semitrailer not taxed under other subsections of this section, there shall be a fee of $20.00 per annum, except that the fee tax on motorcycles shall be $15.00 per annum, the fee on vehicles with a gross weight in pounds of 4,001 or more, shall be $25.00. 
(c)  The owner of an "antique motor vehicle," as defined and licensed in title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, may be recognized upon filing an application for same with the treasurer and payment of a $5.00 fee and the payment of the appropriate personal property taxes. This application shall remain valid so long as the vehicle is titled to the applicant. 
(d)  The following owners of motor vehicles are hereby exempt from the annual license fee: An honorably-discharged prisoner of war, any person awarded the Medal of Honor, and any disabled veteran. 
These exemptions shall be limited to any one passenger vehicle, pickup or panel truck owned by an eligible person. The commissioner of the revenue shall determine eligibility based upon the criteria utilized by the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles of the commonwealth for the issuance of special license plates. The treasurer is hereby authorized to recognize owners eligible under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 851, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 86-331. - Application for license and payment of fee. 
    Application for a license required by this article shall be made at the office of the treasurer on forms supplied by the treasurer. At the time of such application, the license fee prescribed by this article shall be paid. A license fee of $1.00 shall be paid for a license for a vehicle which replaces a vehicle currently licensed in the town which has been sold or disposed of within 60 days of the application for such new license upon the presentation of adequate written proof of sale or disposal of the currently licensed vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 851, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 86-332. - Payment of vehicle personal property taxes prerequisite to licensing. 
    No motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer taxable under the provisions of this article shall be licensed, unless the applicant for such license produces satisfactory evidence that all personal property taxes upon the vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to be licensed have been paid and satisfactory evidence that any delinquent motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer personal property taxes owing have been paid which have been properly assessed or are assessable against the applicant by the town. 
(Ord. No. 851, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 86-333. - Disposition of revenue derived under article. 
    The revenue derived from all license taxes and fees imposed under this article shall be applied to general town purposes. 
(Ord. No. 851, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 86-334. - Regional enforcement of motor vehicle license requirements. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted by subsection K of section 46.2-752 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, the town hereby undertakes to enforce the local motor vehicle license requirements of such section adopted by any local government within the commonwealth with which it shall enter into a compact for that purpose and to authorize such locality, or localities, to enforce in the same manner the motor vehicle license requirements of this town contained in this division of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 851, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 86-335. - Authorization of compacts with other jurisdictions. 
    The town manager is hereby authorized, after consultation with the chief of police, to enter into compacts for the regional enforcement of local motor vehicle license requirements with such local governing bodies of this commonwealth as he shall deem advisable upon such form as shall be approved by the town attorney. On an annual basis, the clerk of this board is hereby directed to provide, to the clerk of each governing body and the clerk of each court sitting in any locality with which the town has entered into a regional enforcement compact, a certified copy of those portions of this code which authorize a local vehicle license requirement. 
(Ord. No. 851, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 86-336. - Violations; penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer on any street, highway, road or other traveled way in the town unless a valid annual license fee has been paid pursuant to section 86-330 of this division or a local license decal issued by the situs jurisdiction of such vehicle is displayed thereon as required by the ordinance of such situs locality. The fact that the current license fee or tax of the situs jurisdiction has been paid on such vehicle shall not bar prosecution for a violation of this section. A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $250.00. The owner or operator of any vehicle receiving a parking ticket or uniform traffic summons as-provided may pay a fine in the amount of $25.00 in the manner provided for in sections 90-111 and 90-112 of this Code in full satisfaction of such violation. Any violation of this section may not be discharged by payment of such fine except upon presentation of satisfactory evidence that the annual license fee herein required has been paid. Any fine paid under this section shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the town, and no accounting need be made thereof to the situs jurisdiction of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 851, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 86-337. - Duties of treasurer. 
    The treasurer of the town shall carry out the responsibilities imposed upon him by section 90-111 and 90-112 for all tickets issued under section 86-336, in the same manner as for all other parking tickets. At the same time as the treasurer shall send to the owner or operator of the motor vehicle the notice required by section 90-112, he shall forward a copy of the original ticket and such notice to the treasurer, or his equivalent counterpart, of the situs jurisdiction of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 851, 5-15-2007) 
Secs. 86-338, 86-339. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TAX ON CIGARETTES 

Sec. 86-340. - Definitions. 
    Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words and phrases shall, for purposes of this article, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
    Cigarette means any roll of any size or shape for smoking, whether filtered or unfiltered, with or without a mouthpiece, made wholly or partly of cut, shredded or crimped tobacco or other plant or substitute for tobacco, whether the same if flavored, adulterated or mixed with another ingredient, if the wrapper or cover is made of any material other than leaf tobacco or homogenized leaf tobacco, regardless of whether the roll is labeled or sold as a cigarette or by any other name. 
    Dealer means every manufacturer, manufacturer's representative, selfwholesaler, wholesaler, public warehouser or other person who supplies a seller within the town with cigarettes. 
    Director means the treasurer/director of finance for the Town of Vinton, or his or her designee. 
    Package means any container, regardless of the material used in its construction in which separate cigarettes are placed without such cigarettes being placed into any container within the package. Packages are those containers of cigarettes from which individual cigarettes are ordinarily taken when they are consumed by their ultimate user. 
    Person means any individual, firm, unincorporated association, company, corporation, L.L.C., joint stock company, group, agency, syndicate, trust or trustee, receiver, fiduciary, partnership and conservator. The word "person" as applied to a partnership, unincorporated association or other joint venture means the partners or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation shall include all the officers and directors thereof. 
    Sale means every act or transaction, regardless of the method or means employed, including the use of vending machines and other mechanical devices, whereby title to any cigarettes shall be transferred from the seller to any other person within the corporate limits of the town. 
    Seller means every person who transfers title to any cigarettes, or in whose place of business title to any cigarettes is transferred, within the corporate limits of the town, for any purpose other than resale. 
    Stamp means a small gummed piece of paper or decalcomania to be sold by the town treasurer / director of finance and to be affixed, manually or by machine, to every package of cigarettes sold at retail in the town, under the authorization of the treasurer/director of finance. It shall also denote any insignia or symbol printed by a meter machine upon any such package under the authorization of the treasurer/director of finance. 
    Town means the Town of Vinton, Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 883, 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 86-341. - Levied; amount; tax additional to other taxes. 
    In addition to all other taxes of every kind now or hereafter imposed by law, there is hereby levied and imposed by the town an excise tax on the sale of cigarettes equivalent to $0.25 on each package containing 25 or fewer cigarettes. The tax shall be paid by the seller, if not previously paid, and collected in the manner and at the time provided for in this article, provided that the tax payable for each package of cigarettes sold within the town shall be paid but once. The tax hereby levied shall not apply to free distribution of sample cigarettes in packages containing five or fewer cigarettes. 
(Ord. No. 883, 5-19-2009; Ord. No. 938, 6-4-2013; Ord. No. 948, 3-18-2014 ) 
Sec. 86-342. - Methods of payment. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall be evidenced by the use of a stamp, purchased from the director and affixed by the dealer or seller to every package of cigarettes to be sold within the town. The tax shall be paid at the time the stamps are purchased from the director. Every dealer and every seller shall have the right to buy such stamps from the director and to affix the same to packages of cigarettes as provided in this article. 
(b)  The director is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe the method to be employed and the conditions to be observed in the use of meter machines for printing upon packages of cigarettes insignia to represent the payment of the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 883, 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 86-343. - Preparation and sale of stamps generally; discounts. 
    For the purpose of making stamps available for use, the director shall sell stamps of such denomination and in such quantities as may be necessary for the payment of the taxes imposed by this article. In the sale of such stamps, the director shall allow a discount of five percent of the denominational or face value of the stamps to cover the costs incurred in affixing the stamps to packages of cigarettes. 
(Ord. No. 883, 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 86-344. - Duties of dealers and sellers. 
(a)  Every dealer in cigarettes is hereby required and it shall be his duty to purchase such stamps at the office of the director as shall be necessary to pay the tax levied and imposed by this article, and to affix or cause to be affixed, a stamp or stamps of the prescribed monetary value to each package of cigarettes prior to delivering or furnishing such cigarettes to any seller. 
(b)  Every seller is hereby required to examine each package of cigarettes, prior to exposing the same for sale, for the purpose of ascertaining whether such package has the proper stamps affixed thereto or imprinted thereon as required by this article. If upon such examination unstamped or improperly stamped packages of cigarettes are discovered, the seller shall either: 
(1)  Purchase and affix to such packages of cigarettes the proper stamps covering the tax imposed by this article; or, 
(2)  Immediately notify the dealer who provided the cigarettes, and upon such notification such dealer shall forthwith either affix to the unstamped or improperly stamped packages the proper amount of stamps, or shall replace such packages with others to which stamps have been properly fixed thereon. 
(c)  In the event any seller elects to purchase and affix stamps before offering cigarettes for sale, the dealer delivering and furnishing such cigarettes shall not be required to purchase and affix stamps to such cigarettes so sold or furnished; provided, that any such dealer shall, on the day following the day of such delivery, file with the director a copy of the delivery memorandum showing the name and address of such seller and the quantity and type of cigarettes so delivered and furnished. 
(Ord. No. 883, 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 86-345. - Monthly reports and recordkeeping. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each dealer to report monthly to the director separately the following information: 
(1)  The quantity of stamped cigarettes sold or delivered during the period requested by the director to: 
a.  Each dealer; 
b.  Each seller; and 
c.  Each separate person or place of business within the town. 
(2)  The quantity of stamps on hand, both affixed and unaffixed on the first day of the period of request and the quantity of stamps or stamped cigarettes received during the period; and 
(3)  Such further information as the director may require for the proper administration and enforcement of this article for the determination of the exact number of cigarettes in the possession of each dealer or user. 
(b)  Upon request by the director, any seller shall provide the director, in writing, with the name and address of the dealer who provides the seller with cigarettes. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every dealer and seller in the town to maintain and keep, for a period of two years, complete records of the number of packages of cigarettes delivered or sold by such dealer or seller and to make all such records available for examination by the director, upon demand, at any and all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 883, 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 86-346. - Assessment of unpaid taxes. 
(a)  When, upon examination and audit of any invoices, records, books, canceled checks or other memoranda touching on the purchase, sale, receipt, storage or possession of tobacco products taxed herein, any dealer or other person liable for the tax is unable to furnish evidence to the director of sufficient tax payments and stamp purchases to cover cigarettes which were sold, used, stored, received, purchased or possessed by him, the prima facie presumption shall arise that such cigarettes were received, sold, used, stored, purchased or possessed by him without the proper tax having been paid. The director shall, from the results of such examination and audit based upon such direct or indirect information available, assess the tax due and unpaid. 
(b)  The dealer or other person liable for the tax shall be notified by certified mail or hand delivery of such deficiency and such tax, penalty and interest assessed shall be due and payable within ten days after notice of such deficiency has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 883, 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 86-347. - Display of stamps; seizure. 
(a)  Stamps shall be placed upon each package of cigarettes in such manner as to be readily visible to the purchaser, and shall be affixed to each package of cigarettes in such a manner that their removal will require continued application of water or steam. 
(b)  Any seller found to possess, prior to being offered for sale, more than 60 packages of cigarettes without the tax paid stamp affixed who is not in the process of affixing such stamps thereto, shall be presumed to be in possession of untaxed cigarettes in violation of this article. If such person has received the cigarettes within the preceding 48 hours, and has not offered them for sale, such presumption shall not apply. 
(c)  Any vending machine located within the town containing cigarettes upon which the stamp has not been affixed or containing cigarettes placed so as to not allow visual inspection of the stamp through the viewing area as provided for by the vending machine manufacturer shall be presumed to contain untaxed cigarettes in violation of this article. If a vending machine does not allow for visual inspection of the stamp, the director is hereby authorized to direct the owner to open the machine in order to determine whether the cigarettes contained therein are stamped. 
(d)  Any cigarettes, coin-operated vending machines, counterfeit stamps, or other property found in violation of this article shall be declared contraband goods and may be seized by the director. In addition to any tax due, the dealer or other person liable for the tax possessing such untaxed cigarettes shall be subject to civil and criminal penalties herein provided. 
(e)  In lieu of seizure, the director may seal such vending machines to prevent continued illegal sale or removal of such cigarettes. The removal of such seal from a vending machine by any unauthorized person shall be a violation of this article. Nothing in this article shall prevent the seizure of any vending machine at any time after it is sealed. 
(f)  All cigarette vending machines shall be plainly marked with the name, address and telephone number of the owner of said machine. 
(g)  Any seized and confiscated cigarettes, vending machines or other property used in the furtherance of any illegal evasion of the tax may be disposed of by sale or other method deemed appropriate by the director 30 days after notice to the person from whom the items were seized, and any other known holder of a property interest in the property. The notice shall state that the owner or holder of a property interest may challenge the proposed sale and forfeiture by written appeal to the Vinton Town Manager at least five days prior to the date of the proposed sale. The appellant shall have the right to personally appear before the town manager, or his or her designee, and to present any relevant evidence or witnesses, to question any witness for the town, and to assert any available affirmative defense. The town manager shall render a written decision on the appeal within ten working days. If a timely appeal is filed, no sale and forfeiture shall occur unless and until the town manager renders a decision rejecting the appeal. 
(h)  No credit from any sale of cigarettes, vending machines or other property seized shall be allowed toward any tax, penalties or interest assessed. 
(Ord. No. 883, 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 86-348. - Refund for unused or damaged stamps. 
(a)  Should any person, after acquiring from the director any stamps provided for in this article, cease to be engaged in a business necessitating the use of the stamps, or should the stamps be damaged to the extent that they are unusable, such person shall be entitled to a refund of the denominational or face amount of any such stamps, less any discount, upon presenting the stamps to the director and furnishing the director with an affidavit showing, to his satisfaction, that the stamps were acquired by such person but not used, and the reason for requesting the refund. 
(b)  Any and all refunds for unused or damaged stamps provided for under this section may be made on vouchers approved by the director. Such refunds shall be charged against the sums collected for the sale of said stamps. Payment to the person requesting the refund shall be made within 30 days of the request. 
(Ord. No. 883, 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 86-349. - Rules and regulations. 
    The director is hereby authorized and empowered to jointly prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the methods and means of cancellation of the stamps provided for in this article and to any and all other matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. The director is further authorized and empowered to examine the books, records, invoices, papers and any and all cigarettes in and upon any premises where the same are placed, stored, sold, offered for sale, or displayed for sale by a seller. The director is authorized to delegate any of the powers and duties set out in this article to one or more designees, except as may be prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 883, 5-19-2009; Ord. No. 938, 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 86-350. - Violations of article generally. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor. Conviction and punishment for such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment of any tax, interest or penalty imposed by this article. 
(b)  Any person who fails to pay any cigarette tax at the time it is due shall pay a late payment penalty in the amount of ten percent of the unpaid tax per month. 
(c)  Any person who fails to pay any cigarette tax at the time it is due shall pay interest on the tax found to be overdue and unpaid at the rate of three-quarters of one percent per month. 
(d)  In addition, any person who shall perform any fraudulent act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this article shall be required to pay a penalty in the amount of 50 percent of any tax found to be overdue and unpaid. 
(e)  Each day's violation of, or noncompliance with, any of the provisions of this article shall be and constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 883, 5-19-2009) 
Sec. 86-351. - Violations of article prohibited; acts enumerated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person: 
(1)  To perform any act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this article or of any part thereof, or for any dealer or seller, with intent to violate any provision of this article, to fail or refuse to perform any of the duties imposed upon him under the provisions of this article, or to fail or refuse to obey any lawful order which the director may issue under this article. 
(2)  To falsely or fraudulently make, forge, alter or counterfeit any stamp, invoice or reports, to procure or cause to be made, forged, altered or counterfeited any such stamp, or knowingly and willfully to alter, publish, pass or tender as true any false, altered, forged or counterfeited stamp or stamps. 
(3)  To sell any cigarettes upon which the tax imposed by this article has not been paid and upon which evidence of payment thereof is not shown on each package of cigarettes. 
(4)  To reuse or refill with cigarettes any package from which the cigarettes have been removed, for which the tax has been paid. 
(5)  To remove from any package any stamp with intent to use or cause the same to be used after the same have already been used, or to buy, sell or offer for sale or give away any used, removed, altered or restored stamps, to any person, or to reuse any stamp which has theretofore been used for evidence of the payment of any tax prescribed [by] this article, or, except as to the director, to sell or offer to sell any stamp provided for herein. 
(6)  To possess, store, use, authorize or approve the possession, storage or use for sale or resale of any cigarettes in quantities of more than 60 packages upon which the stamp has not been affixed; or 
(7)  To transport, authorize or approve the transportation of any cigarettes, in quantities of more than 60 packages into or within the town upon which the stamp has not been affixed, if they are: 
a.  Not accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating the true name and address of the consignor or seller and the consignee or purchaser and the brands and quantity of cigarettes transported; 
b.  Accompanied by a bill of lading or other document which is false or fraudulent in whole or part; or 
c.  Accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating: 
1.  A consignee or purchaser in another state or the District of Columbia who is not authorized by the law of such other jurisdiction to receive or possess such cigarettes on which the taxes imposed by such other jurisdiction have not been paid, unless the tax of the state or district of destination has been paid and the said cigarettes bear the tax stamps of that state or district; or 
2.  A consignee or purchaser in the Commonwealth of Virginia but outside the town who does not possess a Virginia Sales and Use Tax Certificate, a Virginia Retail Tobacco License and, where applicable, both a business license and a retail tobacco license issued by the local jurisdiction of destination. 
(Ord. No. 883, 5-19-2009) 
Chapter 90 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Courts, ch. 22; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; vehicles for hire, ch. 98; visibility at intersections, app. B, § 5-11. 
State Law reference- Local regulation of traffic, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2028; identification of disabled parking spaces by abovegrade signage, Code of Virginia, § 36-99.11; motor vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 et seq.; local vehicle license, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752 et seq.; abandoned vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200 et seq.; removal of vehicles involved in accidents, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1212; removal or immobilization of motor vehicles against which there are outstanding parking violations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1216; parking regulations in cities, towns and certain counties, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220; general powers of local governments as to motor vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Compliance with chapter; general penalty for violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto. Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter or any such rule or regulation shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
(Code 1982, § 22-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, applicable to violations of state traffic laws or local ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113; town prohibited from imposing penalty for traffic violation which is greater than penalty imposed by state for similar offense, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300. 
Sec. 90-2. - Adoption of state law. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of Code of Virginia, § 42.2-1313, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the state contained in Code of Virginia, title 46.2 on the date of the adoption of this Code, and any and all changes to such title adopted by the general assembly of the state, and for any and all changes to Code of Virginia, title 46.2, adopted by the general assembly of the state to be effective on July 1, 2007, except those provisions and requirements which, by their very nature, can have no application to or within the town, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made applicable within the town. This adoption of state law shall be retroactively and prospectively effective for said year by adoption of this article by the town council. References to "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways and other public ways within the town. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length in this section, and it shall be unlawful for any person within the town to violate, or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with, any provision of Code of Virginia, title 46.2, which is adopted by this section; provided, however, that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Code of Virginia, title 46.2. 
(b)  All definitions of words and phrases contained in the state law hereby adopted shall apply to such words and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless clearly indicated to the contrary 
(c)  The town hereby incorporates by reference the provisions of the Code of Virginia, title 46.2, as amended, for any and all changes to said title 46.2 adopted by the General Assembly of Virginia to be effective on July 1, 2009; and this adoption of state law shall be retroactively and prospectively effective for said year by adoption of this section by the town council. 
(Code 1982, § 22-7; Ord. No. 652, § 1, 7-2-1996; Ord. No. 675, § 1, 7-1-1997; Ord. No. 710, §§ 1, 2, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 728, § 1, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 750, § 1, 6-19-2001; Ord. No. 768, § 1, 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 787, § 1, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 802, § 1, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 821, § 1, 7-5-2005; Ord. No. 839, § 1, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 853, § 1, 7-3-2007; Ord. No. 873, § 1, 7-15-2008; Ord. No. 889, § 1, 7-7-2009) 
Sec. 90-3. - General authority of town manager with respect to traffic. 
(a)  The town manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the council, shall have power and is hereby authorized to regulate the operation of vehicles within the corporate limits of the town by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating U-turns, turning at intersections, hazardous intersections, school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones, traffic control signals exhibiting colored lights or the words "go," "caution" or "stop" and other signs or markers indicating the place and the manner of operating vehicles in the town. 
(b)  The town manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed by the council, is empowered and authorized to mark off traffic lanes on streets and parts of streets indicating and directing the flow of traffic. 
(c)  The town manager shall have power and is hereby authorized to secure all necessary signs, signals or markers to be erected or placed on any street or part of a street in accord with this section or any other section of this Code. 
(d)  The existence of signs, signals or markers authorized by this section or any other section of this chapter at any place within the corporate limits of the town shall be prima facie evidence that such signs, signals or markers were erected or placed by and at the direction of the town manager in accordance with the provisions of this section or other applicable sections of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 22-8) 
Sec. 90-4. - Defacing, damaging or removing traffic signs. 
    No person shall deface, obscure, injure, knock down or remove any sign legally posted as provided in this chapter. A violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 22-6) 
Sec. 90-5. - Control of pedestrian traffic. 
(a)  The town manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the council, shall have power and is hereby authorized to regulate the movement of pedestrians upon the streets and sidewalks of the town by the erection or placing of proper signs, signals or markers indicating the flow of pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  All pedestrians shall obey the directions of signs, signals or markers erected pursuant to this section and shall obey the orders of police officers engaged in directing travel and traffic on the streets of the town. A violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $200.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1982, § 22-9) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-935. 
Sec. 90-6. - Direction of traffic by officers of fire department. 
    Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire or hazardous situation, may direct or assist in directing traffic there, or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1982, § 22-10) 
Sec. 90-7. - Stop and yield intersections. 
(a)  The town manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the council, may designate intersections at which vehicles shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way and may secure all necessary signs, signals or markers to be erected or placed on or at any such intersection, so that an ordinarily observant person, who may be affected by such regulation, may be aware of such regulation. The existence of such signs, signals or markers at any place within the corporate limits of the town shall be prima facie evidence that such signs, signals or markers were erected or placed by and at the direction of the town manager in accordance with the provision of this section. 
(b)  The duty of drivers approaching signs, signals or markers erected pursuant to this section shall be as prescribed by the state law adopted by section 90-2. 
(Code 1982, § 22-12) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301; duty of driver approaching stop or yield sign, § 46.2-821. 
Sec. 90-8. - Use of tire chains or snow tires during hazardous weather. 
    Whenever snow, sleet, hail or freezing rain has caused slippery or hazardous conditions on any of the public streets within the town, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to obstruct or impede other vehicular traffic on any such street or road by reason of failure to have the driving wheels of the vehicle operated by him equipped with tire chains or snow tires. 
(Code 1982, § 22-13) 
Sec. 90-9. - Disposition of juvenile and domestic relations cases; driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs; adoption of state laws. 
    The town hereby incorporates by reference the provisions of title 16.1, article 9, (§ 16.1-278 et seq.) of chapter 11, and title 18.2, article 2 (§ 18.2-266 et seq.) of chapter 7, of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, for any and all changes to said sections 16.1-278 et seq. and 18.2-266 et seq. adopted by the General Assembly of Virginia to be effective on July 1, 2009, and this adoption of state law shall be retroactively and prospectively effective for said year by adoption of this article by the town council. 
(Code 1982, § 22-14; Ord. No. 652, § 2, 7-2-1996; Ord. No. 675, § 2, 7-1-1997; Ord. No. 710, § 3, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 728, § 2, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 750, § 2, 6-19-2002; Ord. No. 768, § 2, 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 787, § 2, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 802, § 2, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 821, § 2, 7-5-2005; Ord. No. 839, § 1, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 853, § 1, 7-3-2007; Ord. No. 873, § 2, 7-15-2008; Ord. No. 889, § 2, 7-7-2009) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313. 
Sec. 90-10. - Opening door of vehicle so as to obstruct traffic. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to open the door of any motor vehicle parked in any street in the town in such a manner as to obstruct traffic or to interfere with the lawful use of any other vehicle. 
(Code 1982, § 22-15) 
Sec. 90-11. - Reimbursement of expenses incurred in responding to DUI incident. 
(a)  If a person is convicted of a violation of section 90-9 of this Code, or of Code of Virginia § 18.2-51.4 or 18.2-266, all of which relate to driving while intoxicated, and the person's operation of a motor vehicle while intoxicated is the proximate cause of an accident or incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response by the town, such person shall be liable to the town in a separate civil action for the expenses actually incurred in providing the emergency response; provided, that the amount of liability shall not exceed $1,000.00 for any one accident or incident. 
(b)  As used in this section, "appropriate emergency response" includes, but is not limited to, the provision of law-enforcement, fire-fighting, rescue and emergency medical services. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not preempt or limit any remedy available to the town to recover the reasonable expenses of an emergency response to an accident or incident not involving the impaired operation of a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 738, 1-16-2001) 
Secs. 90-12-90-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRUCK TRAFFIC LANES 

Sec. 90-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Trucks means motorized vehicles with a gross weight exceeding 6,000 pounds, used for transportation of freight. This definition shall not include any emergency vehicle, truck used for street maintenance, public utility truck or school bus. 
(Code 1982, § 22-42) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-72. - Placement of signs and markings. 
    The town manager shall designate truck traffic lanes established by the town council by the placement of appropriate signs and roadway markings. 
(Code 1982, § 22-39) 
Sec. 90-73. - Truck traffic lanes designated. 
    The following streets or portions of streets are hereby designated truck traffic lanes: 
(1)  East-west routes. 
a.  From the western town limits at the City of Roanoke boundary along Gus W. Nicks Boulevard (also being Washington Avenue by its present designation, in part) east to Virginia State Route 24, along the same to the eastern town limits at the County of Roanoke boundary; 
b.  From the western town limits at the City of Roanoke boundary along Walnut Avenue in an easterly direction to the north-south truck traffic lane at Second Street in the town (more particularly described below); and 
c.  From the western town limits at the City of Roanoke boundary along Virginia Avenue in an easterly direction to Hardy Road, and along Hardy Road in an easterly direction to the eastern town limits at the County of Roanoke boundary. 
(2)  North-south routes. 
a.  From the intersection of the east-west truck traffic lane at Walnut Avenue and Third Street in the town, along Third Street in a southerly direction to its terminus within the town; 
b.  From the intersection of Walnut Avenue and Second Street in the town, along Second Street in a southerly direction to the intersection of the east-west truck traffic lane at Virginia Avenue; and 
c.  From the intersection of the east-west truck traffic lane at Virginia Avenue and the so-called Virginia State Route 24 bypass in the town, along such Route 24 in a northerly direction to its intersection with the east-west truck traffic lane at the present Washington Avenue (being a continuation of Gus W. Nicks Boulevard). 
(Code 1982, § 22-39.1) 
Sec. 90-74. - Lane designations apply in both directions. 
    All directions described above in section 90-73 shall apply likewise in the opposite direction. 
(Code 1982, § 22-40) 
Sec. 90-75. - Travel outside of designated lanes. 
    When signs and markings are in place giving notice of the existence of any truck traffic lane established by this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a truck, as defined in section 90-71, along any portion of the street other than that so designated. 
(Code 1982, § 22-41) 
Sec. 90-76. - Use of streets not designated as truck traffic lanes. 
(a)  Prohibited. Trucks are restricted to the truck traffic lanes. Use of other streets within the town is prohibited. 
(b)  When authorized. Trucks delivering or picking up freight at any business or home within the town limits may use any other street within the town, provided that ingress and egress from and to such destination shall be effected by travelling such truck traffic lanes to the fullest extent possible, and by returning to such truck traffic lanes by the most direct route feasible at the point nearest to the subject place of business or residence. 
(Code 1982, §§ 22-43, 22-44) 
Sec. 90-77. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    A violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00, paid to the town treasurer, and the costs of which shall be assessed and disposed of according to law. 
(Code 1982, § 22-45) 
Secs. 90-78-90-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts, app. B, § 5-24; off-street parking requirements, app. B, art. V, div. 6. 
State Law reference- Authority for local parking regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 

Sec. 90-101. - Authority of town manager relative to parking. 
(a)  The town manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the council, shall have power and is hereby authorized to regulate the parking of vehicles within the corporate limits of the town by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating prohibited or limited parking; angle parking; the parking of buses, trucks and other vehicles of various weights; loading and unloading zones; and other signs or markers indicating the place and the manner of parking vehicles in the town. 
(b)  The town manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the council, shall have power and is hereby authorized to designate bus stops and to erect signs prohibiting the parking of vehicles other than buses at such stops. 
(c)  No person shall park a vehicle in violation of the directions contained on any sign or marker erected or placed in accord with this section. 
(d)  The town manager is hereby authorized to determine the time limits for parking on the streets within the corporate limits of the town including, but not limited to, parking meter limits, limitations provided by posted signs and limitations during peak travel times. 
(e)  Persons parking motor vehicles in violation of limitations specified on posted parking signs shall be deemed to be in violation thereof for each separate one-hour period or more cited on each parking citation, and each such citation shall be deemed a separate offense subject to penalties provided in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 22-26) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Sec. 90-102. - Parking near fire hydrants. 
(a)  Where fire hydrants are located at or close to the curbline or edge of the road and face on the public street, a public parking lot or a private road open to the public, the parking of any motor vehicle within 15 feet of such hydrant is prohibited. 
(b)  A special curb marking designating areas established pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be required and shall be yellow. 
(Code 1982, § 22-27) 
State Law reference- Parking near fire hydrant, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1239. 
Sec. 90-103. - Parking in fire lanes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in a fire lane designated and marked in accord with the provisions of section 38-5. 
(Code 1982, § 22-28) 
Sec. 90-104. - Enforcement of sections 90-102 and 90-103. 
(a)  In addition to town police and other law enforcement officers, the fire marshal is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of sections 90-102 and 90-103. 
(b)  In addition to any penalty provided for a violation of section 90-102 or 90-103, any motor vehicle parked in violation of either such section may be moved to a garage or parking lot for storage, at the expense of the owner of the vehicle. 
(Code 1982, § 22-29) 
Sec. 90-105. - Parking on wrong side of street. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on the wrong or opposite side of the street so as to be facing oncoming traffic. 
(Code 1982, § 22-29.1) 
Sec. 90-106. - Parking for more than four days. 
    No person shall park or stand any vehicle on any street or within any municipal parking lot for a period of more than four consecutive days. 
(Code 1982, § 22-30) 
Sec. 90-107. - Parking so as to block driveway of business, filling station, church or personal residence. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle so as to block any driveway of any business establishment, filling station, church or personal residence. In addition to the penalties applied by this article, any motor vehicle parked in violation of this section may be moved to a garage or parking lot for storage, at the expense of the owner of the vehicle. Furthermore, the fire marshal is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 22-32) 
Sec. 90-108. - Parking vehicle without valid license plates. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand any vehicle on any street within the town, unless valid license plates are displayed on such vehicle. 
(Code 1982, § 22-33) 
Sec. 90-108.1. - Parking vehicle without valid local license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand any vehicle on any street within the town unless a valid annual license fee has been paid pursuant to section 86-330, division 3.1, article VIII, of chapter 86 of this Code or a local license decal issued by the situs jurisdiction of such vehicle is displayed thereon as required by the ordinance of such situs locality participating in the Roanoke Valley Regional Compact for the enforcement of vehicle decals. This section shall not apply to vehicles garaged, stored or parked within a jurisdiction not participating in the Roanoke Valley Regional Compact. 
(Ord. No. 711, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 851, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 90-108.2. - Parking vehicle without valid state inspection sticker. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand any vehicle on any street within the town unless there is displayed on such vehicle a valid state inspection sticker. 
(Ord. No. 743, 4-3-2001) 
Sec. 90-109. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
    No lights need be displayed upon any vehicle when parked in the town in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1982, § 22-34) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1037. 
Sec. 90-110. - Parking citations generally. 
    Any law enforcement officer or other officer charged with enforcing this article or other parking regulations of the town shall attach, in plain view, to any vehicle parked in violation of this article or any other parking regulation, a citation notifying the owner or operator that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this article or other parking regulation and instructing such owner or operator when and where to report with reference to the violation. 
(Code 1982, § 22-35) 
Sec. 90-111. - Penalty for parking violations; certification of contest of parking citation; late payment penalty. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by such fine provided by resolution of town council for the provision violated, as the same may be amended from time to time, provided that a copy of the most current version of such resolution shall be on file in the office of the town treasurer during regular office hours for public inspection. Any violation for which a fine is not specified by such resolution, shall be punishable by a fine of $10.00. 
(b)  All uncontested parking citations paid under this section shall be accounted for by the town treasurer. The contest, by any person, of a parking citation shall be certified in writing, upon an appropriate form, to the general district court by the town treasurer. 
(c)  Any person receiving three or more parking citations issued in a consecutive seven-day period shall be punished by a fine of $100.00 for such third offense and any subsequent offense within a consecutive seven-day period. 
(d)  Any person who fails to pay an uncontested parking citation within 72 hours of its issuance shall also pay a $10.00 late payment penalty in addition to the fine imposed. 
(e)  In addition to any penalty provided for a violation of section 90-101, 90-105, 90-106, 90-107, 90-108, 90-108.1, or 90-108.2, any motor vehicle parked in violation of any such section may be moved to a garage or parking lot for storage, at the expense of the owner of the vehicle in accordance with Code of Va., § 46.2-1213. 
(Code 1982, § 22-36; Ord. No. 743, 4-3-01; Ord. No. 812, 3-15-2005) 
State Law reference- Requirement for subsection (b), Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1225(1), (2). 
Sec. 90-112. - Procedure for delinquent parking citations. 
(a)  The town treasurer shall cause a complaint or summons to be issued for delinquent parking citations. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), before any summons shall issue for the prosecution of a violation of this Code or other ordinance or regulation of the town regulating parking, the violator shall have been first notified, at his last known address or at the address shown for such violator on the records of the state division of motor vehicles, that he may pay the fine provided by law for such violation, within five days of receipt of such notice, and the officer issuing such summons shall be notified that the violator has failed to pay such fine within such time. The notice to the violator, required by the provisions of this section, shall be contained in an envelope bearing the words "LAW ENFORCEMENT NOTICE" stamped or printed on the face thereof in all capital letters, bold face type, no smaller than the print type size used for the primary address on the envelope. 
(c)  Every action to collect unpaid parking citation penalties imposed for violation of an ordinance regulating parking under this article shall be commenced within three years of the date upon which such penalty became delinquent. 
(d)  The town may remove or immobilize motor vehicles against which there are outstanding parking violations as follows: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle parked on the public highways or public grounds against which there are three or more unpaid or otherwise unsettled parking violations may be removed to a place within the town or in an adjacent locality designated by the chief of police for the temporary storage of the vehicle, or, in the alternative, such vehicle may be immobilized in a manner which will prevent its removal or operation except by authorized law enforcement personnel. Any such removal or immobilization as authorized by this section shall only be conducted by or under the direction of a police officer. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the police officer removing or immobilizing any motor vehicle or under whose direction such vehicle is removed or immobilized, to inform as soon as practicable the owner of the removed or immobilized vehicle of the nature and circumstances of the prior unsettled parking violation notices for which the vehicle was removed or immobilized. In any case in which a vehicle is immobilized pursuant to this section, a notice warning that the vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle might damage it shall be placed on the vehicle in a conspicuous manner. 
(3)  The owner of any immobilized vehicle, or other person acting on his behalf, shall be allowed at least 24 hours from the time of immobilization to repossess or secure the release of such vehicle. Failure to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle within that time period may result in the removal of the vehicle to an authorized storage area for safekeeping under the direction of a police officer. 
(4)  The owner of the removed or immobilized motor vehicle, or other person acting on his behalf, shall be permitted to repossess or to secure the release of the vehicle by payment of all outstanding parking violation notice for which the vehicle was removed or immobilized and by payment of all costs incidental to the immobilization, removal and storage and the efforts to locate the owner of the vehicle. In the event the owner shall fail or refuse to pay such fines and costs within 15 days of the date of notice, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or should the identify or whereabouts of the owner be unknown and unascertainable, the motor vehicle may be sold in accordance with the procedures set forth in Code of Va., § 46.2-1213. 
(Code 1982, § 22-37; Ord. No. 810, 3-1-2005) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-941, 46.2-1225. 
Sec. 90-113. - Reserved parking for handicapped; criteria for establishment; marking and designation; parking policy; presumption; violation and penalties. 
(a)  The town shall designate handicapped parking spaces on public streets, commercial and industrial areas as follows: 
(1)  Handicapped parking spaces shall be established for the purpose of providing an accessible, more convenient means of parking for disabled citizens. 
(2)  Marking and approved signs to designate such spaces shall be provided by the owner or agents of the property involved, under guidelines established by the town and pursuant to the requirements of Code of Virginia, § 36-99.11. 
(3)  Except as provided in this section, the following policy shall apply where handicapped parking is located: 
a.  Where specified handicapped parking spaces are located on a public parking lot or on a public street, parking in such spaces shall be prohibited. 
b.  A special marking designating the handicapped parking spaces shall be mandatory and shall follow the requirements of Code of Virginia, § 36-99.11. 
c.  No person in a private or commercial vehicle shall park in those designated spaces. 
(4)  The following policy shall apply where handicapped parking is established: 
a.  Handicapped parking spaces shall be designated where it is desirable that the areas be kept clear for accessible entrance and exit to stores, offices, buildings and any other facilities used by the town. 
b.  Signs, as required, shall conform with the requirements of Code of Virginia, § 36-99.11 and shall provide a sufficient, legible area to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle not displaying a license plate, placard or special parking permit issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-731, 46.2-739 or 46.2-1241, in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities on public property or in privately owned parking areas. Parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk shall be identified in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 36-99.11. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person without a disability that limits or impairs his ability to walk, to park a vehicle with a license plate, placard or special parking permit issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-731, 46.2-739 or 46.2-1241, in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk, except when transporting such a disabled person in the vehicle. Parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk shall be identified in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 36-99.11. 
(d)  Any law enforcement officer observing a motor vehicle parked in violation of this section may issue a summons for such offense without the necessity of a warrant being obtained by the owner of a private parking area. 
(e)  In any prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of this section, together with proof that the defendant was at the time the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-600 et seq., shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who committed the violation. 
(f)  The penalty for any violation of this section shall be considered a class 4 misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00, and not more than $500.00, for each offense. In addition thereto, any motor vehicle parked in violation of this section may be moved to a garage or parking lot for storage, at the expense of the owner of the motor vehicle. Any law enforcement officer charged with enforcing this section shall attach, in plain view to any vehicle parked in violation of this section, a ticket notifying the owner or operator that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this section instructing such owner or operator when and where to report with reference to the violation. 
(Code 1982, § 22-38; Ord. No. 656, § 22-38, 11-5-1996; Ord. No. 734, 10-3-2000) 
Sec. 90-114. - Keeping inoperable vehicles on certain property; removal of such vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, except within a fully enclosed building or structure or otherwise shielded or screened from view, on any property zoned for residential or commercial or agricultural purposes any motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer, as such are defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, which is inoperable. The town in addition may, by ordinance, limit the number of inoperable motor vehicles which any person may keep outside of a fully enclosed building or structure, but which are shielded or screened from view by covers. As used in this section, the term "inoperable motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle which is not in operating condition; or which for a period of 60 days or longer has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine, or other essential parts required for the operation of the vehicle or on which there are displayed neither valid license plates, nor a valid inspection decal, nor a valid town decal. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business, which on June 26, 1970, is regularly engaged in business as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. 
(b)  The owners of property zoned for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes shall, within ten days after written notice received from the town manager or chief of police, remove therefrom any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer located thereon contrary to this section. 
(c)  Whenever the owner of the premises fails to remove a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer pursuant to notice given pursuant to this section, the town may, through its own agents or employees, remove such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, and the town may dispose of the same, after giving additional notice to the owner. 
(d)  The cost of any removal and disposal by the town under this section shall be chargeable to the owner of the vehicle or the premises and may be collected by the town as taxes of the town are collected. Such cost shall constitute a lien against the property from which the vehicle was removed, and the lien shall continue until actual payment of such cost shall have been made to the town. 
(e)  In addition to any other penalty imposed, the town may seek an injunction to enjoin the continuing violation of any provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 12-49; Ord. No. 745, 5-1-2001; Ord. No. 794, 12-2-2003) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-904. 
Sec. 90-115. - Vehicle, recreational vehicle, and trailer parking. 
(a)  No person who owns or has possession or control of a vehicle, including, but not limited to, a recreational vehicle (as defined in appendix B, article X, of the Vinton Zoning Ordinance), watercraft (as defined in appendix B, article X, of the Vinton Zoning Ordinance), personal utility trailer (as defined in appendix B, article X, of the Vinton Zoning Ordinance), and recreational equipment trailer (as defined in appendix B, article X, of the Vinton Zoning Ordinance) shall park or leave the vehicle standing on a public street, right-of-way, alley (developed or undeveloped) or any public parking facility within residential districts for a period of 48 hours or more. 
For purposes of this section, a vehicle is considered parked or left standing if it remains in the same location or has not been moved at least one-half mile during the 48-hour period. If visible, the mileage reflected on the odometer of the vehicle shall be presumed to be an accurate indication of the distance that the vehicle has or has not been moved. Obstruction of the odometer of the vehicle will result in a presumption that the vehicle has not been moved. Absent any presumption, the totality of the circumstances, including but not limited to tire markings, vegetation and vehicle condition shall be considered in determining whether the vehicle has or has not been moved. 
(b)  A recreational vehicle, watercraft, recreational equipment trailer, or utility trailer that is parked or left on a public street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, or any public parking facility, once moved, shall not be re-parked or returned to any location within one-half mile of the location where such recreational vehicle, watercraft, recreational equipment trailer, or utility trailer was first parked sooner than 14 days following the time that the recreational vehicle, watercraft, recreational equipment trailer, or utility trailer is first moved. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to park and/or permit any other person to park a recreational vehicle, watercraft, recreational equipment trailer, or utility trailer that intrudes into the public street, right-of-way, sidewalk, or alley, or obstructs visibility from adjacent driveways or street corners. 
(d)  If a vehicle is parked or left standing on a public street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, or any public parking facility or in violation of any portion of this section, any regularly employed officer or employee of the police department of the town may issue a citation or cause the vehicle to be removed from the public street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, or public parking facility in the manner permitted by and subject to the requirements of the town and/or state code. 
(Ord. No. 864, 11-6-2007) 
Sec. 90-116. - Commercial vehicle parking. 
(a)  No person who owns or has possession or control of a truck or commercial vehicle (as defined in appendix B, article X, of the Vinton Zoning Ordinance) shall park or leave the vehicle standing on a public street, right-of-way, alley (developed or undeveloped) or any public parking facility within residential districts for more than two hours at any time, except for: 
(1)  School buses currently used by a public or private institution of learning; 
(2)  Emergency vehicles, while such vehicles are providing emergency services, or emergency vehicles which are owned by the town; 
(3)  Vehicles being loaded or unloaded; 
(4)  Vehicles, the occupants of which are actually engaged in work on the premises but not vehicles belonging to or used by the occupant of a premises; 
(5)  Vehicles being used in connection with utility or street work; and 
(b)  If a vehicle is parked or left standing on a public street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, or any public parking facility or in violation of any portion of this section, any regularly employed officer or employee of the police department of the town may issue a citation or cause the vehicle to be removed from the public street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, or public parking facility in the manner permitted by and subject to the requirements of the town and/or state code. 
(Ord. No. 864, 11-6-2007) 
Secs. 90-117-90-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 90-120. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
    "Abandoned motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer or part of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer that: 
(1)  Is inoperable and is left unattended on public property, other than an interstate highway or primary highway, for more than forty-eight hours; 
(2)  Has remained illegally on public property for more than forty-eight hours; 
(3)  Has remained for more than forty-eight hours on private property without the consent of the property's owner, regardless of whether it was brought onto the private property with the consent of the owner or person in control of the private property; or 
(4)  Is inoperable, left unattended, or both, on the shoulder of a primary highway. 
    "Inoperable abandoned motor vehicle" means an abandoned motor vehicle which is inoperable and whose fair market value is less than the cost of its restoration to an operable condition. 
(Ord. No. 774, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 90-121. - Taking abandoned vehicles into custody. 
    The town may take abandoned vehicles into custody and dispose of them in accordance with Code of Virginia § 46.2-1200 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 774, 11-5-2002) 
Chapter 94 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Water and sewer service charges, § 7.7. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; planning, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; tax on purchasers of utility service, § 86-101 et seq.; licenses, § 86-246 et seq.; telecommunication facilities, app. B, art. V, div. 9. 
State Law reference- Franchises, public utilities, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2100 et seq.; health regulations pertaining to sewage disposal, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-163 et seq.; health regulations pertaining to public water supplies, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-167 et seq.; State Water Control Law, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.2 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 94-1-94-3. - Reserved. 
Sec. 94-4. - Collection of utility fees and charges generally; when due and payable-penalty. 
    Charges and fees for water and sewer services provided by the town may be charged to and collected from individuals and entities as set forth in § 15.2-2119 of the Code of Virginia (1950) as amended from time to time. 
    Bills for water and sewer service shall be due and payable upon receipt. Bills for service not paid by the 18th of the month following the end of the period for which service is billed may be subject to a penalty of ten percent added thereto. 
(Ord. No. 926, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 94-5. - Discontinuance of service generally. 
    The finance director/treasurer may discontinue water and sewer service without notice for any of the following reasons; for repairs; for want of supply; for any fraudulent representation in relation to the consumption of water; for violation of contract or of any rules or regulations applying at the time to the customer's service; in the event the customer's service is detrimental to the service in general or his immediate locality; on account of riots, strikes, insurrections, government, state or municipal authorities or acts of God or any other cause whatsoever. The town shall not be liable for damage to any person for such discontinuance of service. 
(Ord. No. 926, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 94-6. - Discontinuance of service for delinquency in payment of utility bills; generally. 
    The finance director/treasurer is authorized to discontinue water and sewer service furnished by the town if the customer is delinquent in the payment of any account for water or sewer service due the town subject to the provisions set forth in § 15.2-2119 Code of Virginia (1950), as amended from time to time. Before water and sewer service is discontinued, the person whose account is delinquent shall be so notified. Notice of the payment date to avoid disconnection of water or sewer service shall be placed on the bill, which shall be mailed a minimum of five working days before said date. Delinquency shall mean an amount due, equal to or greater than $10.00, not paid by the 18th of the month in which the bill is due. 
(Ord. No. 926, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 94-7. - Re-establishment of utility service in another name. 
    After water or sewer service has been discontinued to either a residence or business establishment because of nonpayment of a bill, the finance director/treasurer shall not again supply water or sewer service at such location in the name of any other person if the person whose service was discontinued for nonpayment of the bill shall continue to reside or conduct business at such location, or be one of the lessees at such location and such bill remains unpaid. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town shall not deny service to a new tenant at the location unless a lien has been recorded against the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 926, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 94-8. - Complaint or failure to receive bill not ground for nonpayment. 
    Complaint against a water or sewer bill or failure to receive a bill for services shall not be taken as a proper excuse for refusal to pay such bill when due or exempt the customer from the imposition of penalties for failure to pay such bill at the proper time. 
(Ord. No. 926, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 94-9. - Deposit prerequisite to service-Required. 
    Every residential lessee or tenant applying for utility service furnished by the town or person or entity who is not a utility user at the place, and for the purpose, for which the application is being made, and of whom a written application is required, shall be required to deposit with the finance director/treasurer, or his designee, before such service is begun, and keep on deposit with the town treasurer until same is applied against a closed account or refunded, as provided in this chapter, a deposit in an amount of at least three months and no more than five months water and sewer charges in accordance with the fee and charge schedule established and approved by the town council. 
    In addition, a deposit in an amount of at least three months and no more than five months water and sewer charges in accordance with the fee and charge schedule established and approved by the town council for the type of account (i.e. residential or commercial) shall be required of any person, firm, or corporation whose utility service has been discontinued for nonpayment of its account twice in a twelve-month rolling period. 
    No deposit shall be required from a lessee or tenant to obtain water and sewer services in the name of such lessee or tenant if such lessee or tenant presents to the locality a landlord authorization letter which has attached documentation showing such lessee or tenant receives need-based local, state, or federal rental assistance, and the absence of a security deposit shall not prevent the town from exercising its lien rights pursuant to applicable provisions of the Virginia Code. 
(Ord. No. 926, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 94-10. - Same-Refund. 
    The town finance director/treasurer is authorized to pay to any depositor the amount of his deposit, in excess of the amount owed the town for utility service, if any, without interest. 
(Ord. No. 926, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 94-11. - Same-Receipts. 
    When receiving a deposit, the town finance director/treasurer shall receipt to the depositor therefor, on forms in which the depositor shall consent to the application by the town finance director/treasurer the deposit, or so much thereof as may be necessary, to the payment of any past due bill of utility service. 
(Ord. No. 926, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 94-12. - Same-Deposit and withdrawal. 
    All funds received by the finance director/treasurer as deposits for utility service shall be deposited in a non-interest bearing account at such bank as the council may direct and withdrawn as may be provided in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 926, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 94-13. - Transfer of account; deposits and balances. 
    Account balances, whether credits or debits, of any person or entity relocating from one location served by town water or sewer services to another location so served, shall be transferred from the old account to the new. Amounts due on any account of any person or entity that is terminated shall be transferred to any active account of the same person or entity 30 days after termination, if not sooner settled. Credits remaining on any terminated account shall be paid to the account owner within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 926, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 94-14. - Unpaid water and sewer fees and charges lien on property; interest; collection costs. 
    Unpaid water and sewer fees and charges, and any penalty and interest thereon, shall constitute a lien against the property, ranking on parity with liens for unpaid taxes, so long as the lien placed upon the property by the town complies with the applicable provisions of § 15.2-2119 Code of Virginia (1950), as amended from time to time. All such liens imposed shall incur interest at a rate of ten percent per annum. Reasonable attorneys' fees and other costs of collection may be recovered as provided pursuant to § 15.2-2119. 
(Ord. No. 926, 9-4-2012) 
Secs. 94-15-94-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Prevention of water pollution, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2109; water supplies and facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2143. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-21. - Permit for connections. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to tap or connect with any pipe, meter or any other part of the water pipe line or system of the town, without a permit from the town manager. 
(Code 1982, § 24-1) 
Sec. 94-22. - Fees and charges for water service. 
    This section establishes procedures for setting fees and charges for new water service or modifying an existing service within the town's utility service area. 
(1)  The following fees and charges are hereby established and defined as follows. 
a.  System development fee. A fee based on the value of the water production and distribution system's capacity and the amount of capacity needed by a customer. This fee is designed to pay for the capacity costs associated with growth and is necessary to provide safe and reliable water service to customers. This fee shall be required of all new customers requesting water service or existing customers requesting increased water service capacity. This fee shall be calculated using a recognized method to determine the value of a unit of system capacity, such as the methodology developed by the American Waterworks Association. 
b.  Service lateral connection charge. This charge shall include all labor, material, equipment, and overhead costs to provide a water service lateral connection from a water main distribution line to the customer's property boundary line. 
c.  Main line extension charge. This charge shall include all labor, material, equipment, and overhead costs to extend a water distribution main line closer to a customer's property in order to provide a service lateral connection. 
d.  Inspection charge. The cost to the town of inspecting work performed by developers or contractors prior to and including connection to the town's public water system. Separate inspection charges shall be established for individual dwelling units and for subdivisions where multiple inspections are typically required for new water distribution lines and appurtenances; and for all commercial and industrial connections. 
e.  Meter setting fee. This fee shall include all labor, material, equipment, and overhead costs to set a water meter in a meter box so a customer's water service can begin. 
f.  Contracting charge. A charge added when the town uses a contractor to perform some or all of the public service lateral and main line extension work. 
(2)  The fees and charges in paragraph (1) above shall be reviewed and established annually; and shall be presented to town council for approval. A fee and charge schedule shall then be published and used by town staff to determine applicable fees and charges. Typically, the fees and charges shall remain unchanged throughout a calendar year, so in developing fees and charges a cost escalation factor should be applied. Town council will consider adjustments during a calendar year in the event of extraordinary price increases in labor, materials, equipment, or operating and maintenance costs. Wherever the fee and charge schedule lists "additional charges" or "additional fees" or fees or charges to be determined on "a case by case basis," then the fee and/or charge shall be the costs incurred by the town, which may include, but are not limited to, labor, materials, equipment, overhead and contracting charges. 
(3)  With regard to the fees and charges set forth in paragraph (1) above: 
a.  All fees and charges shall in all cases be paid by the requestor of either new water service or increased water service capacity. 
b.  Payment shall be made in full to the town pursuant to the town's policies promulgated pursuant to subsection 94-22(11) and prior to any work being performed and, in every case, prior to issuance of a building permit. 
c.  In the case of residential service or apartment complexes, the fees and charges shall apply to each individual metered dwelling unit, and/or to each metered connection point for multiple connections. 
d.  Commercial and industrial service shall be based upon the number of metered service connections to the distribution main. 
e.  System development fees shall not be charged to those property owners that are connected to the town's water system on or before the effective date of this section. For purposes of this section, connected to the town's water system means that a water service lateral connection from a water main distribution line to the customer's property boundary line exists and has been approved by the town. A property shall be deemed connected to the town's system for purposes of this section if a property owner made a request to the town's public works department for a service connection to a property on or before October 20, 2006 and the town could not physically complete the connection on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives because of circumstances that are beyond the control and without the fault of the public works department, such as weather, site conditions and unanticipated quantity of requests received. 
f.  The system development fee is due to the town as follows: 
1.  For individual infill lots - after a legal lot of records exists and prior to the town performing any work. 
2.  For subdivisions - following approval of the site plan, which includes required information with regard to water service, and recordation of the plat. 
3.  For commercial / industrial sites - following approval of the site plan, which includes required information with regard to water service. 
(4)  Town staff shall determine whether the town or the developer/contractor actually performs the service lateral connection and main line extension work. In the case of new residential subdivisions, all work will typically be performed by the developer/contractor. In the case of commercial and industrial services, all work will typically be performed by the developer/contractor. In the case of individual residential infill units, the town will typically perform the work. 
(5)  When the town is performing work and requires the use of a private contractor to complete some portion of or all of the work, a contracting charge shall be added to the cost of the contractor's work. This charge will typically be a percentage of the contract cost or a minimum lump-sum amount, whichever is greater. A down payment can be required from the customer to protect the town's financial interest, with an administrative service charge, plus any additional costs incurred, should the customer elect to perform the work by its own means or not at all. Costs include, but are not limited to, labor, materials, equipment, overhead and contracting charges. 
(6)  When existing multiple property owners request water service, the cost of any main line extension may be shared on a pro rata basis amongst the property owners. However, each property owner shall be responsible for paying a system development fee, service lateral connection charge, inspection charge, meter setting charge, and contracting charge if applicable. Individual property owners requesting water service shall be responsible for the entire cost of main line extension necessary to provide service to their property, as well as all other applicable charges. 
(7)  The town may consider cost sharing when extending water main distribution lines, but such cost sharing shall only be considered when there is a clearly identifiable financial benefit to the town. The town may at its discretion require the prospective customer requesting cost sharing to provide a comprehensive economic analysis that unequivocally demonstrates benefit and short-term payback to the town. 
(8)  When a customer uses a private contractor to perform work on the town's public system or work on private property that will be connected to the town's public system, then that contractor shall posses a valid state contractor's license in strict accordance with all applicable laws and regulations of the commonwealth. A copy of the current license shall be furnished to the town prior to work being performed. 
(9)  Customers requesting an increase in water service capacity by replacing an existing meter with a larger size meter will be credited for existing service in the amount of the system development fee for that existing meter size. An increased wastewater system development fee will also be charged in association with an increase in water service capacity. Additional charges may apply for tap and service lateral work, if required. If there is a decrease in service capacity and/or a decrease in the number of service connections, no credit will be granted; however, in most cases no system development fee will be charged. 
(10)  If a customer pays the town for fees and charges, and then requests return of amounts paid, the town shall assess an administrative service charge; plus any additional costs incurred by the town. Costs include, but are not limited to, labor, materials, equipment, overhead and contracting charges. 
(11)  The town manager shall be authorized to promulgate procedures, policies, rules, and regulations with respect to administering fees and charges; except that establishing and setting fees and charges shall be the responsibility of town council. Such policies, rules and regulations shall be intended to facilitate the orderly daily business conduct of the utility enterprise fund; and shall be enforceable as if fully set forth herein. Included within the above shall be requirements for advance notification to the town when a customer requests water service. 
(Code 1982, § 24-2; Ord. No. 670, § 24-2, 6-17-1997; Ord. No. 843, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 94-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 770, adopted August 20, 2002, amended the Code by repealing former § 94-23 in its entirety. Former § 94-23 pertained to a deposit required of applicant for service; and derived from the Code of 1982, § 24-3. 
Sec. 94-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 876, adopted January 6, 2009, deleted § 94-24, which pertained to service applicant to pay turn on fee and derived from Code 1982; and Ord. No. 770, adopted August 20, 2002. 
Sec. 94-25. - Unauthorized use of or tampering with or damaging public pipes, spigots or hydrants. 
(a)  No person, without a permit therefor from the town manager, shall use, tamper with, damage or destroy any public water pipe, spigot or fire hydrant, except that any legally constituted fire department or company may use such hydrants for firefighting or training purposes. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, §§ 7-6, 24-5) 
Sec. 94-26. - Tampering with or damaging waterworks property. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to tamper with, damage or destroy any hydrant, valve, main, meter or other appliance or fixture of the town's waterworks. This section shall not apply to a duly authorized employee or agent of the town in the discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1982, § 24-6) 
Sec. 94-27. - Orders to restrain use of water. 
(a)  If the town manager shall find that a condition of water shortage exists in the town he shall, by written order, direct persons using an improper amount of water to cease and desist from using such improper amount of water, within such reasonable time after the service of the order as he shall specify in the order. 
(b)  If the town manager shall find that a condition of low water pressure exists within the water system operated by the town, and if he shall further find that such low water pressure condition exists as a result of any person using an excessive amount of water, he shall, by written order, direct such person to cease and desist using such excessive amount of water or designate specific time periods within which such person can actually draw water from the town water system, within such reasonable time after the service of the order as he shall specify in the order. 
(c)  The failure to comply with an order of the town manager given pursuant to this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(d)  The town manager shall have the authority to restrain the use of water under this section at any time he deems it necessary. 
(Code 1982, § 24-7) 
Sec. 94-28. - Council not to consider claims for damages due to shutting off water. 
    No claim with reference to damage to water tanks or other appliances that might occur due to the shutting off of water will be considered by the town council. 
(Code 1982, § 24-8) 
Sec. 94-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 876, adopted January 6, 2009, deleted § 94-29, which pertained to use of Roanoke City water through Vinton facilities and derived from Code 1982. 
Secs. 94-30-94-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE CHARGES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of town to charge and collect compensation for water furnished, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2143. 

Sec. 94-46. - Water rates and charges. 
    This section establishes rates and charges for supplying water to customers. 
(a)  The following rates and charges are hereby established and defined as follows. 
(1)  Minimum charge. A fixed charge that recovers the cost of meter reading; customer billing; meter repair and replacement; and includes an allotment of water consumption. This charge is calculated by including all applicable labor, material, supplies, equipment, and overhead. This charge increases with meter size. The included allotment of water consumption is the minimum amount for which a customer is billed regardless of whether or not the water is used. 
(2)  Service charge. A fixed charge that recovers the cost of meter reading and customer billing. This charge is calculated by including all applicable labor, supplies, equipment, and overhead. This charge is the same for all customers and varies only with the number of meter readings. This charge typically applies only to those customers whose water supply is purchased from an outside source and is delivered through distribution and service lines owned by that source. 
(3)  Volumetric consumption rate. This is a charge per unit, typically 1,000 gallons, of water consumed. It is variable in that the amount the customer pays varies with the amount of water consumed by the customer. This charge applies to consumption above any allotted minimum. This charge is calculated by including all applicable labor, material, supplies, equipment, and overhead. 
(4)  Miscellaneous water service charges. These charges consist of a series of customer account related charges such as initial service application, re-check reading of meter, meter accuracy test, reconnect fee, additional overtime charge, and return check fee. 
(b)  Irrigation water meters may be installed by customers at their expense. Meter repair and replacement shall be the customers' responsibility. The town will read such meters when installed by the customer and the reading used in wastewater volume billing. 
(c)  Rates and charges shall be established for residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial customer classes. Residential class typically includes family dwelling units. Commercial class typically includes establishments such as restaurants, business offices, apartment buildings, and medical and dental offices. Institutional class typically includes schools, hospitals, medical clinics, churches, colleges, and government organizations. Industrial class typically includes establishments engaged in the business of manufacturing or processing. Rates and charges for bulk water sales shall be established for those customers who are intermittent or temporary users of the system such as developers, contractors, and for private individuals or companies who purchase water for their own use or for resale to their own customers. Miscellaneous charges shall be established for services such as initial account setup and service disconnect due to nonpayment; and other such charges needed for the normal and orderly conduct of business. 
(d)  Rates and charges for Town of Vinton and East Roanoke County customers, who are part of the integrated system established by the 1979 Memorandum of Agreement between the Town of Vinton and Roanoke County shall have the same rates and charges for all services. Customers located within the Town of Vinton/East Roanoke County utility service area who are not part of the integrated system and customers located outside the utility service area shall have rates and charges as appropriate. Also, a service charge shall be established for customers supplied with purchased water. 
(e)  The rates and charges in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) above shall be reviewed and set at least annually; and shall be presented to town council for approval. A rates and charges schedule shall then be published and used by town staff to determine customer billings. Any special rates established in lawful agreements shall be approved by town council. 
(f)  The town manager shall be authorized to promulgate procedures, policies, rules, and regulations with respect to administering rates and charges; except that establishing and setting rates and charges shall be the responsibility of town council. Such policies, rules and regulations shall be intended to facilitate the orderly daily business conduct of the utility enterprise fund; and shall be enforceable as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 866, 12-18-2007; Ord. No. 876, 1-6-2009) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 876, adopted January 6, 2009, amended § 94-46 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 94-46, pertained to water rates and fees, and derived from Code 1982; Ord. No. 672, adopted June 17, 1997; Ord. No. 784, adopted June 3, 2003; Ord. No. 816, adopted June 21, 2005; and Ord. No. 835, adopted June 20, 2006. 
Charter reference- Water service charges, § 7.7. 
Sec. 94-47-94-70. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 926, adopted Sept. 4, 2012, repealed former §§ 94-47-94-50 in their entirety which pertained to billing for water service and derived from the Code of 1982, §§ 24-22-24-25. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for sewerage generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2109; sewage disposal systems, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2122 et seq.; sewage disposal when sewers not available, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2157. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-71. - Wastewater code adopted. 
    A wastewater code is hereby adopted as the official wastewater code of the town to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. Such code may be found on file in the office of the town clerk attached to Ordinance No. 376. 
(Code 1982, § 16-1) 
Sec. 94-72. - Mandatory sewer connections generally. 
    The owner of any occupied premises abutting in any manner upon any street or alley through which runs a public sanitary sewer shall connect the premises in question with such sewer. Any such owner failing to make such connection, after thirty days' notice from the town manager, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor for each day such connection is not made; and the use of any cesspool or any unconnected water closet or privy on such premises shall be declared a nuisance. 
(Code 1982, § 16-2) 
Sec. 94-73. - Sewer connection required for vehicle washing businesses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of washing automobiles or other vehicles to permit the water and waste therefrom to flow into any of the streets of the town. Such person so engaged in business shall install on his property a drain connected with the town sewers into which all water and waste from the operation shall flow. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 16-3) 
Sec. 94-74. - Fees and charges for wastewater service. 
    This section establishes procedures for setting fees and charges for new wastewater service or modifying an existing service within the town's utility service area. 
(1)  The following fee and charges are hereby established and defined as follows. 
a.  System development fee. A fee based on the value of the wastewater collection, pumping, and treatment system's capacity and the amount of capacity needed by a customer. This fee is designed to pay for the capacity costs associated with growth and is necessary to provide safe and reliable wastewater service to customers. This fee shall be required of all new customers requesting wastewater service or existing customers requesting increased wastewater service capacity. This fee shall be calculated using a recognized method to determine the value of a unit of system capacity, such as the methodology developed by the Water Environment Federation and/or American Waterworks Association. 
b.  Service lateral connection charge. This charge shall include all labor, material, equipment, and overhead costs to provide a wastewater service lateral connection from a wastewater main collection line to the customer's property boundary line. 
c.  Main line extension charge. This charge shall include all labor, material, equipment, and overhead costs to extend a wastewater main collection line closer to a customer's property in order to provide a service lateral connection. 
d.  Inspection charge. The cost to the town of inspecting work performed by developers or contractors prior to and including connection to the town's public wastewater system. Separate inspection charges shall be established for individual dwelling units and for subdivisions where multiple inspections are typically required for new wastewater collection mains and appurtenances; and for all commercial and industrial connections. 
e.  Contracting charge. A charge added when the town uses a contractor to perform some or all of the public service lateral and main line extension work. 
(2)  The fees and charges in paragraph (1) above shall be reviewed and established annually; and shall then be presented to town council for approval. A fee and charge schedule shall then be published and used by town staff to determine applicable fee and charges. Typically, the fee and charges shall remain unchanged throughout a calendar year, so in developing charges a cost escalation factor should be applied. Town council will consider adjustments during a calendar year in the event of extraordinary price increases in labor, materials, equipment, or operating and maintenance costs. Wherever the fee and charge schedule lists "additional charges" or "additional fees" or fees or charges to be determined on "a case by case basis," then the fee and/or charge shall be the costs incurred by the town, which may include, but are not limited to, labor, materials, equipment, overhead and contracting charges. 
(3)  With regard to the fees and charges set forth in paragraph (1) above: 
a.  All fees and charges shall in all cases be paid by the requestor of either new wastewater service or increased wastewater service capacity. 
b.  Payment shall be made in full to the town pursuant to the town's policies promulgated pursuant to subsection 94-74(11) and prior to any work being performed and, in every case, prior to issuance of a building permit. 
c.  In the case of residential, commercial, and industrial service, the fees and charges shall apply to each service connection point to the wastewater collection system. 
d.  System development fees shall not be charged to those property owners that are connected to the town's wastewater system on or before the effective date of this chapter. For purposes of this section, connected to the town's wastewater system means that a wastewater service lateral connection from a wastewater main collection line to the customer's property boundary line exists and has been approved by the town. A property shall be deemed connected to the town's system for purposes of this section if a property owner made a request to the town's public works department for a service connection to a property on or before October 20, 2006 and the town could not physically complete the connection on or before the effective date of this chapter because of circumstances that are beyond the control and without the fault of the public works department, such as weather, site conditions and unanticipated quantity of requests received. 
e.  The system development fee is due to the town as follows: 
1.  For individual infill lots - after a legal lot of records exists and prior to the town performing any work. 
2.  For subdivisions - following approval of the site plan, which includes required information with regard to wastewater service, and recordation of the plat. 
3.  For commercial / industrial sites - following approval of the site plan, which includes required information with regard to wastewater service. 
(4)  Town staff shall determine whether the town or the developer/contractor actually performs service lateral connection and main line extension work. In the case of new residential subdivisions, all work will typically be performed by the developer/contractor. In the case of commercial and industrial services, all work will typically be performed by the developer/contractor. In the case of individual residential infill units, the town will typically perform the work. 
(5)  When the town is performing work and requires the use of a private contractor to complete some portion of or all of the work, a contracting charge shall be added to the cost of the contractor's work. This charge will typically be a percentage of the contract cost or a minimum lump-sum amount, whichever is greater. A down payment can be required from the customer to protect the town's financial interest, with an administrative service charge, plus any additional costs incurred, should the customer elect to perform the work by its own means or not at all. Costs include, but are not limited to, labor, materials, equipment, overhead and contracting charges. 
(6)  When existing multiple property owners request wastewater service, the cost of any collection line extension may be shared on a pro rata basis amongst the property owners. However, each property owner shall be responsible for paying a system development fee, service lateral connection charge, inspection charge, and contracting charge if applicable. Individual property owners requesting wastewater service shall be responsible for the entire cost of collection line extension necessary to provide service to their property, as well as all other applicable charges. 
(7)  The town may consider cost sharing when extending wastewater collection lines, but such cost sharing shall only be considered when there is a clearly identifiable financial benefit to the town. The town may at its discretion require the prospective customer requesting cost sharing to provide a comprehensive economic analysis that unequivocally demonstrates benefit and short-term payback to the town. 
(8)  When a customer uses a private contractor to perform work on the town's public system or work on private property that will be connected to the town's public system, then that contractor shall posses a valid state contractor's license in strict accordance with all applicable laws and regulations of the commonwealth. A copy of the current license shall be furnished to the town prior to work being performed. 
(9)  Customers requesting an increase in water or wastewater service capacity by replacing an existing service with a larger size line or larger water service line will be credited for existing service in the amount of the system development fee for that existing meter size. Additional charges may apply for tap and service lateral work, if required. If there is a decrease in service capacity and/or a decrease in the number of service connections, no credit will be granted; however, in most cases no system development fee will be charged. 
(10)  If a customer pays the town for fees and charges, and then requests return of amounts paid, the town shall assess an administrative service charge; plus any additional costs incurred by the town. Costs include, but are not limited to, labor, materials, equipment, overhead and contracting charges. 
(11)  The town manager shall be authorized to promulgate procedures, policies, rules, and regulations with respect to administering fees and charges; except that establishing and setting fees and charges shall be the responsibility of town council. Such policies, rules and regulations shall be intended to facilitate the orderly daily business conduct of the Utility Enterprise Fund; and shall be enforceable as if fully set forth herein. Included within the above shall be requirements for advance notification to the town when a customer requests wastewater service. 
(Code 1982, § 16-4; Ord. No. 648, § 16-4, 6-18-1996; Ord. No. 843, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 94-75. - Cost share with developers or subdividers for certain extensions. 
(a)  The town may share costs, as set out in this section, with subdividers or developers of real estate within the town's sewage service area, when the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The costs, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, must relate to land acquisition or design and construction costs for sewer system extensions lying outside of the property limits of the land owned and/or controlled by the subdivider or developer, but which are necessitated or required, at least in part, by the subdivision or development. 
(2)  The town shall have established a general sewer, water and drainage plan for the area within which the subdivision or development is located, or the town shall have committed itself by ordinance to the establishment of such a plan. 
(3)  The proposed extension serves improved properties lying outside of the property limits of the land owned and/or controlled by the subdivider or developer, and the proposed extension has the capacity to serve the total acreage lying within the sanitary sewer drainage basins affected. The determination of the necessary capacity within the meaning of this subsection shall be made to the town's engineer. 
(4)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, the subdivider or developer shall have acknowledged sole responsibility for all costs associated with those parts of the proposed extension which solely serve the subdivision or development, or any future expansions. 
(5)  The town has sufficient funds available to design and build the sewer. 
(b)  The subdivider or developer must apply for sewer extension and cost share approval prior to construction. The application shall include all information which the town feels is necessary to determine the approximate cost of the project and the appropriate amount which will be the responsibility of the subdivider or developer. Upon approval of the application, the town will pay the entire costs of land or right-of-way acquisition, engineering design and survey, and all costs of labor, equipment and materials necessary for construction. Construction will be under the supervision of the town, or its agents, contractors and employees. The subdivider's or developer's share of the costs shall be made as a reimbursement upon demand by the town after construction has been completed. 
(c)  The town may agree to share up to 50 percent of eligible costs of a sewer line extension. 
(d)  The town may agree to pay up to 100 percent of costs of a line, or of oversizing or realigning a line, including a line or lateral within a subdivision, if deemed in the best interest of both the area being served and the town. The original cost estimate, as provided by the subdivider's or developer's engineer, and as agreed to by the town engineer, shall be the subdivider's or developer's base cost share. 
(e)  For all subdivisions or developments which the town agrees to share costs pursuant to the section, the subdivider or developer shall be entitled to a payment of one-half for each residential sewer connection made within the subdivision. Such payment shall be made upon issuance of a building permit for each such lot; provided, however, that no payment shall be made after eight years from the date of tentative approval of the sewer extension/cost share application. In no event shall payments to a subdivider or developer under this subsection exceed his costs for design, right-of-way acquisition and installation of sewer lines within the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 648, § 16-4.1, 6-18-1996; Ord. No. 730, 6-20-2000) 
Sec. 94-76. - Obstructing sanitary sewers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for the owner or occupant of any premises, or any other person, to deposit or permit anything to remain in any toilet, bathtub, sink, pipe, lateral, connection or fixture which results in the obstruction of any sanitary sewer in the town. 
(b)  In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided in this chapter, if the town is required to remove an obstruction or blockage of a sanitary sewer, the owner or occupant of the premises on which such obstruction or blockage is found shall reimburse the town the reasonable cost of such removal or repair. 
(Code 1982, § 16-5; Ord. No. 726, 6-6-2000) 
Sec. 94-77. - Discharge of stormwater or surface water into sanitary sewer. 
(a)  No stormwater or surface water from any premises or lands in the town shall be permitted to enter into any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain, or allow to be constructed or maintained, on any premises belonging to him, any downspout, storm drain or any conductor of surface or stormwater discharging into any sanitary sewer of the town. In any case where there is in existence any downspout, drain or conductor of surface water or stormwater discharging into any sanitary sewer of the town, it shall be the duty of the owner or lessee of the property on which the same exists to sever or break the connection thereof with the sanitary sewer into which it discharges and so provide that it shall not discharge into any sanitary sewer of the town. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 16-6) 
Secs. 94-78-94-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE CHARGES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Sewer service charges, § 7.7. 

Sec. 94-91. - Wastewater rates and charges. 
    This section establishes rates and charges for collecting and treating customer wastewater. 
(a)  The following rates and charges are hereby established and defined as follows. 
(1)  Minimum charge. A fixed charge that recovers the cost of customer billing and includes an allotment of wastewater disposal. This charge is calculated by including all applicable labor, material, supplies, equipment, and overhead. This charge is the same for all customers. The included allotment of wastewater disposal is the minimum amount for which a customer is billed regardless of whether or not the wastewater is disposed. 
(2)  Volumetric consumption rate. This is a charge per unit of customer wastewater disposal. Typically a customer's estimated volume of wastewater disposal is based upon each 1,000 gallons of water consumed. It is variable in that the amount the customer pays varies with the amount of water consumed by the customer. This charge applies to wastewater disposal above any allotted minimum. This charge is calculated by including all applicable labor, material, supplies, equipment, and overhead. 
(3)  Residential unmetered service. A fixed charge that applies where no individual water meter is installed. This charge is calculated using a fair and reasonable volume of wastewater disposal, such as an average, and consideration of applicable residential wastewater rates and charges. 
(b)  The cost of installing, reading, repairing, and replacing wastewater meters is prohibitively expensive. Accordingly, customer's estimated volume of wastewater disposal is commonly based upon each 1,000 gallons of water consumed. Large industrial customers and very large commercial customers, such as commercial laundries, who experience high evaporative water loss in their manufacturing and process operations, may install wastewater volume meters at their expense. Also, at the customers' expense, periodic meter calibration is required, as well as meter repair and replacement. In these instances, the wastewater volume meter will be read by the town and customer wastewater disposal volume shall be based upon the meter reading. Customers who install water irrigation meters may be credited for wastewater disposal based upon the volume of water recorded through the irrigation meter. 
(c)  Rates and charges shall be established for residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial customer classes. Residential class typically includes family dwelling units. Commercial class typically includes establishments such as restaurants, business offices, apartment buildings, and medical and dental offices. Institutional class typically includes schools, hospitals, medical clinics, churches, colleges, and government organizations. Industrial class typically includes establishments engaged in the business of manufacturing or processing. 
(d)  Rates and charges for Town of Vinton and East Roanoke County customers, who are part of the integrated system established by the 1979 Memorandum of Agreement between the Town of Vinton and Roanoke County shall have the same rates and charges for all services. Customers located within the Town of Vinton/East Roanoke County utility service area who are not part of the integrated system and customers located outside the utility service area shall have rates and charges as appropriate. 
(e)  The rates and charges in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) above shall be reviewed and set at least annually; and shall be presented to town council for approval. A rates and charges schedule shall then be published and used by town staff to determine customer billings. Any special rates established in lawful agreements shall be approved by town council. 
(f)  The town manager shall be authorized to promulgate procedures, policies, rules, and regulations with respect to administering rates and charges; except that establishing and setting rates and charges shall be the responsibility of town council. Such policies, rules and regulations shall be intended to facilitate the orderly daily business conduct of the utility enterprise fund; and shall be enforceable as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 867, 12-18-2007; Ord. No. 876, 1-6-2009) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 876, adopted January 6, 2009, amended § 94-91 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 94-91, pertained to sewer service rates, and derived from Code 1982; Ord. No. 673, adopted June 17, 1997; Ord. No. 785, adopted June 3, 2003; Ord. No. 817, adopted June 21, 2005; Ord. No. 836, adopted June 20, 2006; and Ord. No. 844, adopted February 6, 2007. 
Charter reference- Water service charges, § 7.7. 
Secs. 94-92-94-110. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 926, adopted Sept. 4, 2012, repealed former §§ 94-92-94-94 in their entirety which pertained to sewer service billing and derived from the Code of 1982, §§ 16-22-16-24. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 94-111. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the words and phrases set out in this section shall have the following meanings: 
    Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, 33 USC §§ 1251 et seq., as amended. 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20 degrees Celsius. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal; also called House lateral and House connection . 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
    Capital costs means a sum sufficient recovered by use charges computed by using the capital recovery factor for the average life of all capital items, including capitalized O&M charges (unless collected separately) on which expenditures have been made or will have to be made for wastewater treatment facilities, processes or transmission lines. Capital costs may be adjusted from time to time to reflect cost experience. 
    Categorical standards means national categorical pretreatment standards or a pretreatment standard. 
    Class I user means any person discharging normal domestic wastewater into a sanitary sewer and any industrial user discharging group B wastewater into the sanitary sewer. 
    Class II user means any person discharging group A wastewater into a sanitary sewer. 
    COD (chemical oxygen demand) means the measure, expressed in mg/l, of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater, expressing the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
    COD (soluble) means the COD of the filtrate from wastewater that is filtered through a Gooch crucible as required by the suspended solids test in Standard Methods. 
    Control authority means the town manager or his duly authorized representative. 
    Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Control point means a manhole giving access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Discharge means any introduction of substances into the sanitary sewer. 
    Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Group A wastewater means wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which any one of the parameters below are more than the given loading: 
Parameter Average 
Monthly 
(lbs./day) Daily 
Composite 
(lbs./day) Total suspended solids (TSS) ..... 62.5  75.0 Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) ..... 62.5  75.0 Total phosphorus (TP) .....  3.75  4.5 Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) .....  4.50  5.4  
    Group B wastewater means the discharge of permitted industrial wastewater not otherwise qualifying as group A wastewater. 
    Hazardous waste means a waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of or otherwise managed; and 
(3)  Normally not be discharged into a sanitary sewer, subject to regulated disposal. 
    Incompatible waste means a waste which is not susceptible to adequate treatment by the wastewater treatment plant. 
    Industrial user means any user that discharges nondomestic pollutants into the sanitary sewer or plant, regulated by sections 307(b), (c) and (d) of the Act, or any user of publicly owned treatment works identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under divisions A, B, D, E and I, including governmental facilities that discharge wastewater to the sanitary sewer or plant. 
    Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business from the development of any natural resource; or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater or distance from normal wastewater. 
    Infiltration means water entering a sewer system including, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include and is distinguished from inflow. 
    Inflow means water discharged into a sewer system, including service connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling-water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers and combined sewers, catchbasins, stormwaters, surface runoff, street washwaters or drainage. It does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the plant, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; or 
(2)  Causes a violation of the plant's VPDES permit. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) interference means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) and 40 CFR subchapter N (parts 401-471), as amended, which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards which are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment. 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
    Normal wastewater means wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which the average concentration of total suspended solids and BOD is not more than 250 mg/l, total phosphorus is not more than 15 mg/l, total Kjeldahl nitrogen is not more than 18 mg/l and total flow is not more than 25,000 gallons per day. 
    Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the plant into water of the United States in quantities which may cause a violation of the plant's Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit. 
    Person means individual, corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership association and any other legal entity. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration expressed in grams per liter. 
    Phosphorus (total) means the sum of the various types of phosphate expressed as elemental phosphorus found in wastewater. The various forms include ortho-phosphate, condensed phosphates (pyro-, meta-, and poly-phosphates) and organically bound phosphates. The concentration of total phosphate is determined by the Standard Methods test procedure. 
    Plant means the City of Roanoke Regional Sewage Treatment Plant. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperatures, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor). 
    POTW means a publicly owned treatment works; a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature, and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
    Public sewer means a pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use subject to control by the town. 
    Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes, or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
    Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the control authority on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such use should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
    Significant noncompliance (SNC) means an industrial use is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined in this definition as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined in this definition as those in which 33 or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the control authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the control authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Classification Manual, issued by the Executive Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended. 
    Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation. 
    Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Stormwater means rainfall or any other forms of precipitation. 
    Suspended solids means solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
    To discharge includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
    Total Kjeldahl nitrogen means the combined ammonia and organic nitrogen in a given wastewater as measured by the Standard Methods test procedure. It does not include nitrite and nitrate nitrogen. 
    Trap means a device designed to skim, settle or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
    Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil. 
(2)  No acids or alkalis. 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water. 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution. 
(5)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases. 
(6)  Not more than ten mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD. 
(7)  Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as specified in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. 
    Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
    User charge means the charge made to those persons who discharge normal wastewater into the town's sewage system. This charge shall include a proportionate share of any capital improvements to the system (capital costs). 
    User surcharge means the charge made in excess of the user charge for all wastewater over and above the loading defined as normal wastewater. 
    Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activities. 
    Wastewater means a combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities include all facilities for collection, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
    Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer whose wastes are treated at the plant and is the appropriate sum of the user charge and user surcharge. 
    Wastewater treatment plant means any jointly, municipally owned facilities, devices and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
    Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1982, § 16-31; Ord. No. 751, 8-7-01) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-112. - General requirements. 
(a)  All discharges into public sewers shall conform to requirements of this division; however, the federal categorical pretreatment standards as amended, 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 401-471, or any standards imposed by the department of environmental quality, water programs or its successor in authority, as amended, are hereby incorporated by reference, where applicable, and where such standards are more stringent than those set forth in this division. 
(b)  No significant industrial user or other user as determined by the control authority shall discharge industrial wastewaters into the sanitary sewer system without an appropriate industrial waste discharge permit as provided in this division. 
(c)  Unless exception is granted by the control authority or by other provisions of this article, the public sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging wastewater, industrial waste, polluted liquids or unpolluted waters or liquids. 
(d)  Unless authorized by the department of environmental quality water programs or its successor in authority, no person shall deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (c) of this section on public or private property in or adjacent to any natural outlet, watercourse, storm sewer or other area within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(e)  The control authority shall determine prior to discharge that wastes to be discharged will receive such treatment as is required by the laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local authorities; or such discharge shall not be permitted. 
(f)  Each industrial user discharging industrial wastewaters into the sanitary sewer system shall provide protection from slug or accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. At least every two years, the control authority shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The control authority may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the control authority may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharged. 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals. 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the control authority of any accidental or slug discharge. 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the control authority for review and shall be approved by the control authority before construction of the facility. No such user who commences operation after the effective date of this section shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been so approved. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this division. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the control authority of the incident. The notification shall include location of any accidental discharge, or any discharge that may cause problems including a slug, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions. Within five days following an accidental discharge, or any discharge that may cause problems including a slug, the user shall submit to the control authority a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewer systems or treatment plant, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(g)  In the event of an emergency as determined by the control authority, the control authority shall be authorized to immediately halt any actual or threatened discharge. 
(h)  A person discharging in violation of the provisions of this division, within 30 days of the date of such discharge, shall sample, analyze and submit the data to the control authority. 
(Code 1982, § 16-32) 
Sec. 94-113. - Prohibited discharges generally. 
(a)  No person shall discharge into public sewers any waste which, by itself or by interaction with other wastes, may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities. 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals. 
(3)  Create a hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(4)  Generate heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the plant resulting in interference but, in no case, heat in such quantities that the temperature at the plant exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit) unless the control authority approves alternate temperature limits. 
(b)  Discharges into public sewers shall not contain: 
(1)  Antifreeze from vehicle servicing operations. Discharges of glycols must be approved. 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply greater than 12.0 mg/l. 
(3)  Benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene (BTEX) greater than 5.0 mg/l. 
(4)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(5)  Strong acid or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(6)  Fats, wax, grease or oils, from restaurants or other facilities as deemed necessary by the POTW, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 200 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero degrees and 65 degrees Celsius). 
(7)  Total petroleum hydrocarbons in excess of 200 mg/l. 
(8)  Obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, gases, vapors or fumes in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(9)  Waste, wastewater or any other substance having a pH lower than 5.0 or any other substance with a corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel at the wastewater facility. 
(10)  Waste, wastewater or any other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide or other taste-producing and odor-producing substances that have not been minimized. 
(11)  Antimony and beryllium greater than 1.0 mg/l. 
(12)  Hazardous waste. 
(13)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the control authority. Companies that truck or haul pollutants to the POTW are subject to inspections of their facilities including but not limited to offices, garages, and buildings used to house the trucks. 
(14)  Trucked or hauled industrial wastewater, without prior approval and not meeting all local limits, with the exception that wastewater pumped from restaurant grease traps may only be trucked or hauled and discharged only at a designated area at the wastewater treatment plant. 
(15)  Wastes pumped from oil/water separators. 
(16)  After treatment of the composite wastewater, effluent concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(c)  Prohibited toxic materials include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Herbicides. 
(2)  Fungicides. 
(3)  Pesticides. 
(Code 1982, § 16-33; Ord. No. 751, 8-7-01) 
Sec. 94-114. - Discharge of heavy metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  Discharges shall not contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l) determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods are: 
(1)  Arsenic: 0.18 mg/l. 
(2)  Barium: 5.0 mg/l. 
(3)  Boron: 1.0 mg/l. 
(4)  Cadmium: 0.03 mg/l. 
(5)  Chromium (total): 1.95 mg/l. 
(6)  Chromium VI: 0.06 mg/l. 
(7)  Copper: 0.68 mg/l. 
(8)  Cyanide: 0.06 mg/l. 
(9)  Lead: 0.3 mg/l. 
(10)  Manganese: 1.0 mg/l. 
(11)  Mercury: 0.003 mg/l. 
(12)  Nickel: 0.23 mg/l. 
(13)  Selenium: 0.02 mg/l. 
(14)  Silver: 0.54 mg/l. 
(15)  Zinc: 0.8 mg/l. 
In addition, if it is determined that any one of these parameters exceeds the state effluent requirements for the wastewater treatment plant, an adjustment in the given parameter concentration limit will be required. To accomplish this, the discharge permits for industries discharging the particular compound will be adjusted to ensure compliance. 
(c)  No other heavy metals or toxic materials shall be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the control authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Herbicides. 
(2)  Fungicides. 
(3)  Pesticides. 
(Code 1982, § 16-34; Ord. No. 751, 8-7-01) 
Sec. 94-115. - Discharge of garbage. 
(a)  No person shall discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension are prohibited. 
(b)  The control authority shall have the right to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater. 
(Code 1982, § 16-35) 
Sec. 94-116. - Discharge of stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person shall discharge into public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage. 
(2)  Other unpolluted drainage. 
(b)  The control authority shall designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged (see section 94-77). 
(Code 1982, § 16-36) 
Sec. 94-117. - Temperature of discharges. 
    No person shall discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or any which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to 104 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1982, § 16-37) 
Sec. 94-118. - Discharge of radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person shall discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the control authority. 
(b)  The control authority reserves the right to establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for the discharge of radioactive waste into public sewers. 
(Code 1982, § 16-38) 
Sec. 94-119. - Discharge of substances capable of impairing or obstructing facilities. 
(a)  No person shall discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes or facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l including, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues. 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than 500 mg/l including, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. 
(3)  Excessive discoloration including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. Color (due to dye): 750 A.D.M.I. 
Industries having wastewater of this nature shall provide pretreatment as required by the control authority. 
(c)  No person shall discharge into public sewers any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease-handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamendability of the substance to bacterial action; or 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person shall discharge incompatible waste into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters. Subsection (b)(3) of this section illustrates the types of substances intended to be regulated by this subsection. 
(e)  The control authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs. All industrial users shall notify the control authority of all discharges including slug loadings which may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
Industrial operations which on occasion release slugs of waterborne wastes into the sewers or which, on occasion, release any significant quantities of materials which adversely influence the effectiveness of treatment in the wastewater treatment plant shall notify the plant in advance of their release and shall control, at the discretion of the control authority, the rate of release of these wastes. Permission for such planned releases shall not be unreasonably withheld. Persons failing to comply with these requirements shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per incident and shall also be liable for the payment of any damages caused, either directly or indirectly, by the unapproved discharge. 
(f)  No person shall discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes. 
(2)  Cinders. 
(3)  Sand. 
(4)  Mud. 
(5)  Straw. 
(6)  Metal. 
(7)  Glass. 
(8)  Rags. 
(9)  Feathers. 
(10)  Tar. 
(11)  Plastics. 
(12)  Wood. 
(13)  Unground garbage. 
(14)  Paunch manure. 
(15)  Hair and fleshings. 
(16)  Entrails. 
(17)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(18)  Slops. 
(19)  Bulk solids. 
(20)  Wastes pumped from oil/water separators. 
(g)  No person shall discharge into the public sewers pollutants which cause interference or pass through. 
(h)  No person shall discharge into the public sewers pollutants with a high flow rate or concentration of pollutants as to interfere with the plant. 
(Code 1982, § 16-39; Ord. No. 751, 8-7-01) 
Sec. 94-120. - Right to require pretreatment and control of or to reject discharges. 
(a)  If discharges or proposed discharges into public sewers may deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters; create a hazard to life or health or create a public nuisance the control authority shall require: 
(1)  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition before discharge into the public sewers; 
(2)  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and 
(3)  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treatment the wastes in addition to capital costs. 
(b)  The control authority shall have the right to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The control authority shall reject wastes when he determines that a discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section and the discharger does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  No person shall utilize dilution as a means of treatment. 
(Code 1982, § 16-40) 
Sec. 94-121. - Design, installation and maintenance of pretreatment and control facilities. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the control authority may, at his sole discretion, require, review and approve the design and installation of equipment and processes, and require the installation of monitoring equipment for inspection and enforcement purposes. The design and installation of such equipment and processes shall conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws, including federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense. 
(Code 1982, § 16-41) 
Sec. 94-122. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts; 
(2)  Oil; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Flammable wastes; and 
(5)  Other harmful substances. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the control authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the control authority; 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(Code 1982, § 16-42) 
Sec. 94-123. - Measurement, sampling, testing and analysis; report of discharges. 
(a)  The owner of each facility discharging other than normal wastewater or discharging group A wastewater shall upon the written request of the control authority submit monthly, or at such other frequency as may be required by the control authority, to the town on forms supplied by the town a certifies statement of the quantities of its wastes discharged into the sewers and sewage works of the town or into any sewer connected therewith. Copies of pertinent water bills may be required to be submitted with the above statement. Such documents shall be filed with the town not later than the tenth day of the following month. A separate statement shall be filed for each industrial plant. The total quantities of wastes to be measured and certified by the person so discharging shall be established by the control authority and shall, as a minimum, include: 
(1)  Liquid in gallons. 
(2)  Five-day BOD in pounds. 
(3)  Suspended solids in pounds on a dry solids basis. 
(4)  Total phosphorus in pounds. 
(5)  Total Kjeldahl nitrogen in pounds. 
(6)  COD in pounds. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided, each measurement, test, sampling or analysis required to be made under this division shall be made in accordance with 40 CFR 136, as amended. 
(c)  In order to provide for accurate sampling and measurement of industrial wastes, each person discharging group A wastewater or other regulated wastewater, if deemed necessary by the control authority, shall provide and maintain on each of its industrial waste outlet sewers a large manhole or sampling chamber to be located outside or near its plant boundary line where feasible. If inside the plant fence, there shall be a gate near the sampling chamber with a key furnished to the town. There shall be ample room provided in each sampling chamber to enable convenient inspection and sampling by the town. 
(d)  Each sampling chamber shall contain a Parshall flume, accurate weir or similar device with a recording and totalizing register for measurement of the liquid quantity; or the metered water supply to the industrial plant may be used as the liquid quantity where it is substantiated that the metered water supply and waste quantities are approximately the same or where a measurable adjustment can be made in the metered supply to determine the liquid quantity. 
(e)  Composite samples shall consist of samples taken at least every hour for the time period required by the facility's permit using flow proportional or timed composite sample collection methods. Such samples shall be properly refrigerated. For oil and grease, pH, phenols, cyanide, volatile toxic organics and other appropriate pollutants, proper grab sampling shall be performed. Such sampling shall be repeated on as many days as necessary to insure representative quantities for the entire reporting period. Industrial plants with wide fluctuations in quantities of wastes shall provide an automatic sampler paced automatically by the flow-measuring device. 
(f)  Minimum requirements for representative quantities under this section shall include a reevaluation during each 12-month period. The frequency of sampling, sampling chamber, metering device, sampling methods and analyses of samples shall be subject at any time to inspection and verification by the town. Sampling and measuring facilities shall be such as to provide safe access for authorized personnel of the town for making such inspection and verification. 
(g)  Plans for sampling chambers with their locations shown on a site plan shall be submitted to the town. 
(h)  All owners of facilities governed by this section shall also comply with any applicable monitoring requirements and regulations established by the control authority which are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(i)  All owners of facilities governed by this division shall comply with the applicable requirements of 40 CFR 403.12, as amended, which is incorporated by reference in this section including, without limitation, the signatory, certification and recordkeeping requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(c), (d) and (l). All records shall be retained for a minimum of three years, and this retention period shall be extended during litigation or upon request of the control authority. 
(Code 1982, § 16-43; Ord. No. 779, 1-7-03) 
Sec. 94-124. - Discharge permits for industrial waste. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user or other user as determined by the control authority to discharge industrial waste into the public sanitary sewer system unless an appropriate industrial discharge permit has been issued by the control authority. In order to obtain an industrial discharge permit, such person shall: 
(1)  Submit a complete application at least 90 days prior to the date proposed for initial discharge on forms supplied by the control authority. The control authority will act upon the application within 60 days. 
(2)  Comply with all requirements for the discharge permit including, but not limited to, provisions for payment of charges, installation and operation of pretreatment facilities and sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength. 
(3)  Provide a sampling point subject to the provisions of this division and approval of the control authority. 
(4)  Comply with the requirements of federal categorical standards where applicable, including the development of any required compliance schedules or the applicable provisions of this division. 
(b)  An industrial user applying for a new discharge shall meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section and shall secure a permit prior to discharging any waste. 
(c)  Prior advance notification by the discharger to the control authority of any substantial change in volume or character of the discharge shall be required. Upon such notification, the control authority shall have the legal authority to deny or condition any new or increased discharge or any changes in the nature of the discharge if the discharge does not meet pretreatment standards, requirements or if the discharge would cause the plant to violate its Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit. 
(d)  A person not applying for a discharge permit within the allotted time and continuing to discharge an unpermitted discharge shall be deemed to be in violation of this division. 
(e)  A permit issued under this section shall be valid for five years from its date of issuance; after which time, the industrial user shall be required to obtain a new discharge permit. 
(f)  An industrial user governed by this section may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (g) and (h) of this section. 
(g)  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the control authority, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. An industrial user will immediately notify the POTW of any unanticipated bypass. A written report must be submitted within five days. 
(h)  Bypass is prohibited, and the control authority may take an enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless: 
(1)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage; 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; or 
(3)  The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this section. 
(i)  The control authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the control authority determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (h) of this section. 
(j)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the following requirements are met: 
(1)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the causes of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
c.  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times, or if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(2)  In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(3)  Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(4)  Industrial users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. The requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, is lost or fails. 
(k)  All owners of facilities governed by industrial wastewater permits issued pursuant to this section shall also comply with any applicable reporting requirements including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
a.  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in subsection (k)(1)b of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in subsection (k)(1)b of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
b.  Industrial users described in subsection (k)(1)a of this section shall submit the information set forth as follows: 
1.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
2.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
3.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operations carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from regulated processes. 
4.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestreams formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
5.  Measurement of pollutants. 
i.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
ii.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the control authority, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and longterm average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set forth in section 94-123(b). 
iii.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set forth in section 94-123. 
6.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
7.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
8.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 94-123(i). 
(2)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (k)(1)b.7 of this section: 
a.  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation). 
b.  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months. 
c.  The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the control authority no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule. 
d.  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the control authority. 
(3)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater onto the POTW, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the control authority a report containing the information described in subsection (k)(1)b.4-6. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the industrial user's longterm production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the industrial user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 94-123(i). 
(4)  Periodic compliance reports. 
a.  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the control authority, but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 94-123(i). The control authority may sample and analyze user discharges in lieu of requiring the industrial users to conduct sampling and analysis. 
b.  All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
c.  If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant in accordance with approved procedures more frequently than required by the control authority, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(l)  A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the control authority to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the control authority, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state or local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirement for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the control authority to ensure compliance with this division and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Code 1982, § 16-44; Ord. No. 751, 8-7-01) 
Sec. 94-125. - Waiver or modification of requirements of division. 
    The control authority shall have the right to waive or modify, on an interim basis to be noted in any permit issued under this division, the requirements of this division as they pertain to strength of contaminants. No such waiver or modification shall be granted contrary to any city, state or federal regulation; and no waiver or modification shall be granted if it would result in the town violating its discharge permit as it is now issued or as such permit may be amended. 
(Code 1982, § 16-45) 
Sec. 94-126. - Charges generally. 
    Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment in addition to capital costs. When a permit application for industrial waste is approved, the town or its authorized representative shall issue a permit stating: 
(1)  The terms of acceptance by the town; and 
(2)  The basis of payment. 
(Code 1982, § 16-46) 
Sec. 94-127. - User charges and added costs. 
(a)  If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city meets the requirements of other provisions of this division and does not cause overloading of the sewage collection, treatment or disposal facilities of the town, the control authority shall require that the discharger pay a charge to be determined from the schedule of charges which shall include capital costs. 
(b)  If a proposed discharge of waste is responsible for exceeding the existing capacity of the wastewater treatment facilities, and the wastewater treatment plant must be upgraded, expanded or enlarged in order to treat the wastewater, the control authority shall require that the discharger pay in full all added costs which shall include capital costs that the city may incur due to acceptance of the wastewater. 
(c)  The schedule of charges pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Capital costs, including debt retirement and interest on debt, of the town's cost on all capital outlays for collecting and the town's capital outlays for treating the waste, including new capital outlay and the proportionate part of the value of the existing system used in handling and treating waste. 
(2)  Operation and maintenance costs (capitalized) including, but not limited to, salaries and wages, power costs, costs of chemicals and supplies, proper allowances for maintenance, depreciation, overhead and office expense. 
(Code 1982, § 16-47) 
Sec. 94-128. - Schedule of charges. 
(a)  Persons discharging wastewater shall pay a charge to cover the capital cost and the cost of collection and treatment of all wastewater discharged: 
(1)  All class I users discharging normal wastewater or group B wastewater shall pay a user charge computed upon cost per volume of wastewater discharged. 
(2)  All class II users discharging group A wastewater shall have their user charge computed upon a cost-per-unit-volume basis for the base amount, plus the unit cost of treatment for all over the base amount for volume, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), suspended solids (SS), phosphorus (P) and total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN). In computing the contaminant loading, the parameter concentrations for normal wastewater will be considered as standard strength in determining the base amount in the effluent discharge flow. Initially, the responsibility for determining the contaminant loading for each category of establishment will be that of the control authority. However, each establishment must verify its own contaminant loading monthly by initiating a sampling and analytical program at its own expense and with the approval of the control authority. 
(b)  The unit costs to be used to compute the charge for class I and II users shall be established by the control authority. The unit costs for all users and the allowances for normal wastewater for users may be revised as necessary to correspond to current costs and experience. Revisions may be made no more often than once a year upon the approval of the control authority. The user charge for users shall be computed as follows: 
Class I users: 
C u = V u V d 
Class II users: 
C;sub§\sub; = V u V d + V;sub§\sub; V c + B;sub§\sub; B c + 
S;sub§\sub; S c + P;sub§\sub; P c + N;sub§\sub; N c 
    And: 
C u = Charge for class I users. C;sub§\sub; = Charge for class II users. V u = Unit cost of treatment chargeable to normal wastewater ($/1,000 gallons). V d = Volume of wastewater from normal wastewater (1,000 gallons). V;sub§\sub; = Volume of class II wastewater (1,000 gallons) in excess of class I wastewater. V c = Cost of treating 1,000 gallons of class II wastewater ($/1,000 gallons). B;sub§\sub; = Class II wastewater BOD contribution in excess of Class I wastewater limit (lbs.). B c = Cost of treating class II BOD contribution ($/lb.). S;sub§\sub; = Class II wastewater SS contribution in excess of class I wastewater limit (lbs.). S c = Cost of treating class II SS contribution ($/lb.). P;sub§\sub; = Class II wastewater phosphorus contribution in excess of class I wastewater limit (lbs.). P c = Cost of treating class II phosphorus contribution ($/lb.). N;sub§\sub; = Class II wastewater unoxidized nitrogen contribution in excess of class I wastewater limit (lbs.). N c = Cost of treating class II phosphorus contribution ($/lb.).  
(Code 1982, § 16-48) 
Sec. 94-129. - Adjustment of charges. 
(a)  The town may adjust charges at least annually to reflect changes in the characteristics of wastewater based on the results of sampling and testing. 
(b)  The town shall review at least annually the basis for determining charges and shall adjust the unit treatment cost in the formula to reflect increases or decreases in wastewater treatment costs based on the previous year's experience. 
(Code 1982, § 16-49) 
Sec. 94-130. - Billing and payment of charges. 
(a)  The town may bill the discharger by the month or by the quarter and shall show waste charges as a separate item on the regular bill for water and sewer charges. The discharger shall pay in accordance with practices existing for the payment of sewer charges. 
(b)  In addition to sanctions provided for by this division, the town is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the town for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Code 1982, § 16-50) 
Sec. 94-131. - Right of entry to enforce division. 
(a)  The control authority and other duly authorized employees of the town, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be authorized to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this division for sampling purposes, inspect monitoring equipment and to inspect and copy all documents relevant to the enforcement of this division including, without limitation, monitoring reports. 
(b)  Appropriate information submitted to the control authority pursuant to this division, excluding any information utilized in determining effluent limits, may be claimed as confidential by the submitter at the time of submission by stamping the words "confidential business information" on each page containing such information. If a claim is asserted, the information shall be treated in accordance with applicable law. 
(Code 1982, § 16-51) 
Sec. 94-132. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The town reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system and revoke any discharge permit issued under this division when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released into the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the town's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the town as normal domestic treatment; 
(3)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the control authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers; or 
(4)  The permittee has engaged in fraudulent reporting to the control authority or failed to report adequately as required changes in discharge. 
(b)  If service is disconnected pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the town shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his wastes. 
(Code 1982, § 16-52) 
Sec. 94-133. - Notice of violations. 
    The control authority shall serve persons discharging in violation of this division with written notice stating the nature of the violation and requiring immediate satisfactory compliance. The control authority shall have the authority to publish annually in the Roanoke Times & World-News newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the Roanoke area a list of persons which were not in compliance with the terms of this division at least once during the 12 previous months. 
(Code 1982, § 16-53) 
Sec. 94-134. - Penalty for violations of division. 
(a)  A person who violates the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500.00 per violation, per day, and confinement in jail for not more than 12 months, either or both. In the event of a violation, the control authority shall also have the right to terminate the sewer and water connection. 
(b)  Alternatively or in addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) of this section, the town may provide that administrative civil fines be assessed against any person who violates the provisions of this division or any orders, rules, regulations, or permits issued hereunder or pursuant to Roanoke City's Enforcement Response Plan. Such administrative civil fines may be in an amount up to $2,500.00 per violation per day, the amount to be set by the town manager. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. The enforcement of such administrative civil fines may be had through the courts of the Commonwealth in addition to any other legal means available to the town. In addition to the administrative civil fines provided for herein, the town may also recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees, expert witness fees and other expenses of litigation by an appropriate suit at law against any such person found to have violated the provisions of this division or any orders, rules, regulations, or permits issued hereunder or pursuant to Roanoke City's Enforcement Response Plan. 
(c)  Alternatively or in addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) and/or (b) of this section, the town is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under the authority of state statutes or other ordinances of the town against a person conducting a prohibited discharge or violating a pretreatment standard or requirement including, without limitation, injunctive relief. 
(d)  Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document files required to be maintained pursuant to this division, or wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. 
(e)  The control authority shall be authorized to implement such other program and enforcement mechanisms as are consistent with regulatory guidelines and are deemed appropriate. 
(Code 1982, § 16-54; Ord. No. 714, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 94-135. - Payment of costs for work required by prohibited deposits. 
    In any case where a sewer main or pipe connection is stopped or choked by any materials or rubbish being deposited therein contrary to the provisions of this division, by any tenant or property owner upon due ascertainment by the town manager, he shall cause the main or pipe connection to be opened, cleaned or repaired, and shall cause the cost for doing such work to be collected from the property owner. The payment of such cost shall not relieve any person from prosecution for a violation of this division. 
(Code 1982, § 16-55) 
Sec. 94-136. - Public access to data. 
    Effluent data compiled as part of the control authority's pretreatment program shall be available to the public. 
(Code 1982, § 16-56) 
Secs. 94-137-94-139. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS FOR PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 94-140. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide a procedure for citizens of the town to obtain public works or public infrastructure improvements in order to satisfy their need for public services. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 94-141. - Town may impose taxes or assessments. 
    The town may impose taxes or assessments upon the abutting property owner or abutting property owners for making, improving, replacing or enlarging the walkways upon then existing streets, for improving and paving then existing alleys, and for either the construction or the use of sanitary or storm water sewers including retaining walls, curbs and gutters; however, such taxes or assessments shall not be in excess of the peculiar benefits resulting from the improvements to such abutting owner or owners, and no assessment for retaining walls shall be imposed upon any property owner who does not agree to such assessment. 
    In addition to the foregoing, the town may impose taxes or assessments upon abutting property owners for the construction, replacement or enlargement of sidewalks, waterlines, sanitary sewers or storm water sewers; for the installation of street lights; for the construction or installation of canopies or other weather protective devices; for the installation of lighting in connection with the foregoing; and for permanent amenities, including, but not limited to, benches or waste receptacles, provided that such taxes or assessments shall not be in excess of the peculiar benefits resulting from the improvements to such abutting property owners. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 94-142. - Assessments for streets. 
    Certain streets may be accepted by the town if the town agrees to contribute from town revenues or the special assessment of landowners on the street in question one-half of the cost to bring the streets up to the necessary minimum standards for acceptance. 
    No such special assessment shall be made unless the town receives a petition or written declarations from the owners of at least 75 percent of the platted parcels of land abutting upon such street agreeing to such assessment. 
    This assessment shall be subject to the limitations and restrictions contained in Code of Virginia § 33.1-72.1, as amended, in particular, the basis of such special assessments and the restrictions upon speculative interest by developers. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 94-143. - How imposed. 
    Such improvements may be ordered by the town council upon the adoption of an appropriate ordinance, and the cost thereof apportioned pursuant to an agreement between the town and the abutting property owners. 
    If all of the abutting property owners agree to share in the equitable distribution of the costs of such improvements, then as authorized by an appropriate ordinance the town may enter into an agreement to administer the improvements project in accordance with town standards and regulations. In administering such a project the town may identify the costs of the improvements and assess or apportion these costs among the abutting property owners. 
    At the town's option the abutting property owners shall deposit with the town the estimated amount of the costs of such improvements upon the execution of an agreement, or they shall reimburse the town for the costs of such improvements. The reimbursement of these costs shall be accomplished upon such terms and conditions and at a rate of interest to be determined by ordinance. A lien shall be recorded securing the reimbursement of these costs. If the proposed improvements are for a utility project, then the reimbursement of these costs and interest may be accomplished through the regular utility billing procedures, and revenue collected would be deposited in the utility enterprise fund. 
    In the absence of such an agreement, improvements, the cost of which is to be defrayed in whole or in part by such local tax assessment, may be ordered on a petition from not less than 75 percent of the landowners to be affected thereby, or by a vote of two-thirds of all of the members elected to the town council. But notice shall first be given as hereinafter provided to the abutting landowners, notifying them when and where they may appear before the town council to be heard in favor of or against such improvements. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 94-144. - Adoption of ordinance. 
    A special assessment ordinance may be adopted either upon an agreement among all of the abutting property owners, upon a petition of 75 percent of the affected abutting property owners, or upon an affirmative vote of two-thirds of all of the members elected to the town council. 
    A local public works improvements project may be deemed necessary to address a situation concerning the public health, safety or welfare. 
    Council action should alleviate a threat or danger to life, limb or property. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 94-145. - How costs assessed or apportioned. 
    The cost of such improvements, when the same shall have been ascertained, shall be assessed or apportioned by a committee consisting of the town manager and the director of public works. The town may agree to accept a portion of those costs, or to provide in-kind design, engineering or administrative services. If the town agrees to accept a portion of these costs, then the cost of such improvements shall be assessed or apportioned between the town and the abutting property owner or owners when less than the whole is assessed. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 94-146. - Assessments to be reported to treasurer. 
    The amount assessed against each landowner, or for which he is liable by agreement, shall be reported as soon as practicable to the treasurer, who shall enter the same as provided for other taxes. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 94-147. - Notice to landowner of amount of assessment required. 
    When the assessment or apportionment is not fixed by agreement, notice thereof, and of the amount so assessed or apportioned, shall be given each of the then abutting owners and they shall be cited thereby to appear before the committee designated in section 94-145 not less than ten (10) days thereafter, at a time and place to be designated therein, to show cause, if any they can, against such assessment or apportionment. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 94-148. - How notice given; objections. 
    The notice required by the preceding section may be given by personal service on all persons entitled to such notice, except that notice to an infant or insane person may be served on his guardian or committee and notice to a nonresident may be mailed to him at his place of residence or served on any agent of his having the property in charge, or on the tenant of the freehold, or in any case when the owner is a nonresident, or when the owner's residence is not known, such notice may be given by publication in some newspaper published or having general circulation in the town once a week for four successive weeks. Or, in any case, in lieu of such personal service on the parties or their agents and of such publication, the notice to all parties may be given by publishing the same in some newspaper published or having general circulation in the town once a week for two successive weeks, the last publication to be made at least seven days before the parties are cited to appear. Any landowner wishing to make objections to an assessment or apportionment may appear in person or by counsel and state his objections. 
    This notice and opportunity to make objections may be combined with the notice and public hearing for the adoption of an appropriate ordinance approving specific local public works improvements. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 94-149. - Appeal to court authorized. 
    Any aggrieved landowner may, within 30 days thereafter, but not afterwards, appeal to the circuit court of the county. When an appeal is taken, the committee designated in section 94-145 shall immediately deliver to the clerk of the court which has cognizance of the appeal the original notice relating to the assessment, with its judgment endorsed thereon and the clerk shall docket the same. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 94-150. - How appeal tried; lien of judgment; when to take effect; how enforced. 
    Such appeal shall be tried by the court, in a summary way, without pleadings in writing and without a jury, in term time or in vacation, after ten days' notice to the adverse party, and the hearing shall be de novo. The amount finally assessed against or apportioned to each landowner, or fixed by agreement with him, as herein before provided, shall be a lien enforceable in equity on his abutting land, from the time when the work of improvement shall have been completed; subject, however, to his right of appeal and objections as aforesaid. Such lien shall be enforceable against any person deemed to have had notice of the proposed assessment, but if no abstract of the resolution or ordinance authorizing the improvement is docketed, such lien shall be void as to all purchasers for valuable consideration without notice and lien creditors until and except from the time it is duly admitted to record in the clerk's office of the circuit court of the county. The town council, in its discretion, may cause the payment of the amount finally assessed or apportioned against each landowner, or fixed by agreement with him to be divided into two or more, but not exceeding 20, semiannual installments. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 94-151. - Docketing of abstracts of resolutions or ordinances. 
    When any improvement is authorized for which assessments may be made against the abutting landowners, the town council may, before the amount to be finally assessed against or apportioned to each landowner or fixed by agreement is determined, cause to be recorded in the judgment docket of the clerk's office in which deeds conveying real estate are required by law to be recorded, an abstract of the resolution or ordinance authorizing such improvement, showing the ownership and location of the property to be affected by the proposed improvement and the estimated amount that will be assessed against or apportioned to each landowner or fixed by agreement with him, and the same shall be indexed in the name of the owner of the property. 
    After the completion of the improvement, the estimated amount shall be amended to show the amount finally assessed against or apportioned to each landowner or fixed by agreement with him, which final amount shall in no event exceed the estimated amount for the improvements as initially authorized. The amount finally assessed against or apportioned to each landowner may be greater than the initially assessed amount when the increased amount is for additional work being performed when said work was requested by the landowner and the additional work and its estimated amount is written into a separate agreement between the town and the affected landowner. From the time of the docketing of such abstract, any purchase of, or creditor acquiring a lien on, any of the property described therein shall be deemed to have had notice of the proposed assessment. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 94-152. - Installment payment of assessments. 
    The person against who the assessments have been finally made may pay such assessments in equal installments over a period of not exceeding ten years, together with interest at the rate not to exceed the judgment rate of interest on the unpaid balances. Such installments shall become due at the same time that real estate taxes become due and payable and the amount of each installment, including principal and interest, shall be shown on the tax ticket or bill mailed not later than 14 days prior to the installment due date to each such person by the treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 94-153. - Special districts. 
    The town may create special districts or areas within the town, if those areas desire additional or more complete governmental services than are desired in the town as a whole. The town council shall have the power to levy a higher tax in such areas, and the proceeds therefrom shall be segregated for expenditure in the areas from which said proceeds are raised. 
    The higher tax rate shall not be levied for education, law enforcement, or general governmental services. 
    The town council shall create a special district or area only by ordinance. This division shall not be effective until approved by an affirmative vote of the qualified voters residing within the proposed special district or area at a referendum on such question. Upon receipt of a petition from the citizens indicating support for the creation of a special district or area, the town council shall request the circuit court to place this referendum question on the ballot, either at the next scheduled general election or at a special election. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 94-154. - Severability. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, and clauses of this division are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this chapter shall remain valid. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Sec. 94-155. - Effective date. 
    This division shall be in full force and effect from and after December 16, 2003. 
(Ord. No. 795, 12-16-03) 
Chapter 98 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; licenses, § 86-246 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to regulate taxicabs, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-310, 46.2-2062 et seq. 

Sec. 98-1. - Ordinance continued in effect. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect Ordinance No. 358, regulating taxicabs, or any amendment thereto, and such ordinance is hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 20-1) 
APPENDIX A - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is Ordinance No. 686, as adopted by the town council on January 20, 1998. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference- Subdivision ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-8(8); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; planning, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference- Land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2240 et seq.; Virginia Public Records Act, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-76 et seq.; Subdivided Land Sales Act of 1978, Code of Virginia, § 55-336 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to establish certain subdivision standards and procedures for the Town of Vinton, as provided by the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. The enclosed standards and procedures are intended to guide and facilitate the orderly and beneficial growth of the town and to promote public health, safety, and general welfare consistent with the town's comprehensive plan. 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases when used in this ordinance shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. except in those instances where the content clearly indicates a different meaning. Words and terms not defined here or elsewhere in this ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with such normal dictionary meaning or customary usage as is appropriate to the context. 
    Agent. The representative appointed by the town council to serve as the agent of the council in approving the subdivision plats. See Subdivision agent. 
    Alley. A public way affording or intended to afford secondary means of vehicular access to abutting properties and situated along the side or rear of such properties. 
    Applicant. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or its representative who shall have express written authority to act on behalf of the owner. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises. 
    Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or activities of any kind. 
    Building line. The minimum distance that a building must be set back from the front lot line or street right-of-way line. 
    Commission. The planning commission of the Town of Vinton, Virginia. 
    Comprehensive plan. Duly enacted Town of Vinton comprehensive plan, adopted in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2223. 
    Cul-de-sac. A local street with only one outlet that terminates in a vehicular turnaround and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
    Developer. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or its representative who is responsible for any undertaking that requires review and/or approval under these regulations. See Subdivider. 
    Easement. Authorization by a property owner for another to use the owner's property for a specified purpose. 
    Engineer. A civil engineer properly licensed and registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Escrow. A deposit of cash with the local government or escrow agent to secure the promise to perform some act. 
    Health department and health official. The agency and person designated by the town council to administer the health regulations of the local government. 
    Highway engineer. The resident engineer of the area employed by the Virginia Department of Transportation. 
    Individual sewage disposal system. A septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other approved sewage treatment device. 
    Jurisdiction. The area or territory subject to the legislative control of the governing body. 
    Land surveyor. A land surveyor properly licensed and registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Local government engineer. The licensed engineer designated by the town council to furnish engineering assistance for the administration of these regulations. 
    Lot. A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, or possession, or for building development. 
    Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection; on a corner lot, [a] front yard, as required in the district, shall be provided along all street frontages, and a rear yard, as required, shall be provided opposite the street frontage with the least dimension. 
    Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot or through lot, which has frontage on only one street. 
    Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of Roanoke County, Virginia, or a lot or parcel which is described by metes and bounds and is similarly recorded. 
    Major subdivision. All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions including, but not limited to, subdivisions of five or more lots, or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the town facilities or the creation of any public improvements. 
    Minor subdivision. Any subdivision containing not more than four lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road, or the extension of town facilities or the creation of any public improvements, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Town of Vinton comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, or these regulations. 
    Owner. The record owners of the fee or a vendee in possession, including any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having a legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under the definition of [the term] "same ownership." See Subdivider. 
    Plat. Includes the terms map, plan, plat, replat, or replot; a map or plan of a tract or parcel of land which is to be or which has been subdivided. When used as a verb "plat" is synonymous with "subdivide." 
    Preliminary plat. The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning commission for approval. 
    Property. Any tract, lot, parcel or several of the same, collected together for the purpose of subdividing. 
    Resubdivision. Any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat that affects any street layout on the map or area reserved thereon for public use or any lot line, or that affects any map or pian legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling [a] subdivision. 
    Setback. The minimum distance that a building must be set back from the front lot line or street right-of-way line. See Building line. 
    Service drive. A public street generally paralleling and contiguous to a major street primarily designed to promote safety and an alternate access abutting property. 
    Street. The principal means of access to abutting properties. 
    Street or alley, public use of. The lawful unrestricted use of a specified area of right-of-way for ingress and egress to two or more abutting properties. 
    Street, major. A heavily traveled thoroughfare or highway that carries a large volume of through traffic. It serves the major centers of activity, constitute the highest traffic volume corridors, serves the longest trip desires and carry the major portion of through traffic. 
    Street, width. The total width of the strip of land dedicated or reserved for public travel including roadway, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and planting strips. 
    Subdivision. A division of any lot or parcel of land into two or more parts; provided, however, that the term "to subdivide" shall not include a bona fide division or partition of land for joint owners in a chancery proceeding ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter [ordinance] shall not apply to any tract or parcel of land being conveyed to an adjacent landowner by deed wherein it is clearly stated that such tract or parcel not to be used as a separate tract for building purposes but is to be used for building purposes only in connection with an adjacent tract. 
    Subdivision agent, town. The representative appointed by the town council to serve as the agent of the town council in approving the subdivision plats. 
    Subdivider. An individual, corporation or registered partnership, owning any property to be subdivided; or a group of two or more persons owning any tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided, who have given their power of attorney to one individual to act on their behalf in planning, negotiating for, in representing or executing the legal requirements of the subdivision. 
    Surveyor, land. A surveyor properly licensed and registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Zoning ordinance. Refer to zoning ordinance of the Town of Vinton, Virginia, duly enacted and adopted via accordance with the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
Sec. 3. - General requirements for subdivision of land. 
(a)  The owner or developer of a subdivision shall observe and comply with the following general requirements and principles of land subdivision ordinance in preparing the preliminary and final subdivision plats: 
(1)  The plat shall conform to the adopted zoning ordinance requirements and comprehensive plan or one or more parts, sections or divisions thereof, as amended, of the town, as the case may be. 
(2)  All streets which are designated as part of the major highway system on such comprehensive plan or part, division or section thereof, as amended, shall be coordinated with adjoining links in said system and at the same or greater widths. 
(3)  Major and minor street widths shall conform to the widths adopted by the Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT). No minor street shall have a width of less than 50 feet between property lines. 
(4)  Culs-de-sacs where permitted shall not exceed 600 feet in length, and shall not be less than 50 feet wide, except where topography, unusual and peculiar conditions make this impractical, the planning commission may permit a greater length. All permanent dead-end streets shall terminate in a circular right-of-way with a minimum diameter of 80 feet. 
(5)  As far as practicable all proposed streets shall be continuous and made to connect with existing streets without off-set. 
(6)  Blocks, in general, shall not be longer than 1,000 feet or less than 300 feet between street intersections; provided, however, [that] in instances where topography or existing peculiar conditions require it, a longer or shorter block may be approved by the planning commission. A crosswalk shall be provided between cross streets in blocks 800 feet or more long. 
(7)  Except as specifically permitted by the town's zoning ordinance, all lots controlled by these regulations shall front on a public street and shall not extend through to another street; provided, however, that where the topography or existing peculiar conditions make this regulation impractical the planning commission may waive the same. No lot shall embrace any portion of a street or alley. 
(8)  At street intersections, the property he shall be rounded by an arc having a radius of not less than 15 feet. Property lines at major street intersections or at other locations where traffic hazards and congestion may be anticipated, shall be designed for a radius of not less than 20 feet, or greater if deemed necessary. 
(9)  Side lot lines in general shall be at right angles to street lines or radial to curving street lines except where the topography or existing peculiar conditions make this regulation impractical. 
(10)  Dimensions of comer lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback from both streets. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(11)  Lot area and lot width requirements shall be as specified in the town's zoning ordinance. 
(12)  No corner lots shall be resubdivided to face another street unless all established building lines are observed on both streets. 
(13)  Major streets shall, insofar as possible, conform to the contours to avoid grades in excess of seven percent, unless because of special conditions the agent permits otherwise. Minor streets and alleys shall avoid grades in excess of ten percent. No street shall have a minimum grade of less than 0.5 percent. 
(14)  Alleys with a minimum width of 20 feet may be required at the rear of all lots designated for business or industrial use. Alleys, when provided in the rear of residential lots, shall not be less than 20 feet in width. Intersecting alleys shall be provided with a 15-foot radius at each corner. Easements at least 15 feet wide, 7.5 feet on each side of the rear of side lot lines, shall be provided for utilities and drainage where necessary. Easements at least 15 feet wide may be required in, along or adjacent to natural watercourses as drains for sanitary sewers or water diversion purposes. 
(15)  When any part of the land proposed for subdivision lies in a drainage district, such fact shall be set forth on the plat of the proposed subdivision. When any grave, object or structure marking a place of burial is located on the land proposed for subdivision, such grave, object or structure shall be identified on any plans required by this ordinance. 
(16)  When the land for the proposed subdivision lies wholly or partly within an area subject to the joint control of more than one political subdivision, the plat shall be submitted to the local commission or other designated agent of the political subdivision in which the tract of land is located. 
(17)  Monuments of an approved type shall be set by the owner or proprietor of the subdivision as required by the agent and as shown on the final plat. 
(18)  Reserved strips restricting access to streets, alleys, public ways and easements shall not be permitted. 
(19)  All land designated for future public street (right-of-way) purposes or public street (right-of-way) widening shall be dedicated for public use. 
(20)  Where practicable the centerlines of all intersecting streets shall meet in a common point and shall intersect one another as near to a right angle as it is practicable in each case. 
(21)  No existing local street names or subdivision names in the Roanoke Valley and adjoining localities shall be duplicated. 
(22)  Whenever a proposed subdivision abuts a road which is included in the state system of primary highways, an access road extending for the full length of the subdivision along such highway and providing limited access thereto may be required by the subdivision agent at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the land between such access road and highway. 
(23)  Streetlights shall be required in accordance to town's policy. Installation of streetlights shall be required in accordance with design and specifications standards approved by the town. 
(b)  For the acceptance of dedication for public use of any right-of-way located within any subdivision or section thereof. which has constructed or proposed to be constructed within the subdivision or section thereof, any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, bicycle trail, greenway trail, drainage or sewerage system, water line as part of a public system or other improvement dedicated for public use, and maintained by the town and for the provision of other site-related improvements required by town ordinances for vehicular ingress and egress, including traffic signalization and control, for public access street, for structures necessary to ensure stability of critical slopes, and for stormwater management facilities, financed or to be financed in whole or in part by private funds only if the owner or developer (i) certifies to the town that the construction costs have been paid to the person constructing such facilities; (ii) furnishes to the town a certified check or cash escrow in the amount of the estimated costs construction or a personal, corporate or property bond, with surety satisfaction to the town, in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of such facilities, or a contract for the construction of such facilities and the contractor's bond, with like surety, in like amount and so conditioned; or (iii) furnishes to the town a bank or savings institution's letter of credit on certain designated funds satisfactory to the town as to the bank or savings institution, the amount and the form. 
(c)  Where a single lot or parcel of land is to be subdivided into only two parcels, any or all requirements of this ordinance may, in the discretion of the subdivision agent, be waived. 
(d)  Land that the planning commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features that will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the planning commission, upon recommendation of the town's authorized engineer, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses as shall not involve any danger to public health, safety, and welfare. 
(e)  Variations in or exceptions to the general regulations of the subdivision ordinance may be permitted if in the opinion of the agent, in cases of unusual situations, or when strict adherence to the general regulations would result in substantial injustice or hardship. 
Sec. 4. - Plats; procedure for preparation and filing. 
(a)  Whenever a subdivision is proposed to be made and before recordation or any sale of said subdivision, as a whole or any part thereof, is made, the owner or developer of the proposed subdivision, or his duly authorized representative, shall file a plat of the proposed subdivision with the agent for approval. The plat and all procedure relating thereto shall in all respects be in full compliance with the provisions of these regulations and all applicable laws and ordinances affecting or regulating the subdivision of land, the use thereof and the erection of buildings or structures thereon. 
(b)  There shall be a reasonable fee charged for the review of subdivision plat. Such fee shall be established by resolution of the town council, a copy which shall be maintained in the agent's office. 
(c)  The owner or developer of a proposed subdivision shall cause a preliminary plat to be prepared, accompanied by street profiles, when required, and shall present not less than six prints or copies of each for tentative approval to the agent. However, if approval of a feature or features of the preliminary plat by the planning commission and/or a state agency is necessary, additional copies may be required. The subdivision agent shall forward the [preliminary plat] to the planning commission and/or state agency (ies) for review and action. 
(1)  Any state agency making such a review of a plat forwarded to it under this section shall complete its review within 45 days of receipt of such preliminary plat. Upon receipt of the approvals from all state agencies, the agent shall act upon a preliminary plat within 35 days. 
(2)  If a planning commission has the responsibility of review of preliminary plats and conduct a public hearing, it shall act on such plat within 45 days after receiving approval from all state agencies. 
(3)  If the agent or planning commission does not approve the preliminary plat, the agent shall set forth in writing the reasons for such denial and shall state what corrections or modifications will permit approval by such agent or commission; provided, however, that the planning commission shall not be required to approve a preliminary subdivision plat in less than 60 days from the date of its original submission to the agent. 
(4)  All actions on preliminary subdivision plats shall be completed by the subdivision agent and/or planning commission and, if necessary, state agencies, within a total of 90 days of submission to the agent. 
(d)  The agent shall tentatively approve or disapprove the preliminary subdivision plat and street profiles or approve them with modifications, noting thereon any changes that will be required. One copy shall be returned to the owner or developer of the subdivision or his representative with the date of said approval or disapproval noted thereon. 
(1)  If the agent fails to approve or disapprove the preliminary plat within 90 days after it has been officially submitted for approval, the subdivider, after ten days' written notice to the agent, may petition the Circuit Court of Roanoke County to enter such order with respect thereto as it deems proper, which may include directing approval of the plat. 
(2)  If the agent disapproves a preliminary plat and the subdivider contends that such disapproval was not properly based on the ordinance applicable thereto, or was arbitrary or capricious, he may appeal to the Circuit Court of Roanoke County to be heard and determined the case as soon as may be, provided that his appeal is filed with the circuit court within 60 days of the written disapproval by the agent. 
(e)  The agent, in studying the preliminary subdivision plat, shall take into consideration the requirements of the community and the best use of the land being subdivided. Particular attention shall be given to width, arrangement and location of streets, and alleys or utility easements, drainage, lot sizes and arrangements, and other facilities such as parks, playgrounds or school sites, public buildings, parking areas, boulevards and main highways. Adequate street connections shall be required by the agent to ensure free and safe access to adjoining, existing, proposed and possible subdivision lands. 
(f)  The owner or developer of the subdivision, following the tentative approval of the preliminary subdivision plat and street profiles with proposed grades, shall file with the agent within six months, subdivision plats as provided in section 6 of this ordinance. One copy of street profiles with grades or topographic map, if required, shall also be filed with the agent. 
(g)  The final subdivision plat shall be approved by the agent if found to be in conformity with the requirements of law and of these regulations. 
(1)  The agent shall act on any proposed plat within 60 days after it has been officially submitted for approval by either approving or disapproving such plat in writing, and giving with the latter specific reasons therefor. 
(2)  Such plat shall be filed for recordation in the clerk's office of the Roanoke County Circuit Court in which deeds conveying the land are recorded 60 days after final approval thereof, otherwise such approval shall be withdrawn and the plat marked void and returned to the owner and agent; however, in any case where construction of facilities to be dedicated for public use has commenced pursuant to an approved plan or permit with surety approved by the town, or where the developer has furnished surety by certified check, cash escrow, bond, or letter of credit in the amount of the estimated cost of construction of such facilities, the time for plat recordation shall be extended to one year after final approval or to the time limit specified in the surety agreement approved by the town, whichever is greater. 
(3)  If a developer records a final plat which may be a section of a subdivision as shown on an approved preliminary plat and furnishes to the town a certified check, cash escrow, bond or letter of credit in the amount of the estimated cost of construction of facilities to be dedicated within said section for public use and maintained by the town, the commonwealth, or other public agency, the developer shall have the right to record the remaining sections shown on the preliminary plat for a period of five years from the recordation date of the first section, or for such longer period as the agent may, at the approval, determine to be reasonable, taking into consideration the size and phasing of the proposed development, subject to the terms and conditions of this subsection and subject to engineering and construction standards and zoning requirements in effect at the time that each remaining section is recorded. 
Sec. 5. - Preliminary plats. 
(a)  The subdivider shall present to the agent not less than six copies of the preliminary plat, plainly marked as such, preferably at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, showing the following: 
(1)  Subdivision name. 
(2)  Name and address of the recorded owner of the land proposed to be subdivided and the owner or developer of the subdivision, and the surveyor or engineer. 
(3)  The location, width and names of all existing or platted streets, alleys, utility easements, or other public ways or other places for public use of land for future street widening within or adjacent to the subdivision, existing permanent buildings, railroad rights of way (rights-of-way), erosion and sediment control, drainage, and other facilities such as parks, playground, public and private sewage facilities, water filtration and distribution facilities, school sites, public buildings, parking areas, boulevards, and main highways. 
(4)  Location of proposed subdivision by an insert map at a scale of not less than two inches equal to one mile, showing relative location to adjoining properties. Names of owners of adjoining tracts. 
(5)  Profile of each street with proposed grades, when required. 
(6)  Location of all building lines and location and dimensions of all easements. 
(7)  Lot lines with approximate dimensions, acreage of subdivided area and existing buildings footprints. 
(8)  Proposed method and source of water supply, drainage provisions, sanitary sewer layout or other accepted sanitary plan. Plans [of] on-site sewage disposal systems/and or wells to be submitted to Roanoke County/Vinton Health Department for review and approval. 
(9)  New or replacement sanitary sewer facilities, pumping stations and collector systems, including private package sewage treatment plants, shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the system and discharges from the system into the floodwater. 
(10)  An erosion and sediment control plan which shall indicate methods to be utilized in minimizing potential erosion and sediment, both during construction and upon completion of the subdivision, such plan and control methodology to be developed in accordance to Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, latest edition, (E & S Handbook). 
(11)  Proposed use of the property to be subdivided. 
(12)  Topographic map on a suitable scale and contour intervals when required by the agent. 
(13)  Date, scale of plat, and north point of map. True meridian shall be used when practicable; otherwise the date of the magnetic meridian must be given. 
(b)  No preliminary plat shall be approved unless the planning commission determines that public facilities will be adequate to support and service the area of the proposed subdivision. The applicant shall, at the request of the planning commission, submit sufficient information and data on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate the expected impact on and use of public facilities by possible uses of said subdivision. Public facilities and services to be examined for adequacy to include roads, sewerage and water service, schools, parks, police and emergency services. 
(c)  Unless a final plat is filed with the agent within six months after the approval of the preliminary plat, the preliminary plat shall thereupon become void and shall be so marked by the agent. 
Sec. 6. - Final plats. 
(a)  Every final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a certified civil engineer or land surveyor duly licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia, who shall endorse upon each such plat a certificate signed by him setting forth the source of title of the owner of the land subdivided and the place of record of the last instrument or instruments, in the chain of title. When the plat is of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated upon such plat. All plats submitted for recordation shall meet the standards for plats as adopted under Code of Virginia, § 42.1-82 of the Virginia Public Records Act. 
(b)  The final subdivision plat shall be two blue or black line reproducible mylar prints. The final plat must also be accompanied by two blue or block line reproducible mylar prints identifying all required physical improvements to be installed. The size of the sheet shall be 20 inches by 30 inches, including a margin of one inch outside ruled border lines at [the] bottom, top and right sides and two inches for binding on the left 20-inch side of the sheet. The drawing shall be to a scale of not less than 20 feet to an inch and not more than 100 feet to one inch. The original mylar tracing and two paper prints shall be submitted to the agent. After approval, one copy of the reproducible mylar shall be returned to the owner or developer of the subdivision for recordation in the precise form as approved. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements for the preliminary plat the final plat shall show: 
(1)  Sufficient data to readily determine the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, block line and boundary line and to produce the same on the ground from permanent monuments. Linear dimensions shall be in English measurements and acceptable metric units. All dimensions, both linear and angular, shall be determined by an accurate control survey which must close and balance within a limit of one foot in 5,000 feet. A plus or minus figure shall not be permitted on any line. Elevation of existing and proposed ground surfaces at all street intersections and points of major grade change along centerlines of streets, together with proposed grade lines connecting therewith, shall likewise be shown. True elevations shall be used based on the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey datum. Benchmark elevations and descriptions thereof are available at the office of planning and zoning. 
(2)  All curves shall be circular arcs and described by giving the deflection angle, radius, tangent, length of arc and chord bearing and distance. This may be shown in a scheduled tabulation on the plat. 
(3)  In order to establish uniformity, a section or survey shall consist of a number of blocks; a block shall consist of a number of lots; and a lot shall be the smallest individual land use unit. All sections, blocks and lots shall be numbered in consecutive order from left to right, beginning at the top of the unit. In case there is a resubdivision of lots, the original identity shall be shown, and other identification, not in conflict with these regulations, may be designated for the new arrangement. 
(4)  Permanent reference monuments prescribed by the agent shall be placed as required by the agent. Such permanent monuments shall be stone or concrete at least 24 inches long and six inches square (or four inches in diameter) and shall be set to approved finished grade where practicable. Other points, such as street intersections, alley intersections, tangent points and angle points, shall be marked with a solid iron rod or an iron pipe not less than one-half inch in diameter, at least two feet long, driven flush with the ground. Monuments and iron pins shall be indicated on all plats. 
(5)  All bearings are to be referred to the true meridian where geodetic control has been completed. Where the magnetic meridian is used the declination shall be stated. 
(6)  The names of all streets and the name of the subdivision, the north point, scale, date, restrictions and conditions, if any. 
(7)  In no case shall the agent approve a revision of a previously approved plat unless the date of the revision thereof be clearly stated thereon, the fact that it is a revised plat and the reason for the revision. 
(8)  A complete and correct description of the land subdivided. 
(9)  A statement to the effect that the subdivision, as appears on the plat, is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the owners or developers of the land subdivided and the trustees in any deed of trust, or other instrumentality imposing a lien upon such land, if any there be. The plat shall be signed by such owners, developers and trustees, if any, all of whom shall duly acknowledge the same before some officer authorized to take acknowledgment of deeds. 
(10)  A statement of certification by the Roanoke County/Vinton Health Department to the effect that all lots shown on the subdivision plat have been reviewed by the personnel of the Roanoke County/Vinton Health Department and have met the criteria as set forth in the Commonwealth of Virginia Sewage Handling and Disposal Regulations adopted pursuant to Code of Virginia, title 32.1, as amended to date, and each lot or parcel is eligible for a septic permit. 
Sec. 7. - Recordation. 
(a)  When a final subdivision plat has been approved, executed and acknowledged as provided in this ordinance, it shall be recorded in the office of the Roanoke County clerk of court where deeds are admitted to record for the lands contained in the plat, and indexed in the general index to deeds under the name of the subdivision. 
(b)  The recordation of such plat shall operate to transfer, in fee simple, to the town, in which the land lies such portion of the premises platted as is on such plat set apart for streets, alleys or other public use or for future street widening and to transfer to town any easement indicated on such plat to create a public right of passage over the same. The recordation of such plat shall operate to transfer to the town, or to such association or public authority as the town may provide, such easements shown on the plat for the conveyance of stormwater, domestic water and sewage, including the installation and maintenance of any facilities utilized for such purposes, as the town may require. Nothing herein contained shah affect any right of a subdivider of land heretofore validly reserved. 
(c)  No final plat of a subdivision shall be recorded unless and until it shall have been first submitted to and approved by the agent, and no clerk of a court shall file or record a plat of a subdivision until such plat has been approved by said agent. 
(d)  An approved final subdivision plat which has been recorded, hereinafter referred to as "recorded plat," shall be valid for a period of not less than five years from the date of the approval thereof or for such longer period as the agent may, at time of approval, determine to be reasonable, taking into consideration the size and phasing of the proposed development. 
(e)  Upon application of the subdivider filed prior to expiration of a recorded plat, the agent may grant one or more extensions of such approval for additional periods as the agent may, at the time extension is granted, determine to be reasonable, taking into consideration the size and phasing of the proposed development, the laws, ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of the request for an extension. 
(f)  If the agent denies an extension requested as provided herein and the subdivider or developer and the subdivider contends that such denial was not properly based on the ordinance applicable thereto, the foregoing considerations for granting an extension, or was arbitrary or capricious, he may appeal to the Roanoke County circuit court, provided that such appeal is filed with the circuit court within 60 days of the written denial by the agent. 
(g)  Application for minor modifications to recorded plats made during the periods of validity of such plats established in accordance with this ordinance shall not constitute a waiver of the provisions hereof nor shall the approval of such minor modifications extend the period of validity of such plats. 
Sec. 8. - Selling or transferring lots or parcels of land. 
    No lot or parcel of land shall be sold or transferred until the final subdivision plat. of which said lot or parcel is a part, shall have been approved and recorded as provided in this ordinance. 
Sec. 9. - Issuance of permits, grading and installation of improvements. 
(a)  The town shall not issue any permit for the erection of any building or structure to be located in any subdivision, a plat whereof is required to be recorded pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, until such plat shall have been admitted to record as provided for in this ordinance. 
(b)  No construction activity of any kind, including grading, installation of improvements, and building shall begin on any land subject to these regulations without prior approval of the preliminary plat by the agent. In cases where a grading plan is required, approval of the grading plan by [the] Roanoke County Engineering Department is prerequisite to approval of the preliminary plat. In all instances, approval of the erosion and sediment control plan shall be considered such a prerequisite to approval of the preliminary plat. 
(c)  Grading operations may begin following approval of the preliminary plat, provided that such grading shall not be commenced until the subdivider has executed an agreement with Roanoke County and the town and in which he agrees to: 
(1)  Satisfactorily complete all grading within the time specified. 
(2)  Plant, in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the town, all slopes in excess of two horizontal feet to one vertical foot, and maintains such planting for a period of not less than one year. 
(3)  Undertake all erosion and sediment control measures in accordance with plans approved by Roanoke County Engineering Department. 
(4)  Install all required street and utility improvements in accordance with plans approved by the town. 
(5)  Indemnify and hold harmless the town, town officials, agents of the town and town employees from any suit, claims or actions for damages or any cost incurred by the town as a consequence of failure on the part of the subdivider to comply with the terms of the agreement. 
(d)  All physical improvements required by the provisions of this ordinance for the subdivision as platted shall be installed therein and thereon at the expense of the subdivider prior to the recordation of the final plat; provided, however, that in lieu of the actual installation of the physical improvements, the subdivider shall have submitted and have approved an acceptable form of agreement and bond with corporate surety, or in lieu of said bond an acceptable letter of credit to be in an amount equal to the total cost of such improvements and guaranteeing that the required improvements will be installed within a designated length of time. The form of agreement, designated length of time, bond and surety, letter of credit, and choice of guarantee shall be prescribed by the town council, as it may require, according to the nature and extent of the improvements to be made. 
Sec. 10. - Inspection prior approval of plat. 
    The agent, before finally approving any subdivision plat, shall personally inspect the proposed subdivision on the ground. Upon approving such final subdivision plat, the agent shall clearly endorse their [his] approval thereon. 
Sec. 11. - Vacation of plats. 
(a)  Any plat recordation or part thereof, having been recorded, may be vacated before sale or after sale of lot therein, in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Virginia §§ 15.2-2271 and 15.2-2272. 
(b)  The boundary lines of any lot parcel of land may be relocated or otherwise altered as part of an otherwise valid and properly recorded plat of subdivision or resubdivision approved by the agent and executed by the owner or owners of such land with their free will and consent. Such action of approval shall not involve the relocation or alteration of streets, alleys, easements for public passage or other public areas; and provided further, that no easements or utility right-of-way shall be relocated or altered without the express consent of all persons holding any interest therein. 
Sec. 12. - Street names and house numbering. 
(a)  Any street in a subdivision which is a prolongation, or approximately a prolongation, of an existing street shall be given the same name. 
(b)  Except as provided in the preceding paragraph, no street shall be designated by the same name as that therefore borne by any other street, irrespective of the use of any suffix. 
(c)  Where practicable, all streets in a subdivision running in a general direction, east and west, shall be designated as avenues and so named. All streets running in a general direction, north and south, shall be designated as streets and so named or numbered. All streets having winding courses shall be known as roads or boulevards. The names of the streets and avenues, as shown upon the plats of the official map and on file in the office of the planning and zoning, shall be the true names and designation of streets, avenues, roads and boulevards. 
(d)  Where practicable, when a building or structure is erected on any land covered by these regulations, the number assigned shall conform to the existing house numbering system. 
(e)  Each owner of a building, commercial property, industrial structure, [and] residential structures shall be responsible for affixing to such building its assigned building number. Building numbers shall be assigned by the authorized agent of the town designated by town council. 
Sec. 13. - Improvements. 
(a)  All plans and specifications shall be in conformity with requirements approved by the town for various types of physical improvements. 
(b)  The following improvements shall be required to be installed by the subdivider in subdivisions lying, in whole or in part, within the corporate limits of the town, when such subdivision shall include or involve any public street, any extension of the town water and sewer systems, any private water and sewer systems, any right-of-way connecting two public streets, or any casements for any of the foregoing; and the same shall be installed in strict accordance with the specifications provided herein as approved by the agent: 
(1)  All grading, draining, surfacing shall be done and all other items pertaining to the development of any street or road to include curbing, guttering and pavement shall be installed in strict accordance with the standards of the Virginia Department of Transportation. 
(2)  A drainage system shall be provided for means of culverts under roadways, lead and outlet drains necessary head walls, easement for drainage through adjacent properties and other structures that are necessary to provide adequate drainage of both natural [water] and stormwater for all streets and adjoining properties. 
(3)  The facilities for underground utilities such as sewer and water, including sewer and water laterals to each lot line when laid in streets, shall be in place prior to final surfacing. All facilities for utilities shall where possible be placed in alleys or in easements provided for that purpose at the rear of the lots in the subdivision, or located as approved by the town. 
(4)  The subdivider shall install sewer mains and sewer laterals, extended to the property line of each lot, in accordance with size, depth and profile approved by the town. In case where it is found impractical by the town to install or connect with existing sewer systems, the installation of septic tanks may be permitted after percolation tests of the soil have been made to the satisfaction of the Roanoke County/Vinton Health Department. 
(5)  The subdivider shall provide an adequate water system, which public water system shall be approved by the town and private well[s] to be approved by Roanoke County/Vinton Health Department. 
(6)  Street signs of an approved standard design shall be installed at all street intersections. 
(c)  Where a drainage problem exists or will be created by the subdivision or development of land, the subdivider shall be required to provide necessary facilities to drain the area of the subdivision in question by a plan to be approved by the town. This may be accomplished by the proper grading of the area or by the installation of a system of drainage pipes, structures, culverts, ditches, etc. In cases where it is impractical or unreasonable to eliminate the drainage problem as provided above, the agent shall require that certain areas of the subdivision, or other land available to the subdivider, be designed for seepage and absorption. No areas set aside for seepage and absorption, pursuant to this paragraph, shall, thereafter, be altered, in any manner, so as to decrease drainage efficiency; and there shall be reserved unto the town the continuing right to go upon such areas and restore or, if possible, increase the seepage efficiency. In instances where it is impractical to get rid of drainage water and larger drainage areas are not required, the subdivider shall install seepage pits or French drains. 
(d)  Drainage improvement shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding. The town may require the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and/or the construction of off-site drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed developments. 
(e)  [The] Subdivider may be required to pay pro rata share of the cost providing reasonable and necessary off-site sewerage, water, and drainage facilities in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2243, as amended, and the adopted policies of the town. 
(f)  Reasonable provision shall be made for the voluntary funding of off-site road improvements in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Virginia § 15.2-2242, as amended. 
Sec. 14. - Inspection. 
    Periodic inspection during the installation of the physical improvements in a subdivision shall be made by a duly authorized town official to ensure conformity with the approved plans and specifications. The subdivider shall notify the proper administrative officers when each phase of the installation is completed and ready for inspection. 
Sec. 15. - Agreement and bond of a subdivider. 
    When a developer submits the final plat, he shall either demonstrate that the improvements, shown on that plat have been completed to the satisfaction of the agency to be responsible for their ownership, operation and maintenance, or he shall provide to the town a certified check or cash escrow in the amount of the estimated costs of construction or a personal, corporate or property bond with surety satisfactory to the town attorney in an amount sufficient for and conditional upon the construction of said facilities, or a contract for the construction of such facilities and the contractor's bond, with like surety, in like amount and so conditioned, or furnishes to the town a bank or savings and loan association's letter of credit on certain designated funds satisfactory to the town's attorney as to the banks or savings and loan association, the amount and the form. The amount of such certified check, cash escrow, bond, or letter of credit shall not exceed the total of the estimated cost of construction based on unit prices for new public or private sector construction in the town and a reasonable allowance for estimated administrative costs, inflation, and potential damage to existing roads or utilities, which shall, not exceed 25 percent of the estimated construction costs determined by the town authorized agent. 
Sec. 16. - Certificates of approval. 
(a)  Partial and/or final complete release of any bond, escrow, letter of credit, [or] other performance guarantee required by the town council may be issued by the agent within 30 days after receipt of written notice by the subdivider of completion of part or all of any facilities required to be constructed, unless the agent notified said subdivider in writing of nonreceipt of approval by applicable state agency, or of any specified defects or deficiencies in construction and suggested corrective measures prior to the expiration of the 30-day period. 
(b)  If no such action is taken by the agent within the time specified above, the request shall be deemed approved, and a partial release granted to the subdivider. No final release shall be granted until after expiration of such 30-day period, and there is an additional request in writing sent by certified mail return receipt to the town manager. The agent shall act within ten working days of receipt of the request; then if no action is taken, the request shall be deemed approved and final release granted to the subdivider. 
(c)  Upon written request by the subdivider, the agent shall be required to make periodic partial releases of such bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee in a cumulative amount equal to no less than 90 percent of the original amount for which the bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee was taken, and may make partial release of such lower amounts as may be authorized by the agent based upon the percentage of facilities completed and approved by the agent or state agency having jurisdiction. 
(d)  Periodic partial releases may not occur before the completion of at least 30 percent of the facilities covered by any bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee. The agent shall not be required to execute more than three periodic releases in any 12-month period. 
(e)  Upon satisfactory completion of installation of the required improvements in a subdivision, the administrative officers charged with the responsibility of each of the various types of improvements shall issue certificates or approval therefor to the subdivider, or his agent, and such certificates shall operate as evidence for the release of the required bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee as provided for in the preceding section, furnished for the guarantee of satisfactory installation of such improvements. 
(f)  For the purpose of final release, the term "acceptance" is deemed to mean: when said public facility is accepted by and taken over for operation and maintenance by the town department or other public authority which is responsible for maintaining and operating such facility upon acceptance. 
Sec. 17. - Violations. 
    In case of any violation or attempted violation of the provisions of this ordinance, the town council, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such violation or attempted violation, to restrain, correct or abate such violation or attempted violation, or to prevent any act which would constitute such a violation. 
Sec. 18. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 for each lot or parcel of land so subdivided or transferred or sold; and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. 
APPENDIX B - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is Ordinance No. 634, as adopted by the town council on December 19, 1995, and effective on December 19, 1995. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference- Zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-8(7); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; planning, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions, app. A. 
State Law reference- Zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2280 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE, AUTHORITY, PURPOSE 

Sec. 1-1. - Title. 
    This appendix shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Vinton, Virginia." 
Sec. 1-2. - Authority. 
    This appendix is adopted by the Vinton Town Council pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2280 et seq., as amended. 
Sec. 1-3. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this appendix is to classify the territory of the town into zoning districts for the general purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the public and of further accomplishing the objectives of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2200. To these ends, and pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2283, this appendix is designed to give reasonable consideration to each of the following purposes, where applicable: 
(a)  To provide for adequate light, air, convenience of access and safety from fire, flood, crime and other dangers; 
(b)  To reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets; 
(c)  To facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community; 
(d)  To facilitate the provision of adequate police and fire protection, disaster evacuation, civil defense, transportation, water, sewerage, flood protection, schools, parks, forests, playgrounds, recreational facilities, airports and other public requirements; 
(e)  To protect against destruction of or encroachment upon historic areas; 
(f)  To protect against one or more of the following: Overcrowding of land, undue density of population in relation to the community facilities existing or available, obstruction of light and air, danger and congestion in travel and transportation or loss of life, health or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers; 
(g)  To encourage economic development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base; 
(h)  To provide for the preservation of agricultural and forestal lands and other lands of significance for the protection of the natural environment; 
(i)  To protect approach slopes and other safety areas of licensed airports, including United States government and military air facilities; 
(j)  To promote the creation and preservation of affordable housing suitable for meeting the current and future needs of the town as well as a reasonable proportion of the current and future needs of the planning district; and 
(k)  To protect surface water and ground water as defined in Code of Virginia, § 62.1-255. 
Sec. 1-4. - Matters considered in applying zoning. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2284, the regulations contained in this appendix and the districts established by this appendix have been drawn and applied with consideration for: 
(a)  The existing use and character of property; 
(b)  The comprehensive plan of the town; 
(c)  The suitability of property for various uses; 
(d)  Trends of growth or change in the town; 
(e)  Current and future requirements of the town as to land for various purposes as determined by population and economic studies and other studies carried out through the comprehensive plan; 
(f)  Transportation requirements of the town, and requirements for airports, housing, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation areas and other public services; 
(g)  Conservation of natural resources, preservation of floodplains and preservation of agricultural and forestal land; 
(h)  Conservation of properties and their values; and 
(i)  Encouragement of the most appropriate use of land throughout the town. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effective date. 
    This appendix shall become effective as of the date of its adoption by the town council as provided by law, said date being December 19, 1995. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT MAP 

Sec. 2-1. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
    In order to carry out the purposes of this appendix, the following zoning districts are hereby established: 
R-LD residential low density district 
R-1 residential district 
R-2 residential district 
R-3 residential district 
R-B residential-business district 
GB general business district 
CB central business district 
M-1 limited industrial district 
M-2 general industrial district 
PD planned development district 
Floodplain districts FP-1, FP-2 
Public/open space district 
MUD mixed use development district 
( Ord. No. 960, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-2. - District boundaries; official zoning map. 
    The locations and the boundaries of the zoning districts established by this appendix, other than the floodplain districts, shall be as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all notations and explanatory matter shown thereon, is hereby made a part of this appendix. The locations and the boundaries of the floodplain districts are shown as described in article IV of this appendix. 
Sec. 2-3. - Maintenance of zoning map. 
    The official zoning map shall be dated and endorsed with the signature of the mayor. The official zoning map shall be maintained for public view in the office of the zoning administrator and shall not be removed from that office except for official purposes. 
Sec. 2-4. - Recording amendments on zoning map. 
(a)  Whenever amendment is made to the zoning district boundaries or other matter shown on the official zoning map by ordinance adopted by the town council, the zoning administrator shall see that the amendment is properly recorded on the map, along with the effective date and nature of the amendment. Each amendment shall be recorded as soon as practicable after its adoption. 
(b)  The effective date of any amendment to the zoning district boundaries shall be the effective date of the ordinance providing for the amendment. Any delay in or failure to record an amendment on the official zoning map, or any error in depicting the amendment, shall not affect the validity of the ordinance providing for the amendment. 
Sec. 2-5. - Unauthorized changes to zoning map. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make changes on the official zoning map except by authorization of the zoning administrator for official purposes and in accordance with the provisions of this article. Any unauthorized change shall be considered a violation of this appendix. 
Sec. 2-6. - Copies of zoning map. 
    The zoning administrator shall cause copies of the official zoning map to be made in such numbers, in such form and for such purposes as deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator with the consent of the town council. In the case of any discrepancy between the official zoning map and any copy, the official zoning map shall be the final authority. 
Sec. 2-7. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    In any case where uncertainty exists with respect to the location of a boundary of any of the districts shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  Where a discrepancy exists between a district boundary shown on the zoning map and that which is described in the text of the ordinance establishing such boundary, the text of the ordinance shall govern. 
(b)  Where district boundaries are shown with specific dimensions, such dimensions shall govern. 
(c)  Where district boundaries appear to follow street, alley, property or corporation lines, or appear to follow the centerlines of streets, alleys, or watercourses, such boundaries shall be construed as following such lines. The location of any street, alley, property line, corporation line, or watercourse used as a district boundary shall be the location in existence at the time of adoption of the ordinance establishing the boundary. 
(d)  Where district boundaries appear parallel to, perpendicular to, or as extensions of center lines, property lines or other features, they shall be so construed. 
(e)  Where district boundaries are not described in any ordinance and do not appear to follow any center lines, street lines, property lines or other features, the location of such district boundaries shall be determined by measurement on the zoning map in accordance with its scale. 
(f)  In any case where none of the foregoing rules establish the location of a district boundary, or where subsequent dispute or uncertainty exists, the location of such district boundary shall be determined by the board of zoning appeals in accordance with the provisions of article IX of this appendix. 
Sec. 2-8. - Vacation of street or other public way. 
    Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action, the zoning districts adjoining each side of such street, alley or other public way shall automatically be extended to the center of such vacation, and the area included in the vacation shall be subject to all applicable regulations of the extended districts. 
Sec. 2-9. - Unclassified areas and additions to jurisdiction. 
(a)  Any area for which no zoning classification is shown on the official zoning map shall be construed as being within the R-LD residential low density district unless otherwise designated by ordinance adopted by the town council. 
(b)  Any territory hereafter annexed to the town shall be construed as being within the R-LD residential low density district until otherwise designated by ordinance adopted by the town council. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3-1. - Compliance with provisions. 
    Except as provided in section 3-5 of this article, no building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, expanded, converted to another use or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations specified for the district in which such building, structure or land is located and with all other applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 3-2. - Interpretation and application. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this appendix shall be construed to be minimum requirements, unless specifically indicated to the contrary. 
(b)  Conflict with other requirements. Where a requirement imposed by this appendix is at variance with any other provision of this appendix or with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted regulation, the most restrictive requirement, or that which imposes the higher standard, shall govern. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses listed in the district regulations contained in article IV of this appendix shall be permitted in the respective districts, provided they comply with all applicable provisions of this appendix. All other uses shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Private covenants and restrictions. The provisions of this appendix shall not be construed to affect, interfere with, or abrogate any condition, covenant, limitation or restriction contained in any deed, contract or other private agreement relating to the use of any land, building or structure, provided that whenever the provisions of this appendix impose greater restrictions on such use than are imposed by any such condition, covenant, limitation or restriction, the provisions of this appendix shall govern. 
Sec. 3-3. - Reduction from requirements. 
    No lot area, yard, open space, parking space, or other feature required by this appendix shall be reduced or eliminated except in conformity with the regulations established by this appendix. Any such reduction or elimination resulting from a taking for public purpose by a governmental authority shall not be considered to be a violation of the provisions of this appendix. Any property so affected by such taking shall be subject to the applicable provisions of article VI of this appendix pertaining to nonconforming uses and features. 
Sec. 3-4. - Requirements to be met for each building, structure or use. 
    No part of any lot, yard, open space, parking space, or other feature required by this appendix for a building, structure or use shall be considered as lot, yard, open space, parking space, or other feature for any other building, structure or use, except as may be specifically permitted by this appendix. 
Sec. 3-5. - Existing buildings, structures and uses. 
    Buildings, structures and uses lawfully existing at the effective date of this appendix or subsequent amendment thereto may be continued subject to the provisions of article VI of this appendix pertaining to nonconforming uses and features. 
Sec. 3-6. - Lots recorded prior to adoption of appendix. 
    Any lot of record which was lawfully established prior to the effective date of this appendix or subsequent amendment thereto, and which lot does not conform with the requirements for minimum area or width applicable in the district in which it is situated, may be devoted to single-family dwelling use if such use is normally permitted in the district, provided that all other applicable provisions of this appendix and applicable provisions of other laws and health regulations are met. 
Sec. 3-7. - Compliance with approved applications and plans. 
    Zoning permits, certificates of zoning compliance, site plans, special use permits and other approvals required by this appendix are granted on the basis of specific applications or plans and shall authorize only the construction, arrangement or use set forth by such approved applications or plans. Any construction, arrangement or use not in compliance with that which is specifically authorized by approved applications or plans shall be considered a violation of this appendix. 
Sec. 3-8. - Permits issued prior to adoption of appendix. 
    Nothing contained in this appendix shall be construed to require any change in the plans, construction or intended use of any building or structure for which a permit was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this appendix or subsequent amendment thereto, provided that the authorized construction is commenced or use is established prior to the expiration of such permit as specified by the provisions of this appendix or other applicable laws. In any case where a permit expires or ceases to be valid, or where construction is abandoned for a period of 12 consecutive months or greater, further construction and use shall conform with the applicable provisions of this appendix. 
Sec. 3-9. - Fees. 
    The town council may establish by general rule fees to cover the cost of making inspections, issuing permits, advertising of notices and other expenses incident to the administration of this appendix or to the filing or processing of appeals or amendments. All applications for rezonings, permits, reviews, approvals or other actions for which fees are specified by such general rule shall be accompanied by the required application fee. A schedule of such fees shall be made available in the office of the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 3-10. - Severability. 
    Should any article, section, subsection, paragraph, phrase, definition or other provision or part of this appendix, including the zoning map, be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of this appendix as a whole or any part thereof other than the part declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - R-LD RESIDENTIAL LOW DENSITY DISTRICT 

Sec. 4-1. - Intent of district. 
    Pursuant to the general purposes of this appendix, the intent of the R-LD residential low density district is to provide appropriate areas for low density single-family residential development and promote a suitable residential environment with necessary community facilities and public services. The district is intended to preserve the predominant character of established neighborhoods with relatively large lots and to afford protection from encroachment by potentially incompatible nonresidential and higher density residential uses. It is also intended for application in areas that are not yet fully developed, where agricultural activities, forest lands or open areas remain and where public utilities are not yet provided or may not be provided in the future. 
Sec. 4-2. - Permitted uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures permitted by right. The following uses and structures are permitted by right in the R-LD residential low density district, subject to all other applicable requirements of this appendix: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Agricultural and forestry uses and stands for seasonal retail sale of agricultural products produced on the site. 
(3)  Raising and keeping of livestock, including private stables, on lots of not less than two acres in area, provided that not more than one animal per acre shall be kept on lots of less than five acres, and no pen or structure for the keeping of livestock, other than grazing areas, shall be located within 100 feet of any side or rear lot line. 
(4)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(5)  Parks, playgrounds, other recreational facilities and community centers, when such uses are owned and operated by a governmental agency, civic association or other not-for-profit organization and are not operated for commercial purposes. 
(6)  Public schools and private schools having substantially the same curriculum as public schools. 
(7)  Minor public utilities. 
(8)  Adult day care homes. 
(9)  Group homes. 
(10)  Home occupations for other than personal service businesses. 
(11)  Signs as permitted in article V of this appendix. 
(12)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and structures are permitted in the R-LD residential low density district, subject to approval of a special use permit by the town council as set forth in article VII of this appendix: 
(1)  Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(2)  Cemeteries. 
(3)  Fire stations and rescue squad facilities. 
(4)  Golf courses and country clubs, including accessory facilities for the sale and serving of food and beverages and the sale of golfing equipment and supplies. 
(5)  Major public utilities. 
(6)  Antennas and any related unmanned equipment buildings for mobile and land based wireless transmission and subject to the provisions set forth in article V, division 9, section 5-65(a). 
(7)  Home occupations for personal service businesses. 
(8)  Family day care homes. 
(Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998; Ord. No. 769, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 892, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 4-3. - Lot area and lot width requirements. 
    The following lot area and lot width requirements shall be applicable to uses other than parks, playgrounds and public utilities in the R-LD residential low density district (see article V for supplementary regulations): 
(a)  Lots served by public sewer and public water systems shall be not less than 12,000 square feet in area and 75 feet in width. 
(b)  Lots served by either public sewer or public water systems shall be not less than 20,000 square feet in area and 100 feet in width. 
(c)  Lots served by private water and sewage disposal systems shall be not less than 30,000 square feet in area and 120 feet in width. 
Sec. 4-4. - Yard requirements. 
    The following yard requirements shall apply in the R-LD residential low density district (see article V for supplementary yard regulations): 
(a)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 30 feet. 
(b)  Side yard. Side yards of not less than 15 feet shall be provided. 
(c)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
Sec. 4-5. - Height limit. 
    No building or structure in the R-LD residential low density district shall exceed a height of 35 feet. (See article V for supplementary height regulations.) 
DIVISION 2. - R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 4-6. - Intent of district. 
    Pursuant to the general purposes of this appendix, the intent of the R-1 residential district is to provide appropriate areas for moderate density single-family residential development and promote a suitable residential environment with necessary community facilities and public services. The district is also intended to preserve the predominant character of established neighborhoods and protect single-family residential areas from encroachment by potentially incompatible nonresidential uses and higher density residential uses. 
Sec. 4-7. - Permitted uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures permitted by right. The following uses and structures are permitted by right in the R-1 residential district, subject to all other applicable requirements of this appendix: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(3)  Parks, playgrounds, other recreational facilities and community centers, when such uses are owned and operated by a governmental agency, civic association or other not-for-profit organization and are not operated for commercial purposes. 
(4)  Public schools and private schools having substantially the same curriculum as public schools. 
(5)  Minor public utilities. 
(6)  Adult day care homes. 
(7)  Group homes. 
(8)  Home occupations for other than personal service businesses. 
(9)  Signs as permitted in article V of this appendix. 
(10)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and structures are permitted in the R-1 residential district, subject to approval of a special use permit by the town council as set forth in article VII of this appendix: 
(1)  Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(2)  Cemeteries. 
(3)  Fire stations and rescue squad facilities. 
(4)  Major public utilities. 
(5)  Antennas and related unmanned equipment buildings for mobile and land based wireless transmission and subject to the provisions set forth in article V, division 9, section 5-65(a). 
(6)  Home occupations for personal service businesses. 
(7)  Family day care homes. 
(Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998; Ord. No. 769, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 892, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 4-8. - Lot area and lot width requirements. 
    The following lot area and lot width requirements shall be applicable to uses other than parks, playgrounds and public utilities in the R-1 residential district (see article V for supplementary regulations): 
(a)  Lots served by public sewer and public water systems shall be not less than 8,000 square feet in area and 65 feet in width. 
(b)  Any lot which is not served by both public sewer and public water systems and for which private systems are permitted shall be subject to the lot area and lot width requirements applicable in the R-LD district. 
Sec. 4-9. - Yard requirements. 
    The following yard requirements shall apply in the R-1 residential district (see article V for supplementary yard regulations, including zero lot line option): 
(a)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(b)  Side yard. Side yards of not less than 6.5 feet shall be provided. 
(c)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
Sec. 4-10. - Height limit. 
(a)  Generally. No building or structure in the R-1 residential district shall exceed a height of 35 feet. (See article V for supplementary height regulations.) 
(b)  Accessory buildings. No accessory building shall exceed the height of the main building on the lot, nor shall any accessory building located within 25 feet of a property line exceed 15 feet in height. 
DIVISION 3. - R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 4-11. - Intent of district. 
    Pursuant to the general purposes of this appendix, the intent of the R-2 residential district is to provide appropriate areas for moderate density residential development and promote a suitable residential environment with necessary community facilities and public services. Although the primary intended use is single-family detached, the district also provides for flexibility in housing types by permitting two-family dwellings and townhouses at densities compatible with single-family detached. The district is also intended to preserve the predominant character of established neighborhoods and protect them from encroachment by potentially incompatible nonresidential uses and higher density residential uses. 
Sec. 4-12. - Permitted uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures permitted by right. The following uses and structures are permitted by right in the R-2 residential district, subject to all other applicable requirements of this appendix: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(4)  Parks, playgrounds, other recreational facilities and community centers, when such uses are owned and operated by a governmental agency, civic association or other not-for-profit organization and are not operated for commercial purposes. 
(5)  Public schools and private schools having substantially the same curriculum as public schools. 
(6)  Minor public utilities. 
(7)  Adult day care homes. 
(8)  Group homes. 
(9)  Home occupations for other than personal service businesses. 
(10)  Signs as permitted in article V of this appendix. 
(11)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and structures are permitted in the R-2 residential district, subject to approval of a special use permit by the town council as set forth in article VII of this appendix: 
(1)  Townhouses, subject to development standards specified in article V. 
(2)  Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(3)  Fire stations and rescue squad facilities. 
(4)  Major public utilities. 
(5)  Antennas and any related unmanned buildings for mobile and land based wireless transmission and subject to the provisions set forth in article V, division 9, section 5-65(a). 
(6)  Home occupations for personal service businesses. 
(7)  Family day care homes. 
(Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998; Ord. No. 769, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 892, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 4-13. - Lot area, lot width and density requirements. 
    The following lot area, lot width and density requirements shall be applicable to uses other than parks, playgrounds and public utilities in the R-2 residential district (see article V for supplementary regulations): 
(a)  Lots shall be not less than 6,000 square feet in area and 50 feet in width, except as provided in paragraphs [subsections] (b), (c) and (d) of this section. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings shall be located on lots of not less than 12,000 square feet in area and 75 in width. 
(c)  Minimum lot size and maximum density for townhouses shall be as specified in article V of this appendix. 
(d)  Any lot which is not served by both public sewer and public water systems and for which private systems are permitted shall be subject to the lot area and lot width requirements applicable in the R-LD District. 
(Ord. No. 776, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 4-14. - Yard requirements. 
    The following yard requirements shall apply in the R-2 residential district (see article V for supplementary yard regulations, zero lot line option and yards for townhouses): 
(a)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(b)  Side yard. Side yards of not less than five feet shall be provided. 
(c)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
Sec. 4-15. - Height limit. 
(a)  Generally. No building or structure in the R-2 residential district shall exceed a height of 35 feet. (See article V for supplementary height regulations.) 
(b)  Accessory buildings. No accessory building shall exceed the height of the main building on the lot, nor shall any accessory building located within 25 feet of a property line exceed 15 feet in height. 
DIVISION 4. - R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 4-16. - Intent of district. 
    Pursuant to the general purposes of this appendix, the intent of the R-3 residential district is to provide for a variety of housing types at medium to high density in a suitable residential environment protected from encroachment by incompatible nonresidential uses. The district is intended to be applied to areas having convenient access and adequate services and facilities for residents with minimal impact on minor streets and lower density neighborhoods. The lot size, density, open space, yard and other requirements of the district are intended to avoid congestion and overcrowding of land, promote a compatible mixture of housing types and avoid undue burden on public services. 
Sec. 4-17. - Permitted uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures permitted by right. The following uses and structures are permitted by right in the R-3 residential district, subject to all other applicable requirements of this appendix: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Townhouses, subject to development standards specified in article V. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Roominghouses and boardinghouses. 
(6)  Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(7)  Tourist homes. 
(8)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(9)  Parks, playgrounds, other recreational facilities and community centers, when such uses are owned and operated by a governmental agency, civic association or other not-for-profit organization and are not operated for commercial purposes. 
(10)  Public schools and private schools having substantially the same curriculum as public schools. 
(11)  Minor public utilities. 
(12)  Child day care centers. 
(13)  Adult day care homes and adult day care centers. 
(14)  Group homes. 
(15)  Home occupations for other than personal service businesses. 
(16)  Signs as permitted in article V of this appendix. 
(17)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and structures are permitted in the R-3 residential district, subject to approval of a special use permit by the town council as set forth in article VII of this appendix: 
(1)  Manufactured home parks, subject to the development standards in article V of this appendix. 
(2)  Fire stations and rescue squad facilities. 
(3)  Major public utilities. 
(4)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(5)  Antennas and any related unmanned buildings for mobile and land based wireless transmission and subject to the provisions set forth in article V, division 9, section 5-65(a). 
(6)  Home occupations for personal service businesses. 
(7)  Family day care homes. 
(Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998; Ord. No. 692, 6-16-1998; Ord. No. 769, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 777, 12-17-2002; Ord. No. 892, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 4-18. - Lot area, lot width and density requirements. 
    The following lot area, lot width and density requirements shall be applicable to uses other than parks, playgrounds and public utilities in the R-3 residential district (see article V for supplementary regulations): 
(a)  Lots shall be not less than 6,000 square feet in area and 50 feet in width, except as provided in paragraphs [subsections] (b) through (e) of this section. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings shall be located on lots of not less than 12,000 square feet in area and 75 feet in width. Child day care centers, adult day care centers, roominghouses, boardinghouses and tourist homes shall be located on lots of not less than 10,000 square feet in area and 50 in width. 
(c)  Minimum lot size and maximum density for townhouses shall be as specified in article V of this appendix. 
(d)  Multifamily dwellings shall be located on lots of not less than 12,000 square feet in area and 100 feet in width and shall be served by public sewer and public water systems. Maximum density shall not exceed 24 dwelling units per acre. 
(e)  Any lot which is not served by both public sewer and public water systems and for which private systems are permitted shall be subject to the lot area and lot width requirements applicable in the R-LD district. 
(Ord. No. 776, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 4-19. - Yard requirements. 
    The following yard requirements shall apply in the R-3 residential district (see article V for supplementary yard regulations, zero lot line option and yards for townhouses): 
(a)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(b)  Side yards. 
(1)  Side yards of not less than five feet shall be provided for uses other than townhouses and multifamily dwellings. 
(2)  Side yards of not less than 25 feet shall be provided for multifamily dwellings. 
(c)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(d)  Yards between buildings on the same lot. Where two or more buildings devoted to dwelling use are located on the same lot, yards shall be provided between such buildings as follows: 
(1)  A yard of not less than 60 feet shall be provided where building walls facing one another both contain windows. 
(2)  A yard of not less than 40 feet shall be provided where only one of two building walls facing one another contains windows. 
(3)  A yard of not less than 30 feet shall be provided where building walls facing one another contain no windows, or where corners of buildings are located at 90-degree angles to one another and no building wall faces directly opposite another building wall. 
Sec. 4-20. - Height limit. 
(a)  Generally. No building or structure in the R-3 residential district shall exceed a height of 45 feet. (See article V for supplementary height regulations.) 
(b)  Accessory buildings. No accessory building shall exceed the height of the main building on the lot, nor shall any accessory building located within 25 feet of a property line exceed 15 feet in height. 
Sec. 4-21. - Lot coverage. 
    Lot coverage by all buildings shall not exceed 35 percent. 
DIVISION 5. - R-B RESIDENTIAL-BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 4-22. - Intent of district. 
    Pursuant to the general purposes of this appendix, the intent of the R-B residential-business district is to accommodate a limited range of offices and similar uses that are compatible with moderate density residential in order to provide for mixed use and other alternatives for conversion of dwellings or for new construction in areas that are undergoing change and are no longer viable as exclusively residential in character. The district is also intended as a means to ease the transition between residential and commercial areas by providing for a mix of uses and development standards that are compatible with nearby residential areas. 
Sec. 4-23. - Permitted uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures permitted by right. The following uses and structures are permitted by right in the R-B residential-business district, subject to all other applicable requirements of this appendix: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Offices. 
(4)  Medical and dental clinics and laboratories. 
(5)  Banks and other financial services. 
(6)  Photography and other artists' studios, including incidental retail sales. 
(7)  Barber and beauty shops, including incidental retail sales of related products. 
(8)  Music and dance instruction. 
(9)  Business schools. 
(10)  Libraries and museums. 
(11)  Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(12)  Tourist homes. 
(13)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(14)  Parks, playgrounds, other recreational facilities and community centers, when such uses are owned and operated by a governmental agency, civic association or other not-for-profit organization and are not operated for commercial purposes. 
(15)  Public schools and private schools having substantially the same curriculum as public schools. 
(16)  Minor public utilities. 
(17)  Child day care centers. 
(18)  Adult day care homes and adult day care centers. 
(19)  Group homes. 
(20)  Home occupations. 
(21)  Signs as permitted in article V of this appendix. 
(22)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and structures are permitted in the R-B residential-business district, subject to approval of a special use permit by the town council as set forth in article VII of this appendix: 
(1)  Townhouses, subject to development standards specified in article V. 
(2)  Assisted care facilities. 
(3)  Funeral homes. 
(4)  Fire stations and rescue squad facilities. 
(5)  Major public utilities. 
(6)  Outdoor display of monuments. 
(7)  Antennas and any related unmanned buildings for mobile and land based wireless transmission and subject to the provisions set forth in article V, division 9, subsection 5-65(a). 
(8)  Personal service business. 
(9)  Two-family dwellings that do not meet the lot area and lot width requirements of section 4-25 of this division. 
(10)  Family day care homes. 
(Ord. No. 655, § 4-23, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998; Ord. No. 857, 10-2-2007; Ord. No. 870, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 892, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 4-24. - Mixed use provision. 
    Nondwelling uses permitted by right in this district may be located in the same building as a permitted dwelling use, provided that applicable building code and fire safety requirements are met and lot area requirements for the dwelling use are met. Areas used for parking and related access aisles and driveways for nondwelling uses shall not be included in calculating required lot area for any dwelling use. 
Sec. 4-25. - Lot area and lot width requirements. 
    The following lot area and lot width requirements shall be applicable to uses other than parks, playgrounds and public utilities in the R-B residential-business district (see article V for supplementary regulations): 
(a)  Lots shall be not less than 6,000 square feet in area and 50 feet in width, except as provided in paragraphs [subsections] (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings shall be located on lots of not less than 12,000 square feet and 75 feet in width, except as provided in subsection 4-23(b) of this division. 
(c)  Any lot which is not served by both public sewer and public water systems and for which private systems are permitted shall be subject to the lot area and lot width requirements applicable in the R-LD district. 
(Ord. No. 776, 12-17-2002; Ord. No. 870, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 4-26. - Yard requirements. 
    The following yard requirements shall apply in the R-B residential-business district (see article V for supplementary yard regulations): 
(a)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet. 
(b)  Side yard. Side yards of not less than five feet shall be provided, except that a side yard of not less than 25 feet shall be provided for a main building devoted to a nondwelling use where a side lot line abuts property in an R-1 or R-2 district. 
(c)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet. 
Sec. 4-27. - Height limit. 
(a)  Generally. No building or structure in the R-B residential-business district shall exceed a height of 35 feet. (See article V for supplementary height regulations.) 
(b)  Accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall exceed the height of the main building on the lot, nor shall any accessory building located within 25 feet of a property line exceed 15 feet in height. 
DIVISION 6. - GB GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, § 86-246 et seq. 

Sec. 4-28. - Intent of district. 
    Pursuant to the general purposes of this appendix, the intent of the GB general business district is to accommodate a wide range of retail and service uses which serve the community as a whole or cater to the traveling public. The district is intended to be applied along primary traffic routes and to areas having direct access to such routes, in order to provide safe and efficient access while avoiding the routing of traffic onto minor streets or through residential areas. The district regulations are designed to afford flexibility in permitted uses of individual sites in order to promote business opportunities, economic development and the provision of services. The district regulations are also designed to provide for harmonious development and compatibility with adjacent residential areas. 
Sec. 4-29. - Permitted uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures permitted by right. The following uses and structures are permitted by right in the GB general business district, subject to all other applicable requirements of this appendix: 
(1)  Adult day care centers. 
(2)  Artists' studios, art galleries, art supply shops and custom frame shops. 
(3)  Auto and truck sales and service establishments, provided the following conditions shall be met. 
a.  No service or repair of vehicles or storage of inoperable vehicles shall be conducted outside a completely enclosed building; 
b.  Any such use located within 100 feet of a residential or R-B district shall be provided with screening as set forth in article V of this appendix; 
c.  All areas for parking or display of vehicles shall be paved; 
d.  Outdoor activities related to the use shall not be conducted within five feet of any side or rear property line, and all areas devoted to the parking, circulation or display of vehicles shall be separated from public streets as provided in section 4-31 of this appendix; 
e.  The minimum lot area for such use shall be 10,000 square feet, and the minimum lot width shall be 100 feet; 
f.  Outdoor lighting, if provided, shall be permanently affixed; 
g.  A permanent structure or structures meeting the requirements of the Uniform Statewide Building Code shall be provided for such use; 
h.  No newly constructed building shall be situated so that motor vehicle entrances to or exits from the building face a public street. 
(4)  Auto wash facilities. 
(5)  Bakeries where products are sold principally at retail on the premises. 
(6)  Banks and other financial services. 
(7)  Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(8)  Building supplies and materials sales and mechanical, electrical, plumbing and heating supplies sales, provided that all storage is conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(9)  Business schools. 
(10)  Child day care centers. 
(11)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(12)  Contractors' offices, shops and display rooms, but not including warehouse facilities or outside storage or display. 
(13)  Dwelling units contained within the same building as nondwelling uses permitted in this district, provided that such dwelling units shall be located above the first floor of the building or to the rear of other permitted uses, and the amount of floor area devoted to dwelling units shall not exceed two times the floor area devoted to other permitted uses. 
(14)  Farmers' markets and outdoor sales of crafts, foods or seasonal items. 
(15)  Fire stations and rescue squad facilities. 
(16)  Funeral homes. 
(17)  Garden centers. 
(18)  Gasoline service stations, self-service gasoline stations and auto service centers. 
(19)  Hospitals. 
(20)  Hotels and motels. 
(21)  Laundromats, laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations and household linen and diaper services. 
(22)  Libraries and museums. 
(23)  Medical and dental clinics and laboratories. 
(24)  Minor public utilities. 
(25)  Nursing homes. 
(26)  Office supply, office and business support services, photocopy, blueprint and custom printing establishments. 
(27)  Offices. 
(28)  Parking areas, parking lots and parking garages as a principal or accessory use of property. This shall not include the parking or storage of recreational vehicles, watercraft, utility trailers, or recreational equipment trailers. 
(29)  Parks, playgrounds, other recreational facilities and community centers owned and operated by a governmental agency, civic association or other not-for-profit organization. 
(30)  Personal service businesses. 
(31)  Pet shops, pet grooming shops, veterinary clinics and animal hospitals, provided that all facilities shall be located within completely enclosed and air conditioned buildings which are soundproof to the extent that sounds produced by animals kept or treated therein are not audible outside the building. 
(32)  Post offices and package mailing services, but not including package distribution centers. 
(33)  Public schools and private schools having substantially the same curriculum as public schools. 
(34)  Recreation and entertainment uses, including theaters, auditoriums, club and lodge meeting facilities and assembly halls, when such uses are located within completely enclosed buildings. 
(35)  Restaurants, cafes, delicatessens, tearooms, coffee houses, ice cream parlors, refreshment stands, catering businesses and similar food and beverage service establishments. Seating areas outside of enclosed buildings and intended for service to or consumption of food or beverages by patrons may be provided, but not within any public right-of-way, and provided that: 
a.  No deck, patio, terrace or other outside area for the service or accommodation of patrons shall be situated within 100 feet of any property in any residential or R-B district; 
b.  Covered trash containers shall be provided in service areas, and fences, walls or vegetative screening shall be provided around service areas, except at entrances and exits, to prevent refuse from blowing onto adjacent properties or streets; 
c.  No music or public address system shall be operated in a manner that sound produced is audible beyond the boundaries of the premises. 
(36)  Retail stores and shops. 
(37)  Service businesses which rent, service or repair audio or video equipment, home appliances, furniture, personal recreational equipment, home yard and garden equipment, tools, bicycles, locks, computers, office machines and similar household or business items, provided that no products shall be stored or displayed outside a completely enclosed building. 
(38)  Shopping centers containing uses permitted in this district. 
(39)  Signs as permitted in article V of this appendix. 
(40)  Tourist homes. 
(41)  Wholesale merchandising brokers, but not including wholesale storage or warehouses. 
(42)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(43)  Commercial indoor sports and recreation uses, including bingo halls, bowling alleys, ice and roller skating rinks, off-track betting centers, racquetball, swimming, and/or tennis facilities, when such uses are located within completely enclosed buildings. 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and structures are permitted in the GB general business district, subject to approval of a special use permit by the town council as set forth in article VII of this appendix: 
(1)  Commercial indoor amusement uses, including game rooms, billiard and pool halls, and video arcades. Establishments which provide multiple coin operated amusement or entertainment devices or machines, which would include pinball machines, video games, and other games of skill or scoring, and would include pool and/or billiard tables, whether or not they are coin operated. 
(2)  Auto and truck general repair, including the installation and removal of engines, transmissions or other major body or mechanical parts, auto upholstery shops, and auto, truck or trailer rental, but not including body repair or painting. 
(3)  Flea markets. 
(4)  Greenhouses. 
(5)  Major public utilities. 
(6)  Miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges, batting cages and similar outdoor recreation uses. 
(7)  Miniwarehouses and warehouses. 
(8)  Sports complexes. 
(9)  Antennas and any related unmanned buildings for mobile and land based wireless transmission and subject to the provisions set forth in article V, division 9, section 5-65(a). 
(10)  Towers and/or monopoles, with a related unmanned equipment building and subject to the provisions set forth in article V, division 9, section 5-65(b). 
(11)  Counseling services. 
(12)  Halfway house. 
(13)  Outpatient mental health centers. 
(14)  Outpatient substance abuse centers. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 4-29, 9-16-1997; Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998; Ord. No. 793, 11-4-2003; Ord. No. 863, 11-6-2007) 
Sec. 4-30. - Lot area and width requirements. 
    There shall be no minimum lot area or lot width requirements, except as specified in section 4-29 for certain uses, provided that minimum lot area for any use not served by public sewer and public water systems shall be as determined by the health official. 
Sec. 4-31. - Yard requirements. 
    The following yard requirements shall apply in the GB general business district (see article V for supplementary yard, transitional yard and screening requirements): 
(a)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 20 feet, provided that areas devoted to the parking or circulation of vehicles shall be separated from public streets by yards of not less than ten feet in depth which shall be graded and landscaped with grass, other vegetative ground cover, shrubs, trees or other plant materials in a manner that will prevent erosion, accumulation or spread of dust and collection of surface water or drainage thereof onto adjacent areas. 
(b)  Side yards. No side yards shall be required, provided that where a side lot line abuts or is situated across an alley from property located in a residential or R-B district, transitional yard and screening requirements as specified in article V of this appendix shall be met. 
(c)  Rear yard. No rear yard shall be required, provided that where a rear lot line abuts or is situated across an alley from property located in a residential or R-B district, transitional yard and screening requirements as specified in article V of this appendix shall be met. 
Sec. 4-32. - Height limit. 
    No building or structure in the GB general business district shall exceed a height of 60 feet, provided that no building or structure situated within 100 feet of property located in a residential or R-B district shall exceed a height of 35 feet. (See article V for supplementary height regulations.) 
DIVISION 7. - CB CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, § 86-246 et seq. 

Sec. 4-33. - Intent of district. 
    Pursuant to the general purposes of this appendix, the intent of the CB central business district is to provide for the day-to-day and specialty shopping and service needs of the community. It is intended to be a compact, densely developed and well-defined area having a strong pedestrian orientation and urban shopping area character that is compatible with adjacent residential neighborhoods. The permitted uses and regulations of the district are intended to promote an attractive pedestrian environment with retail, personal service and office establishments at street level and with minimal disruption from vehicle oriented land uses and features that would detract from a safe, convenient and economically viable pedestrian environment. The district is intended to promote continuity of a storefront character with minimum interruption by driveways and vehicle traffic across public sidewalk areas. The district regulations are also intended to preserve the predominant scale of the central business area, promote retention and appropriate use of existing structures and encourage that new development be compatible with the area. 
Sec. 4-34. - Permitted uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures permitted by right. The following uses and structures are permitted by right in the CB central business district, subject to all other applicable requirements of this appendix: 
(1)  Artists' studios, art galleries, art supply shops and custom frame shops. 
(2)  Bakeries where products are sold principally at retail on the premises. 
(3)  Banks and other financial services. 
(4)  Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(5)  Business schools. 
(6)  Child day care centers and adult day care centers. 
(7)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(8)  Dwelling units contained within the same building as nondwelling uses permitted in this district, provided that such dwelling units shall be located above the first floor of the building or to the rear of other permitted uses, and the amount of floor area devoted to dwelling units shall not exceed two times the floor area devoted to other permitted uses. 
(9)  Farmers' markets and outdoor sales of crafts, foods or seasonal items. 
(10)  Fire stations and rescue squad facilities. 
(11)  Floral shops, including the assembling of live or dried floral arrangements and related storage of materials and finished products and wholesale or retail sales and distribution of such products. 
(12)  Hotels and motels. 
(13)  Laundromats, laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations and household linen and diaper services. 
(14)  Libraries and museums. 
(15)  Medical and dental clinics and laboratories. 
(16)  Minor public utilities. 
(17)  Office supply, office and business support services, photocopy, blueprint and custom printing establishments. 
(18)  Offices. 
(19)  Parking areas, parking lots and parking garages as a principal or accessory use of property. This shall not include the parking or storage of recreational vehicles, watercraft, utility trailers, or recreational equipment trailers. 
(20)  Parks, playgrounds, other recreational facilities and community centers owned and operated by a governmental agency, civic association or other not-for-profit organization. 
(21)  Personal service businesses. 
(22)  Pet shops, pet grooming shops, veterinary clinics and animal hospitals, provided that all facilities shall be located within completely enclosed and air conditioned buildings which are soundproof to the extent that sounds produced by animals kept or treated therein are not audible outside the building. 
(23)  Post offices and package mailing services, but not including package distribution centers. 
(24)  Recreation and entertainment uses, including theaters, auditoriums, club and lodge meeting facilities and assembly halls, when such uses are located within completely enclosed buildings. 
(25)  Restaurants, cafes, delicatessens, tearooms, coffee houses, ice cream parlors, refreshment stands, catering businesses and similar food and beverage service establishments, but not including establishments with drive-up window facilities or establishments where food or beverages are intended to be consumed in vehicles on the premises. Seating areas outside of enclosed buildings and intended for service to or consumption of food or beverages by patrons may be provided, but not within any public right-of-way, and provided that: 
a.  No deck, patio, terrace or other outside area for the service or accommodation of patrons shall be situated within 100 feet of any property in any residential or R-B district; 
b.  Covered trash containers shall be provided in service areas, and fences, walls or vegetative screening shall be provided around service areas, except at entrances and exits, to prevent refuse from blowing onto adjacent properties or streets; 
c.  No music or public address system shall be operated in a manner that sound produced is audible beyond the boundaries of the premises. 
(26)  Retail stores and shops. 
(27)  Service businesses which rent, service or repair audio or video equipment, home appliances, furniture, personal recreational equipment, home yard and garden equipment, tools, bicycles, locks, computers, office machines and similar household or business items, provided that no products shall be stored or displayed outside a completely enclosed building. 
(28)  Signs as permitted in article V of this appendix. 
(29)  Tourist homes. 
(30)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and structures are permitted in the CB central business district, subject to approval of a special use permit by the town council as set forth in article VII of this appendix: 
(1)  Amusement centers, bowling alleys, skating rinks and dance halls. 
(2)  Auto and truck sales and service establishments, provided the following conditions shall be met: 
a.  No service or repair of vehicles or storage of inoperable vehicles shall be conducted outside a completely enclosed building; 
b.  Any such use located within 100 feet of a residential or R-B district shall be provided with screening as set forth in article V of this appendix; 
c.  All areas for parking or display of vehicles shall be paved; 
d.  Outdoor activities related to the use shall not be conducted within five feet of any side or rear property line, and all areas devoted to the parking, circulation or display of vehicles shall be separated from public streets as provided in section 4-36 of this appendix; 
e.  The minimum lot area for such use shall be 10,000 square feet, and the minimum lot width shall be 100 feet; 
f.  Outdoor lighting, if provided, shall be permanently affixed; 
g.  A permanent structure or structures meeting the requirements of the Uniform Statewide Building Code shall be provided for such use; 
h.  No newly constructed building shall be situated so that motor vehicle entrances to or exits from the building face a public street. 
(3)  Drive-up facilities in conjunction with any use permitted in this district. 
(4)  Flea markets. 
(5)  Gasoline service stations, self-service gasoline stations and auto service centers. 
(6)  Major public utilities. 
(7)  Parking garages for parking by the general public as a principal or accessory use of property. 
(8)  Sports complexes. 
(9)  Not more than one dwelling unit contained within accessory buildings, provided the main building on the property contains no dwelling units. 
(10)  Antennas and any related unmanned buildings for mobile and land based wireless transmission and subject to the provisions set forth in article V, division 9, section 5-65(a). 
(Ord. No. 637, 2-6-1996; Ord. No. 639, 2-6-1996; Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998; Ord. No. 863, 11-6-2007) 
Sec. 4-35. - Lot area and width requirements. 
    There shall be no minimum lot area or lot width requirements, except as specified in section 4-34 for certain uses. 
Sec. 4-36. - Yard requirements. 
    The following yard requirements shall apply in the CB central business district (see article V for supplementary yard, transitional yard and screening requirements): 
(a)  Front yard. No front yard shall be required, provided that areas devoted to the parking or circulation of vehicles shall be separated from public streets by yards of not less than five feet in depth which shall be graded and landscaped with grass, other vegetative ground cover, shrubs, trees or other plant materials in a manner that will prevent erosion, accumulation or spread of dust and collection of surface water or drainage thereof onto adjacent areas. 
(b)  Side yards. No side yards shall be required, provided that where a side lot line abuts or is situated across an alley from property located in a residential or R-B district, transitional yard and screening requirements as specified in article V of this appendix shall be met. 
(c)  Rear yard. No rear yard shall be required, provided that where a rear lot line abuts or is situated across an alley from property located in a residential or R-B district, transitional yard and screening requirements as specified in article V of this appendix shall be met. 
Sec. 4-37. - Requirements for areas devoted to vehicle parking or circulation. 
(a)  Location of parking and circulation areas. Areas devoted to the parking or circulation of vehicles shall not be located between the main building on a lot and the street line, nor shall such areas be located closer to the street than the main building on the lot. On a lot having more than one street frontage, the provisions of this paragraph shall apply only along the principal street frontage of the lot as defined in article X of this appendix. 
(b)  Driveways from streets. No driveway intersecting a street which constitutes the principal street frontage of a lot shall be permitted when other street frontage or alley access is available to serve such lot. For purposes of this provision, principal street frontage shall be as defined in article X of this appendix. 
(c)  Lighting. Parking areas and parking lots containing five or more spaces and available for use by the general public shall be provided with lighting during the nondaylight hours when such parking areas and parking lots are in use. Such lighting shall be designed and installed so as to concentrate illumination within the parking area or parking lot and to prevent glare on adjoining properties and streets. The level of illumination and means of providing such lighting shall be in accordance with policies established by the zoning administrator and applied in conjunction with the site plan review process. 
(d)  Other improvement requirements. In addition to the provisions of this section, areas devoted to the parking and circulation of vehicles shall be subject to the applicable general requirements for improvement of parking areas and parking lots as set forth in article V of this appendix. 
(e)  A variance from the provisions of this section may be permitted by the zoning administrator, when strict adherence to such provisions would result in substantial injustice or hardship. An appeal from the decision of the zoning administrator may be taken to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with section 9-7 of this appendix. 
(Ord. No. 793, 11-4-2003) 
Sec. 4-38. - Height limit. 
    No building or structure in the CB central business district shall exceed a height of 35 feet. (See article V for supplementary height regulations.) 
DIVISION 8. - M-1 LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, § 86-246 et seq. 

Sec. 4-39. - Intent of district. 
    Pursuant to the general purposes of this appendix, the intent of the M-1 limited industrial district is to provide appropriate locations for light industrial and manufacturing uses along with related service and support uses and compatible commercial activities. The uses permitted in the district typically involve minimal hazards, do not create significant amounts of smoke, noise, odor, dust or other nuisance, and are intended to provide employment opportunities and economic development potential. The district is intended to be located along or near primary traffic routes to facilitate access and avoid industrial traffic on minor roads and residential streets. The regulations in the M-1 district are designed to promote compatibility among uses within the district and with neighboring uses in other districts and to avoid adverse impacts on existing and future industrial development so as to maximize industrial development opportunities in the town. 
Sec. 4-40. - Permitted uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures permitted by right. The following uses and structures are permitted by right in the M-1 limited industrial district, subject to all other applicable requirements of this appendix: 
(1)  Any use or structure permitted by right in the GB general business district as set forth in section 4-29 (a) of this appendix, except that: 
a.  Dwelling use shall be permitted only for purposes of occupancy by a guard, caretaker or watchman employed in connection with the principal use of the premises; 
b.  Outdoor activities, such as storage, display or service which are specified as prohibited in the GB district, shall be permitted in the M-1 district, provided such activities are located and screened in accordance with the requirements of section 4-43. 
(2)  Auto and truck general repair, including the installation and removal of engines, transmissions or other major body or mechanical parts, auto upholstery shops, auto, truck or trailer rental, and body repair or painting. 
(3)  Boatbuilding. 
(4)  Bottling plants. 
(5)  Cabinet, furniture, woodworking and upholstery shops, when conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(6)  Coal[yards] and woodyards. 
(7)  Contractors' and construction equipment storage yards and rental of contractors' or construction equipment. 
(8)  Ice manufacturing and packaging. 
(9)  Laboratories and research and development facilities, when conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(10)  Machine shops, excluding punch presses exceeding forty-ton rated capacity and drop hammers, welding shops and blacksmith shops. 
(11)  Manufacturing, compounding, assembling, treatment or packaging of articles of merchandise from the following materials, when such materials are refined, prepared or initially processed elsewhere: Bone, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiberglass, fibers, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastic, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, rubber, shell, straw, textiles, tobacco, wood, yarn, and similar materials. 
(12)  Manufacturing, compounding, processing, treatment or packaging of bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, food products, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, soaps, toiletries and similar products. 
(13)  Manufacturing of pottery, figurines and other similar ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
(14)  Manufacturing or assembling of electronic equipment, instruments, devices, components and parts, electrical appliances, medical equipment, musical instruments, toys, novelties, small parts and similar products. 
(15)  Monument and stone works. 
(16)  Printing and publishing plants. 
(17)  Sales, rental, servicing and repair of boats, trailers, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, mobile homes, machinery and equipment, provided all servicing and repair is conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(18)  Sheet metal and metal fabrication shops. 
(19)  Signs as permitted in article V of this appendix. 
(20)  Warehouses, miniwarehouses, storage and distribution facilities. 
(21)  Wholesale businesses, including storage. 
(22)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(23)  Antennas and any related unmanned buildings for mobile and land based wireless transmission and subject to the provisions set forth in article V, division 9, section 5-65(a). 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and structures are permitted in the M-1 limited industrial district, subject to approval of a special use permit by the town council as set forth in article VII of this appendix: 
(1)  Any use or structure permitted by special use permit in the GB general business district as set forth in section 4-29 (b) of this appendix. 
(2)  Truck stops. 
(3)  Storage lots for the parking of motor vehicles which are being held in the custody of a law enforcement agency or financial institution, but not including automobile graveyards, and provided that individual vehicles shall not be stored for periods exceeding 90 days. 
(4)  Adult bookstores, adult video stores, adult drive-in theaters, adult entertainment establishments, adult minimotion picture theaters, adult model studios, adult motion picture arcades and adult motion picture theaters as defined in section 5-58 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 638, 2-6-1996; Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998; Ord. No. 936, 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-41. - Lot area and width requirements. 
    There shall be no minimum lot area or lot width requirements, except as may be specified for certain uses, provided that minimum lot area for any use not served by public sewer and public water systems shall be as determined by the health official. 
Sec. 4-42. - Yard requirements. 
    The following yard requirements shall apply in the M-1 limited industrial district (see article V for supplementary yard, transitional yard and screening requirements): 
(a)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet, provided that areas devoted to the parking or circulation of vehicles shall be separated from public streets by yards of not less than ten feet in depth which shall be graded and landscaped with grass, other vegetative ground cover, shrubs, trees or other plant materials in a manner that will prevent erosion, accumulation or spread of dust and collection of surface water or drainage thereof onto adjacent areas. 
(b)  Side yards. No side yards shall be required, provided that where a side lot line abuts or is situated across an alley from property located in a residential, R-B or Business district, transitional yard and screening requirements as specified in article V of this appendix shall be met. 
(c)  Rear yard. No rear yard shall be required, provided that where a rear lot line abuts or is situated across an alley from property located in a residential, R-B or Business district, transitional yard and screening requirements as specified in article V of this appendix shall be met. 
Sec. 4-43. - Location and screening of certain outdoor activities. 
    Areas devoted to outdoor storage of materials, supplies, equipment or outdoor servicing, truck loading and unloading, trash collection or similar activity shall not be located within any required front yard, and shall be screened from all adjacent streets and properties by buildings or by solid structural fences, walls or evergreen vegetative material not less than six feet in height. Structural screening shall consist of solid masonry walls, uniformly painted or stained wood fences or combinations thereof. Chainlink, wire mesh or similar fence material shall not be permitted for required screening purposes. 
Sec. 4-44. - Height limit. 
    No building or structure in the M-1 limited industrial district shall exceed a height of 60 feet, provided that no building or structure situated within 100 feet of property located in a residential or R-B district shall exceed a height of 35 feet. (See article V for supplementary height regulations.) 
DIVISION 9. - M-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, § 86-246 et seq. 

Sec. 4-45. - Intent of district. 
    Pursuant to the general purposes of this appendix, the intent of the M-2 general industrial district is to provide appropriate locations for general industrial and manufacturing uses which may result in greater amounts of smoke, noise, odor or dust than typically associated with uses permitted in the M-1 limited district. The M-2 district is intended to accommodate those uses which, although not generally appropriate in other districts or close to residential, business or limited industrial areas, provide desirable employment opportunities, enhance economic development potential, enlarge the tax base and provide needed services or products. The setback, yard, screening, special use permit and other requirements of the district are intended to promote compatibility of development and to provide protection for other uses and for the general public. 
Sec. 4-46. - Permitted uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures permitted by right. The following uses and structures are permitted by right in the M-2 general industrial district, subject to all other applicable requirements of this appendix: 
(1)  Any use or structure permitted by right in the M-1 limited industrial district as set forth in section 4-40(a) of this appendix. 
(2)  Asphalt mixing plants. 
(3)  Assembly of automobiles, other motor vehicles, machinery and similar large durable goods and products. 
(4)  Auto and truck sales and service establishments. 
(5)  Battery manufacturing. 
(6)  Boiler shops. 
(7)  Brick manufacturing. 
(8)  Concrete mixing plants. 
(9)  Cotton spinning mills. 
(10)  Dye manufacturing. 
(11)  Feed mills and feed manufacturing. 
(12)  Boarding kennel. 
(13)  Machine shops with punch presses or drop hammers exceeding forty-ton rated capacity. 
(14)  Major public utilities. 
(15)  Railroad yards, related facilities and freight and passenger terminals. 
(16)  Sawmills, planing mills and wood preserving operations. 
(17)  Signs as permitted in article V of this appendix. 
(18)  Steel fabricating. 
(19)  Tire recapping. 
(20)  Truck terminals. 
(21)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(b)  Special uses. The following uses and structures are permitted in the M-2 general industrial district, subject to approval of a special use permit by the town council as set forth in article VII of this appendix: 
(1)  Any use or structure permitted by special use permit in the M-1 limited industrial district as set forth in section 4-40(b) of this appendix. 
(2)  Junkyards and automobile graveyards. 
(3)  Manufacturing of acids, cement, lime, gypsum or fertilizer. 
(4)  Meat, poultry and fish processing and abattoirs. 
(5)  Paper and pulp manufacturing. 
(6)  Petroleum refining, including byproducts, and bulk storage of petroleum products for distribution. 
(7)  Sand and gravel and crushed stone operations. 
(Ord. No. 702, 2-2-1999) 
Sec. 4-47. - Lot area and width requirements. 
    There shall be no minimum lot area or lot width requirements, except that minimum lot area for any use not served by public sewer and public water systems shall be as determined by the health official. 
Sec. 4-48. - Yard requirements. 
    The following yard requirements shall apply in the M-2 general industrial district (see article V for supplementary yard, transitional yard and screening requirements): 
(a)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet, provided that areas devoted to the parking or circulation of vehicles shall be separated from public streets by yards of not less than ten feet in depth which shall be graded and landscaped with grass, other vegetative ground cover, shrubs, trees or other plant materials in a manner that will prevent erosion, accumulation or spread of dust and collection of surface water or drainage thereof onto adjacent areas. 
(b)  Side yards. No side yards shall be required, provided that where a side lot line abuts or is situated across an alley from property located in a residential, R-B or business district, transitional yard and screening requirements as specified in article V of this appendix shall be met. 
(c)  Rear yard. No rear yard shall be required, provided that where a rear lot line abuts or is situated across an alley from property located in a residential, R-B or business district, transitional yard and screening requirements as specified in article V of this appendix shall be met. 
Sec. 4-49. - Location and screening of certain outdoor activities. 
    Areas devoted to outdoor storage of materials, supplies, equipment or outdoor servicing, truck loading and unloading, trash collection or similar activity shall not be located within ten feet of any street line and shall be screened from all adjacent streets and from properties located in any district other than M-2 by buildings or by solid structural fences, walls or evergreen vegetative material not less than six feet in height. Structural screening shall consist of solid masonry walls, uniformly painted or stained wood fences or combinations thereof. Chainlink, wire mesh or similar fence material shall not be permitted for required screening purposes. 
Sec. 4-50. - Height limit. 
    No building or structure in the M-2 general industrial district shall exceed a height of 60 feet, provided that no building or structure situated within 100 feet of property located in a residential or R-B district shall exceed a height of 35 feet. (See article V for supplementary height regulations.) 
DIVISION 10. - PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 4-51. - Intent of district. 
    Pursuant to the general purposes of this appendix, the intent of the PD planned development district is to encourage and provide for the development of medium to large parcels of land for residential or limited mixed use communities in a planned and coordinated manner. The district is intended to provide greater flexibility than normal zoning classifications in order to encourage the most efficient and economical use of limited vacant land, to maximize opportunities to provide open space and preserve natural features of the land through clustering and other design concepts and to adapt development standards to the unique characteristics of individual sites. The district regulations are intended to promote imaginative and innovative design, a variety of housing types, convenience of services and provision of recreational and other amenities for residents. 
Sec. 4-52. - Permitted uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures permitted by right. The following uses and structures are permitted by right in the PD planned development district, subject to all other applicable requirements of this appendix: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Townhouses. 
(4)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(5)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(6)  Parks, playgrounds, other recreational facilities and community centers, when such uses are owned and operated by a governmental agency, civic association or other not-for-profit organization and are not operated for commercial purposes. 
(7)  Public schools and private schools having substantially the same curriculum as public schools. 
(8)  Minor and major public utilities. 
(9)  Family day homes and child day care centers. 
(10)  Adult day care homes and adult day care centers. 
(11)  Group homes. 
(12)  Home occupations. 
(13)  Commercial uses, which shall be limited to the following: 
a.  Offices, banks, other financial services and medical and dental clinics; 
b.  Personal service businesses; 
c.  Retail stores and shops; 
d.  Laundromats and laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations; 
e.  Restaurants, cafes, delicatessens, tearooms, coffee houses, retail bakeries and ice cream parlors, but not including establishments with drive-up window facilities or establishments where food or beverages are intended to be consumed in vehicles on the premises; 
f.  Gasoline service stations and self-service gasoline stations. 
(14)  Signs as permitted in article V of this appendix. 
(15)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(b)  Use limitations. Commercial uses permitted in the PD planned development district shall be subject to the following limitations in addition to other applicable requirements: 
(1)  Not more than 15 percent of the gross area of a PD district shall be devoted to sites for commercial uses and their accessory uses and structures. 
(2)  No individual commercial use shall contain more than 5,000 square feet of floor area. 
(3)  No zoning permit for any commercial use shall be issued until certificates of use and occupancy have been issued for at least 25 percent of the dwelling units proposed in the PD district. 
Sec. 4-53. - District size. 
    Each PD district shall contain not less than ten acres of contiguous land area. Existing public streets shall not be included in calculating land area. 
Sec. 4-54. - General development standards. 
(a)  Density. The density of a PD district shall not exceed ten dwelling units per gross acre. For purposes of calculating density, areas devoted to sites for commercial uses shall not be included. 
(b)  Common open space requirements. Not less than 20 percent of the gross area of each PD district shall be devoted to common open space meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  Common open space shall consist of areas owned by a homeowners' association and devoted to active or passive recreation or leisure time use or to the privacy or visual enjoyment of residents of the development, and may include buffers, floodplains, steep slopes and other natural areas to be preserved. Common open space may include land improved or developed for recreation use, including swimming pools, game courts, playgrounds, recreation centers and similar facilities, but shall not include streets, parking areas, private yard areas or sites reserved for future development of a nature that would not qualify as common open space. 
(2)  Common open space shall have horizontal dimensions of not less than 50 feet, except areas devoted to pedestrian trails, bikeways or leisure trails shall not be less than ten feet in horizontal dimensions. 
(3)  Common open space shall be arranged, together with streets and walkways, to provide a continuous and interconnected system which is accessible from all dwelling units within the development without having to cross privately owned property. 
(c)  Yards and setbacks. Minimum yards, setbacks and spaces between buildings shall be as required in the R-3 residential district, unless different minimum requirements are specifically authorized in the approved master plan for the PD district. 
(d)  Perimeter buffer. A buffer area of not less than 50 feet in width shall be provided around the perimeter of the PD district, except adjacent to public streets providing access to the district. Such buffer area shall be left in a natural state or shall be supplemented with landscaping materials and/or structural fences or walls. No building, structure, road, parking area or improvement for active recreation use shall be located in any required buffer. 
(e)  Height limits. No building or structure in a PD district shall exceed a height of 45 feet, provided that no accessory building located within 25 feet of a property line shall exceed a height of 15 feet. (See article V for supplementary height regulations.) 
(f)  Public sewer and water. The PD district shall be served by public sewer and public water systems. 
(g)  Underground utilities. All utility lines within a PD district shall be placed underground. 
(h)  Streets. Except as may be specifically approved by the town council in conjunction with the PD district master plan, streets within a PD district shall be public and shall be constructed in accordance with applicable standards of the town and the Virginia Department of Transportation. Private internal streets within a PD district which provide access to sites within the district and do not provide for through traffic by the general public may be permitted by the council in accordance with design and construction standards specified in the PD district master plan. 
(i)  Preservation and maintenance of common areas. Provisions shall be made by the developer to ensure preservation and maintenance of required common open space and other common areas and facilities. Ownership of common areas and facilities shall be vested in a homeowners' association comprised of all owners of property within the development. Appropriate covenants and restrictions providing for preservation and maintenance of such areas and facilities shall be described in general and approved as to form by the town attorney at the time of submission and review of the PD district master plan. Final covenants and restrictions shall be submitted for review by the zoning administrator and town attorney, and shall be recorded prior to approval of any site plan. 
Sec. 4-55. - Procedures. 
(a)  Generally. Except as specifically modified by the provisions of this division, application for rezoning of property to a PD district shall be submitted in the same manner and shall be reviewed and considered in the same manner as other applications to change the zoning classification of property by amendment to the official zoning district map as set forth in article VIII of this appendix. A master plan for the development of each PD district shall be submitted by the applicant as part of the application for rezoning. Upon approval by the town council, the standards and requirements set forth in the master plan shall, together with the applicable requirements of this appendix, constitute the regulations applicable within the PD district. 
(b)  Master plan contents. Every application for rezoning to a PD district shall include a master plan for development of the site which shall consist of not less than the following written and graphic information, in such number as specified by policy of the planning commission, prepared in sufficient detail and scale and with sufficient clarity to accurately depict the nature and character of development proposed within the PD district: 
(1)  A plat, legal description of the property and verification of ownership or control by the applicant. 
(2)  Existing zoning, uses and structures on the subject site, and existing zoning and use of adjacent properties. 
(3)  An inventory of site characteristics and natural features, including topography with contour intervals of five feet or less, watercourses, water bodies, floodplains, wooded areas and other major vegetation features, and historic and archeological resources. 
(4)  Description of the proposed development, including its general character, the manner in which it satisfies the purposes and intent of PD districts, means of preserving significant natural features and means of addressing potential impacts on the community and on public services. 
(5)  A land use plan for the site, showing specific land uses with schematic site plans, access and circulation, general location and arrangement of buildings, parking areas, driveways, pedestrian routes, natural areas to be retained, buffers and open spaces and their functions and general character. 
(6)  Statements or graphic representations showing proposed development standards including minimum lot areas and widths, minimum yards and setbacks, building heights, densities, amount of nonresidential floor area, numbers of parking spaces and percentage of open space. 
(7)  Traffic impact analysis. 
(8)  General plans for public services and utilities sufficient to show that necessary services and utilities will be provided to serve the development. 
(9)  Statements or graphic representations of general character and architectural and community design guidelines to be applicable to the development, including street and parking area design standards, lighting and signage. 
(10)  General description of covenants and restrictions intended to provide for preservation and maintenance of common areas and facilities. 
(11)  Development phasing schedule. 
(12)  Such other information deemed necessary by the zoning administrator, planning commission or town council to establish that the proposed development complies with the general purposes or specific requirements of this appendix, including such additional information or analyses as may be necessary to evaluate potential impacts of the proposed development on the surrounding area and the community as a whole. 
[(c)  Reserved. ] 
(d)  Preapplication conference. Prior to submission of the application and master plan, the applicant shall meet with the zoning administrator to discuss the proposed development in general and the PD district application, review and approval process. 
(e)  Review and consideration of application. Formal review, consideration and action on the application shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of division 1 of article VIII of this appendix. The planning commission's action on the application shall include recommendations to town council regarding the master plan accompanying the application, and the commission may recommend modifications or changes to such master plan. The town council may consider further modifications or changes to the master plan after the planning commission makes its recommendation, provided such are referred to the commission before final action by the council. 
(f)  Approval of subdivision and site plans. Prior to development pursuant to an approved PD district, subdivision plats as normally required by the subdivision ordinance[, Appendix A of this Code,] of the town and site plans as normally required by article VII of this appendix shall be submitted and approved. Subdivision plats and site plans shall conform to the standards and requirements of the PD district and the master plan approved in conjunction with the district. 
(g)  Modifications or amendments to approved master plan. Minor modifications to an approved PD district master plan may be authorized by the zoning administrator when such modifications do not: Alter the boundaries of the property; conflict with specific requirements of this appendix or any specific standards or requirements set forth in the approved master plan; significantly decrease the width or depth of any yard, setback or buffer area; significantly alter points of access to the property or the internal circulation system; significantly alter the arrangement of major site plan elements; or substantially change the general character, architectural treatment or design of elements of the plan. Any change in an approved PD district master plan other than a minor modification as described above shall require a formal amendment subject to the same procedures and requirements as a new application. 
(h)  Failure to submit site plans. Failure of an applicant to submit a site plan for a first phase of development pursuant to an approved PD district within 24 months of approval of the district shall cause the town council to initiate an ordinance to amend the official zoning map to rezone the property to the classification(s) existing at the time of initial approval of the PD district. 
DIVISION 11. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 949, adopted April 15, 2014 , repealed former Div. 11, §§ 4-56-4-61, in its entirety. Former Div. 11 pertained to the FO floodplain overlay district and derived from Ord. No. 854, adopted Sept. 4, 2007. 

Secs. 4-56-4-61. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - PUBLIC/OPEN SPACE DISTRICT 

Sec. 4-62. - Statement of intent. 
    A purpose of this [public/open space] district is to preserve specific areas from private development, as these areas have been identified as currently undeveloped, unlikely to be developed, or unsuitable for private development. These areas either have natural conditions of soil, slope, susceptibility to flooding or erosion, geological condition, vegetation or an interaction between the aforesaid which makes such lands unsuitable for urban development or which are of a public nature which is inappropriate for private development. In order to protect the natural environment in these sensitive areas, the permissible uses there are limited to public recreation-oriented activities. This district is also intended to specify the location of public facilities of a recreational nature as well as to reserve areas for location of other public facilities. Any public/open space activity shall be in compliance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204. 
Sec. 4-63. - Uses permitted by right. 
    [The following uses are permitted by right in the public/open space district:] 
(a)  Schools. 
(b)  Municipal or county buildings. 
(c)  Parks or playgrounds. 
(d)  Recreational facilities. 
(e)  Cemeteries. 
(f)  Swimming pools. 
(g)  Water storage and distribution, detention ponds, dry dams. 
(h)  Public utilities such as poles, lines, distribution transformers, pipes, meters, and/or other facilities necessary for the provision and maintenance including water and sewage facilities. 
(i)  Bicycle and pedestrian paths and trails. 
(j)  Accessory buildings as defined. 
(k)  Public parking facilities and off-street parking as required by article V. 
Sec. 4-64. - Parking regulations. 
    Off-street parking [in the public/open space district] shall conform to article V of this appendix. 
DIVISION 13. - FO FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 4-65. - General provisions. 
(a)  Statutory authorization and purpose. The ordinance from which this division derives is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to localities by § 15.2-2280, Code of Virginia. The purpose of these provisions is to prevent: the loss of life and property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by: 
(1)  Regulating uses, activities, and development which, alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities, and frequencies; 
(2)  Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within districts subject to flooding; 
(3)  Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur in flood-prone districts to be protected and/or flood-proofed against flooding and flood damage; and, 
(4)  Protecting individuals from buying land and structures which are unsuitable for their intended purpose because of flood hazards. 
(b)  Applicability. These provisions shall apply to all privately and publicly owned lands within the jurisdiction of the Town of Vinton (hereafter referred to as "town") and identified as areas of special flood hazard according to the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) that is provided to the town by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(c)  Compliance and liability. 
(1)  No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this division and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this division. 
(2)  The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study, but does not imply total flood protection. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This division does not imply that districts outside the floodplain district areas or land uses permitted within such district will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
(3)  The provisions herein shall not create liability on the part of the town or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(d)  Records. Records of actions associated with administering this ordinance shall be kept on file and maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(1)  This floodway overlay district ordinance supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in flood-prone areas. Any underlying zoning district regulations, however, shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive. 
(2)  In the event any provision concerning a floodplain area is declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions or judicial discretion, the basic underlying zoning district provisions shall remain applicable. 
(f)  Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this division shall be declared invalid for any reason whatever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this division. The remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect; and for this purpose, the provisions of this division are hereby declared to be severable. 
(g)  Penalty for violations. Any person who fails to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of this article or directions of the floodplain administrator or any authorized employee of the town shall be guilty of the appropriate violation and subject to the penalties therefore. 
The Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (VA USBC) addresses building code violations and the associated penalties in Section 104 and Section 115. Violations and associated penalties of the zoning ordinance of the town are addressed in Division 5, sections 7-38 through 7-41 of the zoning ordinance. 
In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this article. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this article shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated in noncompliance with this article may be declared by the town to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. Flood insurance may be withheld from structures constructed in violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 949, 4-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-66. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
(1)  Appurtenant or accessory structure. Accessory structures not to exceed 200 square feet. 
(2)  Base flood. The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
(3)  Base flood elevation. The FEMA designated one-percent annual chance water surface elevation and the elevation determined per section 4-69. The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the datum specified on the community's FIRM. For the purposes of this division, the base flood is a 100-year flood or one-percent annual chance flood. 
(4)  Basement. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
(5)  Board of zoning appeals. The board appointed to review appeals made by individuals with regard to decisions of the zoning administrator in the interpretation of this division. 
(6)  Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
(7)  Existing construction. Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975 for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
(8)  Flood or flooding. 
a.  A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
3.  Mudflows which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph a.2. of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
b.  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph a.2. of this definition. 
(9)  Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency FEMA has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM). 
(10)  Flood insurance study (FIS). A report by FEMA that examines, evaluates and determines flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudflow and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
(11)  Floodplain or flood-prone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
(12)  Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
(13)  Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
(14)  Freeboard. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization in the watershed. When a freeboard is included in the height of a structure, the flood insurance premiums may be less expensive. 
(15)  Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
(16)  Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or, 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
(17)  Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis. Analyses performed by a licensed professional engineer, in accordance with standard engineering practices that are accepted by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation and FEMA, used to determine the base flood, other frequency floods, flood elevations, floodway information and boundaries, and flood profiles. 
(18)  Letters of map change (LOMC). A letter of map change is an official FEMA determination, by letter, that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
a.  Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a land as defined by meets and bounds or structure is not located in a SFHA. 
b.  Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. A letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) is a determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer exposed to flooding associated with the base flood. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
c.  Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective FIRM or FIS. 
(19)  Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Federal Code 44 CFR § 60.3. 
(20)  Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days, but does not include a recreational vehicle. 
(21)  Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
(22)  New construction. For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after March 15, 1978, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
(23)  Post-FIRM structures. A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or after March 15, 1978. 
(24)  Pre-FIRM structures. A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred before March 15, 1978. 
(25)  Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis; 
b.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
(26)  Repetitive loss structure. A building covered by a contract for flood insurance that has incurred flood-related damages on two occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the event for which a second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the building at the time of each flood event. 
(27)  Shallow flooding area. A special flood hazard area with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
(28)  Special flood hazard area (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined in section 4-63(b). 
(29)  Start of construction. For other than new construction and substantial improvement, under the Coastal Barriers Resource Act (P.L.. 97-348), means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of the construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(30)  Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
(31)  Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
(32)  Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that notification from the Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places determines that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
c.  Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as defined above, must comply with all requirements of this division that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the state historic preservation officer. Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(33)  Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 4-70 is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(34)  Watercourse. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
( Ord. No. 949, 4-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-67. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of the floodplain administrator. The town manager, or his/her designee, is hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations and is referred to herein as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may: 
(1)  Do the work themselves. In the absence of a designated floodplain administrator, the duties are conducted by the planning and zoning director, or his/her designee. 
(2)  Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees. 
(3)  Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another community or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
(b)  Duties and Responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
(1)  The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Review applications for permits to determine whether proposed activities will be located in the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA); 
b.  Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide available base flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
c.  Review applications to determine whether proposed activities will be reasonably safe from flooding and require new construction and substantial improvements to meet the requirements of these regulations; 
d.  Review applications to determine whether all necessary permits have been obtained from the federal, state or local agencies from which prior or concurrent approval is required; in particular, permits from state agencies for any construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a dam, reservoir, or waterway obstruction (including bridges, culverts, structures), any alteration of a watercourse, or any change of the course, current, or cross section of a stream or body of water, including any change to the 100-year frequency floodplain of free-flowing non-tidal waters of the state. 
e.  Verify that applicants proposing an alteration of a watercourse have notified adjacent communities, the Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management), and other appropriate agencies (Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers) and have submitted copies of such notifications to FEMA. 
f.  Approve applications and issue permits to develop in flood hazard areas if the provisions of these regulations have been met, or disapprove applications if the provisions of these regulations have not been met. 
g.  Inspect or cause to be inspected, buildings, structures, and other development for which permits have been issued to determine compliance with these regulations or to determine if non-compliance has occurred or violations have been committed. 
h.  Review elevation certificates and require incomplete or deficient certificates to be corrected. 
i.  Submit to FEMA, or require applicants to submit to FEMA, data and information necessary to maintain FIRMs, including hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses prepared by or for the town, within six months after such data and information becomes available if the analyses indicate changes in base flood elevations. 
j.  Maintain and permanently keep records that are necessary for the administration of these regulations, including: 
1.  Flood insurance studies (FIS), flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs, including historic studies and maps and current effective studies and maps) and letters of map change; and 
2.  Documentation supporting issuance and denial of permits, elevation certificates, documentation of the elevation (in relation to the datum on the FIRM) to which structures have been floodproofed, other required design certifications, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken to correct violations of these regulations. 
k.  Enforce the provisions of these regulations, investigate violations, issue notices of violations or stop work orders, and require permit holders to take corrective action. 
l.  Advise the board of zoning appeals regarding the intent of these regulations and, for each application for a variance, prepare a staff report and recommendation. 
m.  Administer the requirements related to proposed work on existing buildings: 
1.  Make determinations as to whether buildings and structures that are located in flood hazard areas and that are damaged by any cause have been substantially damaged. 
2.  Make reasonable efforts to notify owners of substantially damaged structures of the need to obtain a permit to repair, rehabilitate, or reconstruct, and prohibit the non-compliant repair of substantially damaged buildings except for temporary emergency protective measures necessary to secure a property or stabilize a building or structure to prevent additional damage. 
n.  Undertake, as determined appropriate by the floodplain administrator due to the circumstances, other actions which may include but are not limited to: 
1.  Issuing press releases, public service announcements, and other public information materials related to permit requests and repair of damaged structures; 
2.  Coordinating with other federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations; 
3.  Providing owners of damaged structures information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood hazard areas; and 
4.  Assisting property owners with documentation necessary to file claims for increased cost of compliance coverage under NFIP flood insurance policies. 
o.  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) when the corporate boundaries of the town have been modified and: 
1.  Provide a map that clearly delineates the new corporate boundaries or the new area for which the authority to regulate pursuant to these regulations has either been assumed or relinquished through annexation; and 
2.  If the FIRM for any annexed area includes special flood hazard areas that have flood zones that have regulatory requirements that are not set forth in these regulations, prepare amendments to these regulations to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirements, and submit the amendments to the governing body for adoption; such adoption shall take place at the same time as or prior to the date of annexation and a copy of the amended regulations shall be provided to Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management) and FEMA. 
p.  Upon the request of FEMA, complete and submit a report concerning participation in the NFIP which may request information regarding the number of buildings in the SFHA, number of permits issued for development in the SFHA, and number of variances issued for development in the SFHA. 
q.  It is the duty of the floodplain administrator to take into account flood, mudslide and flood-related erosion hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions relating to land management and use throughout the entire jurisdictional area of the community, whether or not those hazards have been specifically delineated geographically (e.g. via mapping or surveying). 
(c)  Use and interpretation of FIRMs. The floodplain administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of SFHAs, floodplain boundaries, and floodway boundaries. The following shall apply to the use and interpretation of FIRMs and data: 
(1)  Where field surveyed topography indicates that adjacent ground elevations: 
a.  Are below the base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a SFHA on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as SFHA and subject to the requirements of these regulations; 
b.  Are above the base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as SFHA unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the SFHA. 
(2)  In FEMA-identified special flood hazard areas SFHAs where base flood elevation and floodway data have not been identified and in areas where FEMA has not identified SFHAs, any other flood hazard data available from a federal, state, or other source shall be reviewed and reasonably used. 
(3)  Base flood elevations and designated floodway boundaries on FIRMs and in FISs shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway boundaries by any other sources if such sources show reduced floodway widths and/or lower base flood elevations. 
(4)  Other sources of data shall be reasonably used if such sources show increased base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FIRMs and in FISs. 
(5)  If a preliminary FIRM and/or a preliminary FIS has been provided by FEMA: 
a.  Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and shall replace the flood hazard data previously provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering these regulations. 
b.  Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall be deemed the best available and used where no base flood elevations and/or floodway areas are provided on the effective FIRM. 
c.  Prior to issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data is permitted where the preliminary base flood elevations or floodway areas exceed the base flood elevations and/or designated floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided by FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA. 
( Ord. No. 949, 4-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-68. - Boundary and floodplain overlay district changes. 
(a)  Jurisdictional boundary changes. The town floodplain ordinance in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements for participation in the NFIP. Municipalities with existing floodplain ordinances shall pass a resolution acknowledging and accepting responsibility for enforcing floodplain ordinance standards prior to annexation of any area containing identified flood hazards. If the FIRM for any annexed area includes SFHAs that have flood zones that have regulatory requirements that are not set forth in these regulations, prepare amendments to these regulations to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirements, and submit the amendments to the governing body for adoption; such adoption shall take place at the same time as or prior to the date of annexation and a copy of the amended regulations shall be provided to Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management) and FEMA. 
In accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 44 Subpart (B) Section 59.22 (a) (9)(v), all NFIP participating communities must notify the Federal Insurance Administration and optionally the state coordinating office in writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified by annexation or the community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. 
In order that all FIRMs accurately represent the community's boundaries, a copy of a map of the community suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for which the community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority must be included with the notification. 
(b)  District boundary changes. The delineation of any of the floodplain overlay districts may be revised by town council where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or where more detailed studies have been conducted or undertaken by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified agency, or an individual documents the need for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from FEMA. 
(c)  Interpretation of district boundaries. Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the floodplain administrator, or his or her designee. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the board of zoning appeals shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his/her case to the Board and to submit his/her own technical evidence if he/she so desires. Procedures for such appeals shall be as outlined in Article IX, Division 2, Section 9-11 of the zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Submitting technical data. A community's base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data. 
(e)  Letters of map revision. When development in the floodplain causes a change in the base flood elevation, the applicant, including state agencies, must notify FEMA by applying for a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
Examples: 
(1)  Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway. 
(2)  Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation. 
(3)  Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges). 
( Ord. No. 949, 4-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-69. - Establishment of floodplain overlay districts. 
(a)  Basis of districts. The various special flood hazard districts shall include the SFHAs. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the FIS and the FIRM for the town prepared by FEMA, Federal Insurance Administration, dated September 28, 2007, and any subsequent revisions or amendments thereto. 
The town may identify and regulate local flood hazard or ponding areas that are not delineated on the FIRM. These areas may be delineated on a "local flood hazard map" using best available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood of record, historic high water marks or approximate study methodologies. 
The boundaries of the SFHA districts are established as shown on the FIRM which is declared to be a part of this ordinance and which shall be kept on file at the town offices. 
(1)  The floodway overlay district is in an AE zone and is delineated, for purposes of this division, using the criterion that certain areas within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the one percent annual chance flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. 
The following provisions shall apply within the Floodway Overlay District of an AE zone: 
a.  Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently-accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the floodplain administrator. 
Development activities which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood may be allowed, provided that the applicant first applies-with the town's endorsement-for a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR), and receives the approval of FEMA. 
If subsection 4-69(a)(1)a. of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 4-70. 
b.  The placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes) is prohibited, except in an existing manufactured home (mobile home) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring, elevation, and encroachment standards are met. 
(2)  The flood-fringe overlay district shall be those areas of the 100-year floodplain not included in the floodway; identified as AE zone on the maps accompanying the FIS that are not included in the floodway area. 
(3)  The AE or AH zone on the FIRM accompanying the FIS shall be those areas for which one-percent annual chance flood elevations have been provided and the floodway has not been delineated. The following provisions shall apply within an AE or AH zone: 
Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within the areas of special flood hazard, designated as zones AE or AH on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the town. 
Development activities in zones AE or AH on the town FIRM which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot may be allowed, provided that the applicant first applies-with the town endorsement-for a Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR), and receives the approval of FEMA. 
(b)  Overlay concept. The floodplain districts described above shall be overlays to the existing underlying zoning districts as shown on the official zoning ordinance map, and as such, the provisions for the floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying zoning district provisions. 
If there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the floodplain districts and those of any underlying district, the more restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the floodplain districts shall apply. 
In the event any provision concerning a floodplain district is declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions or judicial decision, the basic underlying provisions shall remain applicable. 
( Ord. No. 949, 4-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-70. - District provisions. 
(a)  Permit and application requirements. 
(1)  Permit requirement. All uses, activities, and development occurring within any floodplain district, including placement of manufactured homes, shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a zoning permit. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this division and with all other applicable codes and ordinances, as amended, such as the VA USBC and the town's subdivision regulations. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the floodplain administrator shall require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and shall review all sites to assure they are reasonably safe from flooding. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
(2)  Site plans and permit applications. All applications for development within any floodplain district and all building permits issued for the floodplain shall incorporate the following information: 
a.  The elevation of the base flood (100-year flood) at the site. 
b.  The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or, in V zones, the lowest horizontal structural member. 
c.  For structures to be flood-proofed (non-residential only), the elevation to which the structure will be flood-proofed. 
d.  Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground elevations. 
(b)  General standards. The following provisions shall apply to all permits: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be according to the VA USBC, and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, including duct work, shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system, and be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages. 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage facilities and private package sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems) shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)  All storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface waters without damage to persons or property. The systems shall ensure drainage away from buildings and on-site waste disposal sites. The town may require a primarily underground system to accommodate frequent floods and a secondary surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans. The facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties. 
(10)  Streets and sidewalks should be designed to minimize their potential for increasing and aggravating the levels of flood flow. Drainage openings shall be required to sufficiently discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights. 
In addition to provisions (1)-(10) above, in all special flood hazard areas, the additional provisions shall apply: 
(11)  Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or of any watercourse, stream, etc., within this jurisdiction a permit shall be obtained from the U. S. Corps of Engineers, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission (a joint permit application is available from any of these organizations). Furthermore, in riverine areas, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all affected adjacent jurisdictions, the Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management), other required agencies, and FEMA. 
(12)  The flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse shall be maintained. 
(c)  Elevation and construction standards. In all identified flood hazard areas where base flood elevations have been provided in the FIS or generated by a certified professional in accordance with Section 4-69(a)(3), the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) in zones AE and AH with detailed base flood elevations shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above two feet above the base flood level. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above one foot above the base flood level. Buildings located in AE and AH zones may be flood-proofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building components below the elevation corresponding to the base flood elevation plus one foot are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification, including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed, shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Space below the lowest floor. In zones AE and AH, fully enclosed areas, of new construction or substantially improved structures, which are below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall: 
a.  Not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
b.  Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials below the regulatory flood protection elevation; 
c.  Include measures to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum design criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding. 
2.  The total net area of all openings must be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
3.  If a building has more than one enclosed area, each area must have openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit. 
4.  The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one foot above the adjacent grade. 
5.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other opening coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
6.  Foundation enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires openings as outlined above. 
(4)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
a.  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the elevation and anchoring requirements in subsection 4-70(b) and subsection 4-70(c). 
b.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions); or 
2.  Meet all the requirements for manufactured homes in subsection 4-70(b) and Subsection 4-70(c). 
(5)  Standards for subdivision proposals. 
a.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
b.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
c.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and 
d.  Base flood elevation data shall be obtained from other sources or developed using detailed methodologies, hydraulic and hydrologic analysis, comparable to those contained in a flood insurance study FIS for subdivision proposals and other proposed development proposals (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that exceed 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser. 
( Ord. No. 949, 4-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-71. - Permitted uses by right and by special use. 
(a)  Floodplain area. 
(1)  The development and/or use of land shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying zoning district, provided that all such uses, activities, and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions contained in the VA USBC and all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
a.  In the floodplain area, the applicant and/or developer shall evaluate the effects of the proposed development and/or use of land on the floodplain with current hydrologic and hydraulic engineering technologies. The applicant and/or developer shall submit studies, analysis, computations, etc. to show the delineation of a floodway based on the requirement that all existing and future development not increase the 100-year flood elevation more than one (1) foot at any point. The engineering principle, equal reduction of conveyance, shall be used to make the determination of increased flood heights. 
(b)  Floodway area. 
(1)  The following uses, types, and activities are permitted, provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying zoning district and are not prohibited by any other ordinance and provided that no specific land use requires any type of structure, fill, or storage of materials and equipment: 
a.  Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting. 
b.  Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as parks, day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat launching and swimming areas, horseback riding and hiking trails, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, trap and skeet game ranges, and hunting and fishing areas. 
c.  Accessory residential uses, such as yard areas, gardens, play areas, and pervious loading areas. 
d.  Accessory industrial and commercial uses, such as yard areas, pervious parking and loading areas, airport landing strips, etc. 
e.  Manufactured homes are permitted only in an existing manufactured home park, and must meet all the requirements for manufactured homes in subsection 4-70(b) and subsection 4-70 c). 
(2)  The following uses and activities may be permitted by special use pursuant to Article VII, Division 4 of the town zoning ordinance, provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying zoning district and are not prohibited by this or any other ordinance: 
a.  Structures (except for manufactured homes) accessory to the uses and activities by right, above. 
b.  Certain utilities and public utilities and improvements, such as pipelines, water and sewage treatment plants, and other similar or related uses. 
c.  Water-related uses and activities, such as marinas, docks, wharves, piers, etc. 
d.  Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials (where no increase in level of flooding or velocity is caused thereby). 
e.  Storage of materials and equipment provided that they are not buoyant, flammable or explosive, and are not subject to major damage by flooding, or provided that such material and equipment is firmly anchored to prevent floatation or movement, and/or can be readily removed from the area within the time available after flood warning. 
f.  Other similar uses and activities provided they cause no increase in flood heights and/or velocities. All uses, activities, and structural development, shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing provisions contained in all other applicable code and ordinances. 
(c)  Procedures for special uses in floodways. 
(1)  Any use listed as permitted with special use in a floodway shall be allowed only after application to the town council. All such applications shall be reviewed pursuant to the procedures outlined in Article VII, Division 4 of the town zoning ordinance. In addition to information required by Article VII, Division 4, all applications shall include the following: 
a.  Plans in triplicate drawn to scale of not less than one inch to 100 feet horizontally showing the location, dimension, and contours (at five-foot intervals) of the lot, existing and proposed structures, fill, storage areas, water supply, sanitary facilities, and relationship of the floodway to the proposal. 
b.  A typical valley cross-section as necessary to adequately show the channel of the stream, elevation of land and areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development and 100-year flood elevation. 
c.  A profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream. 
d.  A summary report, prepared by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities; the seriousness of flood damage to the use; and other pertinent technical matters. 
e.  A list of names and addresses of adjoining property owners. 
(2)  In acting upon such applications, the planning commission and the town council shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this article and: 
a.  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. No special use shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within the floodway that will cause any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood. 
b.  The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
c.  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions. 
d.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners. 
e.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the town. 
f.  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location. 
g.  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
h.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
i.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the town. 
j.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
k.  Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this division. 
( Ord. No. 949, 4-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-72. - Existing structures in floodplain areas. 
    A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Existing structures in the floodway area shall not be expanded or enlarged unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed expansion would not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(b)  Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use located in any floodplain areas to an extent or amount of less than 50 percent of its market value shall conform to the VA USBC. 
(c)  The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use, regardless of its location in a floodplain area to an extent or amount of 50 percent or more of its market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with this ordinance and shall require the entire structure to conform to the VA USBC. 
( Ord. No. 949, 4-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-73. - Variances; factors to be considered. 
    Applications for a variance of the requirements of floodplain overlay district shall be accepted and reviewed pursuant to the procedures outlined in Article IX, Division 3 of the town zoning ordinance. 
Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(a)  A showing of good and sufficient cause, 
(b)  After the board of zoning appeals (BZA) has determined that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(c)  After the BZA has determined that the granting of such variance will not result in: 
(1)  Unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights; 
(2)  Additional threats to public safety; 
(3)  Extraordinary public expense; and will not: 
a.  Create nuisances; 
b.  Cause fraud or victimization of the public; or 
c.  Conflict with local laws or ordinances. 
While the granting of variances generally is limited to a lot size less than one-half acre, deviations from that limitation may occur. However, as the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing a variance increases. Variances may be issued by the BZA for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, in conformance with the provisions of this section. 
Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the criteria of this section are met, and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
In passing upon applications for variances, the BZA shall satisfy all relevant factors and procedures specified in other sections of the zoning ordinance and consider the following additional factors: 
(a)  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. No variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within any floodway area that will cause any increase in the 100-year flood elevation; 
(b)  The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others; 
(c)  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions; 
(d)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners; 
(e)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(f)  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location; 
(g)  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use; 
(h)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future; 
(i)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(j)  The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the property in time of flood; 
(k)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; 
(l)  The historic nature of a structure. Variances for repair or rehabilitation of historic structures may be granted upon a determination and notification from the Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure; 
(m)  Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this division. 
The BZA may refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a variance to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for flood protection and other related matters. 
Variances shall be issued only after the BZA has determined that the granting of such will not result in: 
(a)  Unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights; 
(b)  Additional threats to public safety; 
(c)  Extraordinary public expense; and will not 
(d)  Create nuisances; 
(e)  Cause fraud or victimization of the public; or 
(f)  Conflict with local laws or ordinances. 
Variances shall be issued only after the BZA has determined that the variance will be the minimum required to provide relief. 
The BZA shall notify the applicant for a variance, in writing that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the 100-year flood elevation: 
(a)  Increases the risks to life and property; and 
(b)  Will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance, 
A record shall be maintained of the above notification as well as all variance actions, including justification for the issuance of the variances. Any variances that are issued shall be noted in the annual or biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administrator. 
( Ord. No. 949, 4-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-74-7-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (MUD) DISTRICT 

Sec. 4-80. - Intent of district. 
    Mixed use is the idea of creating a multi-use, multi-purpose building or set of buildings, incorporating some combination of residential, commercial, industrial, office, institutional, or other land uses as part of the overall environment. Mixed use may be developed at various scales from a mixed-use building, mixed use parcels/sites or mixed use walkable/transit areas. A mixed use building or buildings will be considered largely residential with street front commercial space, provider retailers with customers within close reach of each other. 
    The intent of the mixed use development district is to encourage the orderly development of mixed residential/commercial sites and to encourage innovative development patterns that create a desirable environment, particularly for lots which contain a number of constraints to conventional development. These regulations are designed to achieve the following objectives: 
(a)  Allow market-driven growth in places that are most conducive to accommodating additional activity. 
(b)  Encourage economic development through the creation of a mix uses adjacent to existing commercial centers. 
(c)  Provide diverse housing development for households with a range on incomes and lifestyles. 
(d)  Promote a walkable community with pedestrian-oriented buildings and open space that connects to nearby destinations. 
(e)  Create and support lively, human-scaled activity areas and gathering places for the community by encouraging civic uses, plazas, and a mix of uses. 
(f)  Ensure that new development is consistent with and enhances the nearby streetscapes. 
(g)  Promote development that accommodates the automobile but also emphasizes alternative travel means such as buses, biking, and walking. 
(h)  Promote the adaptive reuse of existing buildings that have been identified as architectural, cultural, and/or historic significance to the community. 
(i)  Encourage redevelopment of underutilized or obsolete industrial, commercial or institutional property. 
(j)  Create opportunities to use new technologies in managing the quality and quantity of stormwater; and 
(k)  Encourage the preservation of steep slopes, floodplains, historic structures and areas, and unique, natural, or geological formations. 
( Ord. No. 960, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-81. - Procedural requirements for mixed use development (MUD) district. 
    Applications to establish a mixed use development (MUD) district or amend the development plan of MUD district shall include a proposed development plan, drawn to scale, containing the following information and necessary explanatory materials: 
(a)  Boundaries of the location of the proposed MUD district and the ownership of properties contained therein, as well as all existing public and private streets, alleys, and easements within and immediately adjacent to the district; 
(b)  Location, size, and use of existing buildings and the location, size, and use of proposed buildings or additions to existing buildings; 
(c)  Location of all existing parking facilities, off-site parking facility, on-street parking, shared parking, and the approximate location of all proposed surface parking lots or parking structures, including the number of parking spaces for each lot or structure and all existing and proposed means of access to parking areas and to public or private streets, alleys, and easements; 
(d)  Proposed changes in the location, width, or character of public streets, alleys, or easements within and adjacent to the district, and the delineation of any private driveways or loading spaces that intersect with public rights-of-way or easements and the delineation of routes for emergency vehicles accessing the district; 
(e)  Existing and proposed pedestrian routes, including links between various buildings; 
(f)  General use of major existing and proposed open spaces within the site and specific features of the development plan, such as screening, buffering, or retention of natural areas, which are intended to enhance compatibility with adjacent properties, and calculations of the percentage of usable open space for the district; 
(g)  Infrastructure plans indicating the size and location of existing and proposed stormwater, sanitary sewer, and water lines as well as estimates of impacts of the proposed development on infrastructure capacity in the district and impacts on collector lines immediately outside of the district; and 
(h)  Information to demonstrate the compatibility of all structures with the character and appearance of the surrounding neighborhood by virtue of the structures' height, bulk, and location within the MUD district. 
( Ord. No. 960, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-82. - Permitted uses and structures. 
(a)  Uses and structures permitted by right. The following uses and structures are permitted by right in the mixed use development district, subject to all other applicable requirements of this appendix: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Townhouses. 
(4)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(5)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(6)  Parks, playgrounds, other recreational facilities and community centers. 
(7)  Public schools and private schools. 
(8)  Government administrative uses, post offices, community centers, and libraries. 
(9)  Minor and major public utilities. 
(10)  Family day homes and child day care centers. 
(11)  Adult day care homes and adult day care centers. 
(12)  Assisted living facility. 
(13)  Group homes. 
(14)  Home occupations. 
(15)  Commercial uses, which shall be limited to the following: 
a.  Offices, banks, other financial services and medical and dental clinics; but not including establishments with drive-up window facilities. 
b.  Personal service businesses; 
c.  Retail stores and shops; 
d.  Laundromats and laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations; 
e.  Restaurants, cafes, delicatessens, tearooms, coffee houses, retail bakeries and ice cream parlors, but not including establishments with drive-up window facilities or establishments where food or beverages are intended to be consumed in vehicles on the premises; 
f.  Artist studios, art galleries, art supply shops and custom frame shops; 
g.  Music and dance instruction; 
h.  Libraries and museums; 
i.  Pet shops, pet grooming shops, veterinary clinics, provided that all facilities shall be located within completely enclosed and air conditioned buildings which are soundproof to the extent that sounds produced by animals kept or treated therein are not audible outside the building; 
j.  Repair service, including bicycles, but not including motorized vehicles; 
k.  Community markets; 
l.  Indoor sports facilities, including bowling alley, racquet sports, and health club; 
m.  Hotels, bed and breakfast facilities, convention centers, meeting space, and banquet facilities. 
(16)  Signs as permitted in article V of this appendix. 
(17)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(b)  Uses and structures permitted by special use permit (SUP). The following uses and structures are permitted by special use permit in the Mixed Use Development district, subject to all other applicable requirements of this appendix: 
(1)  Drive-through windows serving or associated with permitted uses provided such facilities are located at the rear or side of the structure and do not conflict with pedestrian travel ways. In no case shall the drive through lane or window abut or face a public street. 
(2)  Outdoor storage, display and/or sales serving or associated with a by-right permitted use, if any portion of the use would be visible from a travel way. 
(3)  Individual buildings over 20,000 total square feet in gross floor area, or greater than 10,000 square feet per floor. 
(4)  Fuel sales with pumps located at the rear or side of the associated retail structure and which do not conflict with pedestrian travel ways or interrupt street frontage. In no case shall the gas pump canopy abut a public street. 
( Ord. No. 960, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-83. - Street design, block size and sidewalks. 
(a)  Public streets. All proposed streets within a MUD district shall be designed and constructed according to the VDOT Secondary Street Acceptance Requirements, and the applicant shall ensure that the proposed public streets will be accepted into the public street system by VDOT and Town, and shall supply such surety as the town may require. 
(b)  Grid network. The transportation system in the MUD district shall be generally in the form of a grid of interconnected streets, alleys and paths, modified as necessary to accommodate topography and parcel shape. 
(1)  Streets. Proposed streets within the MUD district shall be extended to the boundary lines of the parcel being developed and terminated with stub outs to provide access to adjacent tracts not presently being subdivided or developed. 
(2)  Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sac streets shall not comprise more than ten percent of the total street length in the MUD district, nor shall any individual cul-de-sac street exceed 500 feet in length. Alleys are exempt from this calculation. 
(3)  Block size. Blocks shall be in conformance with Appendix A Subdivision Ordinance. 
(4)  Street design. 
a.  Street sections shall be designed to meet VDOT standards and shall be built to the narrowest dimensions permitted by Town and VDOT. 
b.  Dead end alleys are permissible if identified in the development plan submitted at the time of rezoning approval, but in no circumstances shall an alley have a dead end length of over 100 feet. Dead end alleys shall have hammerhead turnarounds. 
c.  Bicycle accommodations shall meet VDOT requirements. 
(5)  Accommodation for pedestrians and bicycles. 
a.  Accommodations for pedestrians and bicycles within new proposed Town right-of-way shall be designed and constructed according to VDOT Secondary Street Acceptance Requirements. Reasonable accommodation for bicycles should be considered in existing street systems. 
b.  Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the street and separated from the roadway by a planting strip or designated parallel parking. 
c.  The paved area of sidewalks shall be not less than five (5) feet wide. If a planting strip is provided, it shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in width. 
(6)  Lot access. 
a.  All lots shall front on a public street or on a square or plaza. 
b.  Alleys shall serve only the rear or sides of lots or uses. 
( Ord. No. 960, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-84. - Parking. 
(a)  Off-street parking. Except as otherwise provided by this subsection, off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with Article V of this Appendix. 
(b)  Shared parking. Shared parking shall be permitted upon approval of a shared parking plan by the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  On-street parking. On-street parking is permitted, provided that the design and placement of such spaces are approved by the Vinton Department of Public Works. 
(1)  On-street as well as off-street parking spaces shall be counted toward satisfying the use-based parking requirements contained within Article V of this appendix. 
(2)  Where on-street parking is provided, requirements for off-street parking shall be reduced accordingly. 
(3)  On-street parking spaces assigned to a building or use shall be those spaces that abut the lot containing that building or use. 
(4)  On-street parking shall be provided on streets abutting squares, small parks or other open spaces. 
(d)  Off-street parking for commercial and mixed uses. Off-street parking and loading spaces for commercial and mixed-use structures shall be located to the rear of principal structures with the exception of required handicapped parking or loading spaces or for existing building which may be located to the sides of the principal structure. 
(e)  Parking for retail and services. Parking for retail and service uses shall not require on-site parking provided that: 
(1)  On-street or off-street parking is available within a 600-foot radius of the activity. 
(2)  The total floor space for the individual uses does not exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area. 
( Ord. No. 960, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-85. - Pedestrian scale lighting. 
    The provisions of this subsection shall apply to any non-residential project in a MUD district as follows: 
(a)  Generally, site lights should be dark-sky-friendly, and not cast light upward into the sky. Site lighting shall be located and designed so as to illuminate only the intended lot; light shall be directed downward to the immediate area being lighted and away from any living quarters. 
(b)  Floodlights or directional lights (maximum 100-watt metal halide bulbs) may be used to illuminate alleys, parking garages and working (maintenance) areas, but shall be shielded or aimed in such a way that they do not shine into other lots, the street, or direct light out of the MUD district. Floodlighting shall not be used to illuminate building walls (i.e. lights should not be placed on the ground so that a beam of light is directed upward). 
(c)  Pedestrian scale decorative street lights (12 feet to 15 feet in height) shall be installed by the developer on both sides of new streets throughout the MUD district with a general average spacing of 75 feet on center. 
( Ord. No. 960, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-86. - Utilities. 
    The following provisions shall apply to providing utilities in the MUD district: 
(a)  All development within a MUD district shall be served by public water and sewer facilities. 
(b)  Utilities (and associated pedestals, cabinets, junction boxes and transformers) including electric, cable TV, telephone and natural gas service shall be located underground and to the rear of properties in alley rights-of-way (ROW) or the ROW of minor streets, and all utilities shall be located within a public utility easement. Above-ground utilities are permissible if identified and approved in the development plan submitted at the time rezoning is approved. 
( Ord. No. 960, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-87. - Property owners' association (POA). 
    A property owners' association (POA) shall be established: 
(a)  A property owners association (POA) shall be established by the developer at the time of zoning approval of a MUD district. 
(b)  Membership in a POA shall be mandatory for all property owners within the MUD district, and shall be required as a covenant in all deeds to property in the MUD district granted after development plan approval. 
(c)  The developer shall prepare documents which provide at a minimum that the POA shall accept title to any common elements including, but not limited to, open space, recreation, plazas, roads, parking, sewer, water, and stormwater management facilities which will not be publicly owned, and shall provide for the maintenance of any common area improvements or other property owned by the POA. 
( Ord. No. 960, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-88. - General development standards. 
    The following general development standards shall apply in the MUD district: 
(a)  The density of a MUD district shall not exceed 24 dwelling units per gross acre. For purposes of calculating density, areas devoted to sites for commercial uses shall not be included. 
(b)  Except infill sites of less than three acres; not less than ten to 20 percent of the gross area of each MUD district shall be devoted to common open space meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  Common open space shall consist of areas owned by a homeowners' association and devoted to active or passive recreation or leisure time use or to the privacy or visual enjoyment of residents of the development, and may include buffers, floodplains, steep slopes and other natural areas to be preserved. Common open space may include land improved or developed for recreation use, including swimming pools, game courts, playgrounds, recreation centers and similar facilities, but shall not include streets, parking areas, private yard areas or sites reserved for future development of a nature that would not qualify as common open space. 
(2)  Common open space shall have horizontal dimensions of not less than 50 feet, except areas devoted to pedestrian trails, bikeways or leisure trails shall not be less than ten feet in horizontal dimensions. 
(3)  Common open space shall be arranged, together with streets and walkways, to provide a continuous and interconnected system which is accessible from all dwelling units within the development without having to cross privately owned property. 
(c)  Minimum yards, setbacks and spaces between buildings shall be as required in the R-3 residential district, unless different minimum requirements are specifically authorized in the approved master development plan for the MUD district. 
(d)  Where adjacent to a non-compatible land use, as determined by zoning administrator, a buffer area of not less than 15 feet in width shall be provided around the perimeter of the MUD district, except adjacent to public streets providing access to the district. Such buffer area shall be left in a natural state or shall be supplemented with landscaping materials and/or structural fences or walls. No building, structure, road, parking area or improvement for active recreation use shall be located in any required buffer. 
(e)  No building or structure in a MUD district shall exceed a height of 45 feet. This height limitation should not apply to the adaptive reuse of existing structures that have been identified as architectural, cultural and/or historic significance to the community. 
(f)  Except as may be specifically approved by the town council in conjunction with the MUD district master plan, streets within a MUD district shall be public and shall be constructed in accordance with applicable standards of the town and the Virginia Department of Transportation. Private internal streets within a MUD district which provide access to sites within the district and do not provide for through traffic by the general public may be permitted by the council in accordance with design and construction standards specified in the MUD district master development plan. 
(g)  Provisions shall be made by the developer to ensure preservation and maintenance of required common open space and other common areas and facilities. Ownership of common areas and facilities shall be vested in a homeowners' association comprised of all owners of property within the development. Appropriate covenants and restrictions providing for preservation and maintenance of such areas and facilities shall be described in general and approved as to form by the town attorney at the time of submission and review of the MUD district master development plan. Final covenants and restrictions shall be submitted for review by the zoning administrator and town attorney, and shall be recorded prior to approval of any site plan. 
(h)  A variance from the development standards may be permitted by the zoning administrator, when strict adherence to such development standards would result in substantial injustice or hardships. An appeal from the decision of the zoning administrator may be taken to the board of zoning appeals (BZA) in accordance with section 9-7 of this appendix. 
( Ord. No. 960, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-89. - Procedures. 
(a)  Except as specifically modified by the provisions of this division, application for rezoning of property to a MUD district shall be submitted in the same manner and shall be reviewed and considered in the same manner as other applications to change the zoning classification of property by amendment to the official zoning district map as set forth in article VIII of this appendix. A master plan for the development of each MUD district shall be submitted by the applicant as part of the application for rezoning. Upon approval by the town council, the standards and requirements set forth in the master plan shall, together with the applicable requirements of this appendix, constitute the regulations applicable within the MUD district. 
(b)  Every application for rezoning to a MUD district shall include a master plan for development of the site which shall consist of not less than the following written and graphic information, in such number as specified by policy of the planning commission, prepared in sufficient detail and scale and with sufficient clarity to accurately depict the nature and character of development proposed within the MUD district: 
(1)  A plat, legal description of the property and verification of ownership or control by the applicant. 
(2)  Existing zoning, uses and structures on the subject site, and existing zoning and use of adjacent properties. 
(3)  An inventory of site characteristics and natural features, including topography with contour intervals of five feet or less, watercourses, water bodies, floodplains, wooded areas and other major vegetation features, and historic and archeological resources. 
(4)  Description of the proposed development, including its general character, the manner in which it satisfies the purposes and intent of MUD district, means of preserving significant natural features and means of addressing potential impacts on the community and on public services. 
(5)  A land use plan for the site, showing specific land uses with schematic site plans, access and circulation, general location and arrangement of buildings, parking areas, driveways, pedestrian routes, natural areas to be retained, buffers and open spaces and their functions and general character. 
(6)  Statements or graphic representations showing proposed development standards including minimum lot areas and widths, minimum yards and setbacks, building heights, densities, amount of nonresidential floor area, numbers of parking spaces and percentage of open space. 
(7)  Traffic impact analysis, at the discretion of the zoning administrator. 
(8)  General plans for public services and utilities sufficient to show that necessary services and utilities will be provided to serve the development. 
(9)  Statements or graphic representations of general character and architectural and community design guidelines to be applicable to the development, including street and parking area design standards, lighting and signage. 
(10)  General description of covenants and restrictions intended to provide for preservation and maintenance of common areas and facilities. 
(11)  Development phasing schedule. 
(12)  Such other information deemed necessary by the zoning administrator, planning commission or town council to establish that the proposed development complies with the general purposes or specific requirements of this appendix, including such additional information or analyses as may be necessary to evaluate potential impacts of the proposed development on the surrounding area and the community as a whole. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Prior to submission of the application and master development plan, the applicant shall meet with the zoning administrator to discuss the proposed development in general and the MUD district application, review and approval process. 
(e)  Formal review, consideration and action on the application shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of division 1 of article VIII of this appendix. The planning commission's action on the application shall include recommendations to town council regarding the master plan accompanying the application, and the commission may recommend modifications or changes to such master plan. The town council may consider further modifications or changes to the master plan after the planning commission makes its recommendation, provided such are referred to the commission before final action by the council. 
(f)  Prior to development pursuant to an approved MUD district, subdivision plats as normally required by the subdivision ordinance [Appendix A of this Code] of the town and site plans as normally required by article VII of this appendix shall be submitted and approved. Subdivision plats and site plans shall conform to the standards and requirements of the MUD district and the master plan approved in conjunction with the district. 
(g)  Minor modifications to an approved MUD district master development plan may be authorized by the zoning administrator when such modifications do not: Alter the boundaries of the property; conflict with specific requirements of this appendix or any specific standards or requirements set forth in the approved master plan; significantly decrease the width or depth of any yard, setback or buffer area; significantly alter points of access to the property or the internal circulation system; significantly alter the arrangement of major site plan elements; or substantially change the general character, architectural treatment or design of elements of the plan. Any change in an approved MUD district master development plan other than a minor modification as described above shall require a formal amendment subject to the same procedures and requirements as a new application. 
( Ord. No. 960, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-90-4-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 5-1. - Applicability of article. 
    The regulations set forth in this article are additions or exceptions to and shall be construed to qualify, supplement or modify, as the case may be, the regulations and requirements set forth in the district regulations contained in article IV of this article. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDINGS AND LOTS 

Sec. 5-2. - Location on a lot required. 
    Every building or structure hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or moved and every use hereafter established shall be located on a lot of record as defined herein. 
Sec. 5-3. - More than one main building on a lot. 
    More than one main building containing a permitted principal use may be located on a single lot when all lot area, yard, open space, yard between buildings and other applicable requirements of the district in which such lot is situated are met, provided that no main building containing a single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling shall be located on a lot with any other main building. 
Sec. 5-4. - Public street frontage and access required. 
    Every building or structure hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or moved and every use hereafter established shall be located on a lot having frontage on and access to an improved public street, except as permitted in a townhouse development or specifically approved by the town council in a PD district. In any case where public street frontage and a minimum lot width are required for a use, other than a townhouse, such lot shall also be provided with at least 30 feet of frontage on a public street. 
DIVISION 3. - SUPPLEMENTARY YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 5-5. - Exceptions to yard requirements. 
    Except for required visibility at intersections as provided in this division, the following may be located within required yards: 
(a)  Fences and walls. Fences and walls not exceeding four feet in height may be located within required front and street side yards. Fences and walls not exceeding 6.5 feet in height may be located within required side and rear yards. An additional one foot of fence or wall height shall be permitted for posts, columns or gates. All other fences and walls shall be subject to all yard requirements applicable to buildings and structures. 
(b)  Yard accessories. Poles, posts, similar customary yard accessories and ornaments, and permitted signs for which no specific yard requirement is specified elsewhere in this appendix, may be located within required yards. 
Sec. 5-6. - Permitted projections into required yards. 
(a)  Certain architectural features. Sills, belt courses, bay windows, cornices, eaves, roof overhangs, chimneys, pilasters and similar architectural features of a building may project into required yards not more than two feet. 
(b)  Uncovered porches, steps, and decks. Uncovered porches, steps, landings, patios, decks and other similar building features may project into required yards, provided that such features do not exceed a height of 30 inches above the adjacent natural ground level, and provided that no such projection shall extend closer than two feet from any lot line. Covered building projections and projections exceeding 30 inches in height shall be subject to all yard requirements. 
Sec. 5-7. - Yards on corner lots and through lots. 
(a)  Front and street yards on corner lots. On a corner lot, a front yard as required in the district shall be provided along one street frontage and a second front yard of not less than 15 feet shall be provided on the street frontage. 
(b)  Rear yards on corner lot. On a corner lot, a rear yard as required in the district shall be provided. The zoning administrator shall have the authority to determine the rear yard that best suits the development of the property. 
(c)  Front yards on through lots. On through lots, there shall be a front yard as required in the district along each street frontage, and no rear yard shall be required. 
(d)  Front yard requirements for infill developments. On a vacant lot that adjoins other lots containing buildings, the required depth of the front yard shall be equal to the depth of the adjoining front yards. No front yard shall have a depth of less than 15 feet and no greater than the front yard depth normally required in the district. 
(Ord. No. 761, 4-16-02) 
Sec. 5-8. - Yards for accessory buildings. 
(a)  Certain accessory buildings. Minimum side and rear yards for buildings accessory to single-family dwellings shall be five feet. 
(b)  Structures considered part of the main building. Garages, porches and other structures attached to a main building shall be considered part of the main building for purposes of applying required yards. 
Sec. 5-9. - Yards along streets less than 50 feet in width or streets to be widened. 
(a)  Streets less than 50 feet in width. The required front yards and street side yards set forth in this appendix are applicable adjacent to public streets having a right-of-way width of 50 feet or greater. The required depth of any front yard or street side yard along a public street having a right-of-way of less than 50 feet in width shall be increased by 25 feet from that which is stated in this appendix, and shall be measured from the centerline of the street right-of-way instead of from the street line. 
(b)  Streets to be widened. In any case where there are plans approved by the Virginia Department of Transportation or the town council for the widening of any public street or highway, the zoning administrator may recommend that the required front yard set forth in this appendix be measured from the future street line. 
Sec. 5-10. - Yards and screening for swimming pools and tennis courts. 
    Swimming pools, pool deck areas and tennis courts shall not be located within required front and side yards. Swimming pools, pool deck areas or tennis courts accessory to any use other than a single-family dwelling and situated within 50 feet of adjacent property in a residential district shall be screened from such property by solid walls, fences or evergreen vegetative material not less than six feet in height. 
Sec. 5-11. - Visibility at intersections. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this provision is to prohibit the planting of shrubbery or low trees or the construction of solid fences, walls, signs or other structures that would block the visibility of oncoming vehicles to motorists at a street intersection. This provision shall not be applicable to public utility poles, official street signs, fire hydrants and other appurtenances installed by a governmental agency for public safety purposes, or to tree trunks which do not materially impair visibility and shall not be construed to require the removal of any mature trees existing at the effective date of this provision. 
(b)  Visibility triangle. On a corner lot in any district other than a CB central business district, nothing that would materially obstruct the vision of operators of motor vehicles shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow between the heights of three feet and eight feet above the the grade of the intersection of the centerlines of the adjacent intersecting streets within the following described area: 
A triangular shaped area on the ground bounded on two sides by the street lines abutting the lot, and bounded on the third side by a line joining points on said street lines 20 feet from the point of their intersection. 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
Sec. 5-12. - Transitional yard and screening requirements. 
(a)  Transitional yard requirements. Transitional yards shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Location and depth. A transitional yard shall be provided in any case where a side rear lot line of a lot abuts or is situated across an alley from property located in a district of lower intensity as shown on the following table. The transitional yard shall be provided on the lot in the higher inten 
sity district, and shall have a depth not less than shown on the table. 
 Higher 
Intensity 
District Lower 
Intensity 
District Minimum 
Yard 
(in feet) GB or CB R-LD, R-1, 
R-2 or R-3 25 GB or CB R-B 15 M-1 or M-2 R-LD, R-1, 
R-2 or R-3 50 M-1 or M-2 R-B, GB 
or CB 25  
(2)  Use of transitional yards. Transitional yards shall be devoted exclusively to screening, landscaping or retention of natural vegetation. No building, structure, parking area, loading area or outside storage, display or servicing of materials, products, equipment or supplies or area for collection of trash shall be located within any transitional yard. Driveways may be permitted to cross transitional yards only where approved by the zoning administrator and deemed necessary for purposes of public safety or providing emergency access to a building. 
(3)  Transitional yard option. A required transitional yard located between any combination of R-B, GB, CB, M-1, or M-2 districts may be reduced by not more than 50 percent of the depth shown on the table in paragraph (1) [subsection (a)(1)] when all buildings and structures comply with the full depth transitional yard shown on the table and solid structural screening is provided within the reduced transitional yard. 
(b)  Screening requirements. Screening as described in this section shall be provided and maintained within every required transitional yard and at such other locations as may be required elsewhere in this appendix. 
(1)  General requirements. Required screening shall be not less than six feet in height, shall be visually opaque, shall be continuous and shall consist of solid structural fences or walls, evergreen vegetative material or combinations thereof. Landscaped earth berms with slopes not exceeding two feet horizontal for each one foot vertical may be used in conjunction with structural or vegetative material to provide required screening. 
(2)  Structural screening. Structural screening shall consist of solid masonry walls, uniformly painted or stained wood fences or combinations thereof. Chainlink, wire mesh or similar fence material shall not be permitted for required screening purposes. 
(3)  Evergreen vegetative screening. Vegetative material shall consist of evergreen shrubs or evergreen trees of such species, size, shape and spacing as will provide effective visual screening in accordance with the requirements of this section. Where necessary to provide the required screening effect, materials shall be planted in double staggered rows. All materials shall be in good health at the time of planting and shall be maintained, or replaced as necessary, in a manner that continues to comply with the requirements of this section. With the approval of the zoning administrator, evergreen shrubbery may be not less than four feet in height at the time of planting, if the species can reasonably be expected to grow to at least six feet in height at maturity. 
Sec. 5-13. - Zero lot line option. 
(a)  Applicability. In an approved subdivision of five or more lots located in an R-1, R-2 or R-3 district, one interior side yard on a lot devoted to single-family dwelling use may be equal to zero, provided that the requirements of this section are met. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  The minimum lot area, front yard and rear yard requirements of the district in which the property is located shall be met. 
(2)  The minimum lot width shall be 50 feet. 
(3)  The zero side yard shall not be located along a street or adjacent to any property not designated for the zero lot line option. 
(4)  The minimum width of the side yard opposite the zero yard shall be 15 feet for all structures, and in no case shall the distance between two main buildings be less than 15 feet. 
(5)  Not less than 50 percent of the overall depth of the dwelling unit shall be provided along the designated zero lot line. No doors, windows or other similar openings shall be permitted in the building wall facing the designated zero lot line within five feet of the property line. 
(6)  A perpetual easement of not less than five feet in width shall be provided on the adjacent lot to permit maintenance of structures abutting a zero lot line. Such easement and the buildable area of the lot shall be shown on the subdivision plat and described in the deed for each property. 
Sec. 5-14. - Exceptions to height regulations. 
    The height regulations set forth in this appendix shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, barns or silos used for agriculture or feed storage or mixing, water or cooling towers, accessory antennas, flagpoles, ventilators, chimneys, flues, solar energy equipment or similar appurtenances or mechanical structures attached to a building and not intended for human occupancy and containing no signs or other advertising. Parapet walls may exceed the height limit applicable in a district by not more than four feet. 
DIVISION 4. - ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND TEMPORARY BUILDINGS 

Sec. 5-15. - Dwelling use prohibited. 
    No accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes except by domestic employees or caretakers whose principal occupation is rendering services on the premises for benefit of persons who occupy or use the main building on the lot, with the exception that: 
(a)  Dwelling use shall not be prohibited for temporary family health care structures, subject to the provisions of section 5-17.2. 
(Ord. No. 908, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 5-16. - Permits and relation to main building. 
    No accessory building for which a building permit is required shall be constructed or located on a lot until a building permit has been issued, and no permanent accessory building shall be constructed until a permit for construction of the main building has been issued. No permanent accessory building shall be used, except related to construction on the site, until a certificate of use and occupancy is issued for the main building. 
Sec. 5-17.1. - Temporary buildings and construction trailers. 
    When used in conjunction with construction work taking place on the site, temporary buildings and construction trailers are permitted in any district during the period when construction work is in progress as evidenced by a valid building permit. Such buildings and trailers shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction work. 
(Ord. No. 908, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 5-17.2. - Temporary family health care structures. 
(a)  In all residential districts, temporary family health care structures shall be allowed to be placed on a lot, provided that: 
(1)  The primary use of the property is a single-family detached dwelling; 
(2)  The occupant of the temporary family health care structure meets the qualifications of a mentally or physically impaired person as defined in subsection (b) below, and a letter of certification, written by a physician licensed in Virginia, has been provided to the zoning administrator; 
(3)  The property is occupied by the caregiver as his/her residence; 
(4)  The temporary family health care structure shall comply with all setback requirements that apply to the primary structure, and with any maximum floor area ratio limitations that may apply to the primary structure; 
(5)  Only one temporary family health care structure shall be allowed on a lot or parcel of land; 
(6)  The proper permits shall be obtained before a temporary family health care structure may be placed on a lot or parcel of land. Required permits may include, but are not limited to, zoning permit, building permit, electrical permit, mechanical permit, and plumbing permit. 
(b)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Activities of daily living or ADLs means bathing, dressing, toileting, transferring, bowel control, bladder control, and eating/feeding. 
(2)  Assistance means aid that is required to be provided by another person in order to safely complete the activity. 
(3)  Caregiver means an adult who provides care for a mentally or physically impaired person within the commonwealth. A caregiver shall be either related by blood, marriage, or adoption to, or be the legally appointed guardian of the mentally or physically impaired person for whom he/she is caring; 
(4)  Mentally or physically impaired person means a person who is a resident of Virginia and who requires assistance with two or more activities of daily living, as defined in § 63.2-2200, as certified in a writing provided by a physician licensed by the commonwealth; 
(5)  Temporary family health care structure means a transportable residential structure, providing an environment facilitating a caregiver's provision of care for a mentally or physically impaired person, that (i) is primarily assembled at a location other than its site of installation, (ii) is limited to one occupant who shall be the mentally or physically impaired person or, in the case of a married couple, two occupants, one of whom is a mentally or physically impaired person, and the other requires assistance with one or more activities of daily living as defined in Code of Virginia § 63.2-2200, as certified in writing by a physician licensed in the commonwealth, (iii) has no more than 300 gross square feet, and (iv) complies with applicable provisions of the Industrialized Building Safety Law (Code of Virginia § 36-70 et seq.) and the Uniform Statewide Building Code (Code of virginia § 36-97 et seq.). Placing the temporary family health care structure on a permanent foundation shall not be required or allowed. 
(c)  Any temporary family health structure installed pursuant to this section may be required to connect to any water, sewer, and electric utilities that are serving the primary residence on the property and shall comply with all applicable codes and requirements, including permits, for such connection. 
(d)  Any temporary family health care structure installed pursuant to this section shall be removed within 60 days in which the mentally or physically impaired person is no longer receiving or is no longer in need of the assistance provided for in this section. 
(e)  A letter of certification, written by a licensed physician, shall be provided to the zoning administrator on an annual basis to ensure continued compliance with this section. The zoning administrator may inspect the temporary family health care structure at reasonable times convenient to the caregiver, not limited to any annual compliance inspection. 
(f)  No signage advertising or otherwise promoting the existence of the temporary family health care structure shall be permitted either on the exterior of the structure or elsewhere on the property. 
(Ord. No. 908, 4-5-2011; Ord. No. 951, 4-15-2014 ) 
DIVISION 5. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 5-18. - Townhouse development standards. 
    The following development standards shall be applicable to all townhouses: 
(a)  Density and lot area. The density of a townhouse development shall not exceed 12 units per gross acre in the development site. Lot areas for individual townhouses shall be not less than 1,800 square feet for interior lots and 2,500 square feet for end lots. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. Individual townhouse lots shall be not less than 18 feet in width from center of wall to center of wall for interior lots and from center of wall to outside face of the end wall for end lots. 
(c)  Front yard. A front yard of not less than 25 feet shall be provided adjacent to public streets. A front yard of not less than 20 feet shall be provided adjacent to common parking areas, drives, streets and other areas. 
(d)  Side yard. A side yard of not less than 15 feet shall be provided at each end of a series of townhouse units, except that a side yard of not less than 30 feet shall be provided adjacent to the boundary of a development site. 
(e)  Rear yard. A rear yard of not less than 25 feet shall be provided for each townhouse unit, except that a rear yard of not less than 40 feet shall be provided adjacent to the boundary of a development site. 
(f)  Location of accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be located in any required front or side yard. An accessory building not exceeding ten feet by ten feet may be located in any rear yard. 
(g)  Number of contiguous units. Not more than ten townhouse units shall be attached in a series or continuous row. Variations in the setbacks and architectural treatment of the facades of townhouses attached in a series shall be provided so that no more than four contiguous units have the same setback and architectural treatment. 
(h)  Height limit. No townhouse unit shall exceed a height of 35 feet. No accessory building shall exceed a height of 15 feet. 
(i)  Sewer and water. All townhouses shall be served by public sewer and public water systems. 
(j)  Street frontage and common areas. Every townhouse development shall have frontage on and access to an improved public street. Individual townhouse lots within a development site may front on private streets, drives, parking areas or other common areas owned and maintained by a homeowners' association, provided that street design and construction standards are approved by the zoning administrator and town engineer in accordance with town policies. Suitable easements, covenants and restrictions providing for access to all lots and maintenance of all streets, access drives, parking areas, open spaces and other common facilities owned by a homeowners' association shall be approved as to form by the town attorney and recorded. 
Sec. 5-19. - Manufactured home park standards. 
    The following development standards shall be applicable to manufactured home parks in addition to the requirements set forth in article VIII of this appendix pertaining to special use permits: 
(a)  Minimum site size. Five contiguous acres. 
(b)  Maximum density. Six units per gross acre. 
(c)  Minimum area of manufactured home space. Five thousand square feet. 
(d)  Minimum dimensions of manufactured home space. Fifty feet in width and 100 feet in length. 
(e)  Street frontage. Every manufactured home park shall have not less than 200 feet of frontage on an improved public street. Each manufactured home space shall have frontage on and access to a public street or private street constructed in accordance with standards approved by the town council. 
(f)  Yards. 
(1)  Yards in general. No manufactured home or other building or structure shall be located within ten feet of a boundary of a manufactured home space. 
(2)  Front yards. No manufactured home, accessory structure or other building or structure within a manufactured home park shall be located within 20 feet of an interior roadway or within 25 feet of any public street right-of-way. 
(3)  Separation between manufactured homes. No manufactured home shall be located within 30 feet of any other manufactured home. 
(g)  Buffer. A landscaped buffer area of not less than 25 feet in width shall be provided adjacent to all boundaries of a manufactured home park. Such buffer area shall not be occupied by any manufactured home space, building, structure, parking area, improved area for active recreation purposes or roadway, other than an approved means of access to an abutting public street. Along exterior boundaries abutting properties other than public streets, such buffer area shall include continuous solid fencing or evergreen vegetative material not less than six feet in height with no openings to adjoining privately owned properties. 
(h)  Recreation area. Every manufactured home park shall include within its boundaries areas for indoor or outdoor recreation purposes for common use by residents of the park. Such areas shall in the aggregate consist of not less than ten percent of the gross area of the manufactured home park. 
(i)  Improvement requirements. 
(1)  Sewer and water systems. Every manufactured home park shall be served by public sewer and public water systems connected to each manufactured home unit and each building or structure containing plumbing facilities. 
(2)  Storm drainage. Storm drainage facilities shall be provided within each manufactured home park in accordance with a storm drainage plan submitted and approved with the special use application. 
(3)  Streets, roadways and parking spaces. Streets, roads and parking spaces shall be paved with dustfree, all-weather hard surface material such as asphalt, asphalt and gravel seal coat, concrete, unit pavers or similar material. The width of private streets shall be not less than 20 feet. In any case where parking is situated along a street, additional width shall be provided as necessary to meet required parking space dimensions and to maintain a usable trafficway width of not less than 20 feet. 
(4)  Traffic control. Signs shall be installed within a manufactured home park as needed for purposes of traffic control and safety. 
(5)  Lighting. Lighting shall be installed along streets within a manufactured home park and adjacent to common facilities serving residents of the park. 
(6)  Underground utilities. All utilities within a manufactured home park shall be installed underground, provided that waiver of this requirement may be recommended by the planning commission and approved by the town council when it is determined that soil or topographic conditions make such requirement impracticable. 
(7)  Refuse facilities. Refuse containers of adequate capacity to meet the needs of all manufactured home units and common facilities shall be provided for the deposit and collection of refuse. Containers serving individual manufactured home units and containers serving common facilities within the manufactured home park shall be located or screened so as not to be visible from public or private streets or properties adjacent to the park. 
(8)  Delineation of spaces. Each manufactured home space shall be clearly delineated with permanent markers at each corner and shall be identified with the space number as shown on the approved plans. 
(j)  Installation of manufactured homes. 
(1)  Completion of improvements. No manufactured home shall be installed until all required improvements have been completed and the zoning administrator has certified that all applicable requirements of this appendix and the approved special use permit are met. 
(2)  Compliance with building code. All manufactured homes shall be anchored and installed in accordance with applicable requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Build ing Code. A zoning permit shall be required for each manufactured home prior to installation. 
(3)  Skirting. Skirting shall be installed and maintained around each manufactured home so as to conceal from view the frame, axles, wheels, crawl space and all utility connections. Skirting shall be constructed of weather resistant material and shall meet the requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
Cross reference- Manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58. 
Sec. 5-20. - Stormwater management regulations. 
(a)  Drainage plans. Drainage plans may be required for developments in any zoning district. Such plans shall be prepared by an engineer who is authorized by the commonwealth to practice as such. 
(b)  Design of improvements. The design of all drainage improvements shall be based on runoff to be anticipated from a ten-year frequency storm, or greater if conditions necessitate, based on conditions before development with no increase in the rate of runoff after development. Calculations supporting such design shall be furnished as part of the plan. The entire tributary to the proposed development shall be considered in the design. Unless otherwise agreed to by the town engineer, the entire area shall be considered as if it were fully developed. 
(c)  Common system. Where a proposed development includes more than one lot, a common stormwater management system, serving all of the lots included in the development, shall be provided, unless otherwise approved by the town engineer. 
(d)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply in the case of all zoning permit applications except the following: 
(1)  Construction, reconstruction, moving or addition to a single-family detached dwelling or permitted accessory structure and including associated grading and clearing; 
(2)  Construction, reconstruction, moving or addition to a two-family dwelling and including associated grading and clearing, when development is not in conjunction with the construction, reconstruction, moving or addition to other dwellings on the same lot or adjacent lot under the same ownership; 
(3)  Additions to buildings or uses which do not result in an increase of greater than ten percent of the floor area of a building and where the number of required parking spaces is increased no more than three spaces. 
Sec. 5-21. - Location and height of satellite dish antennas. 
    No satellite dish antenna, guy anchorage or other support for a satellite dish antenna shall be located in any required front yard or side yard along a street or within three feet of any interior side or rear property line. No ground-mounted satellite dish antenna, together with its structural support, shall exceed a height of 20 feet. All satellite dish antennas and structural supports shall be installed in accordance with applicable requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
Sec. 5-22. - Outdoor lighting. 
    Outdoor lighting, provided as accessory to any use or to illuminate any parking area, sign or similar device, shall be located, directed or shielded so as not to shine directly on or to result in glare on nearby properties or to create a potential traffic hazard on adjacent streets as a result of glare or similarity to or confusion with traffic signals, warning lights or lighting on emergency vehicles. The exterior of a building, structure or portion thereof shall not be illuminated by outlining such with lights, except for purposes of temporary seasonal decoration or illumination of display windows of permitted businesses. 
Sec. 5-23. - Parking of recreational vehicles, watercraft, personal utility trailers, and recreational equipment trailers in residential and R-B districts. 
(a)  All recreational vehicles, watercraft, personal utility trailers, and recreational equipment trailers shall be parked in a rear yard, a side yard behind the front line of the main building and not within the required side yard, or inside of a completely enclosed garage or building. In the instance of a corner lot that fronts on two streets, each yard that fronts a street shall be considered a front yard. 
(b)  A recreational vehicle, watercraft, utility trailer, or recreational equipment trailer may be parked in front of the main building for a period not exceeding 120 hours for maintenance, loading and unloading purposes, provided that such motor vehicle or equipment shall: 
(1)  Be licensed for the current year; 
(2)  Be at least 15 feet from the front property line; 
(3)  Not cause a site visibility problem for motorists; 
(4)  Not be over 32 feet in length or nine feet in height; 
(5)  Not be inhabited; and 
(6)  Not be parked in front of the main building for more than a total of 120 hours in a 14-day period. 
(Ord. No. 860, 11-6-2007) 
Sec. 5-24. - Parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts. 
(a)  No truck or commercial vehicle, as defined in article X of this appendix, nor any utility trailer when used for commercial purposes, shall be parked or stored outside of a completely enclosed building in a residential district, except while being used to perform a service on the premises; 
(b)  No construction machinery or equipment shall be parked or stored in a residential district unless such machinery or equipment is incidental to construction activity occurring on the premises; 
(c)  Any commercial vehicle or trailer covered by this section may be parked on the property for a period not exceeding 48 hours for the purposes of performing a service on the premises, provided that such vehicle or trailer shall: 
(1)  Be at least 15 feet from the front property line; 
(2)  Not cause a site visibility problem for motorists. 
(d)  These provisions shall not apply to vehicles being used in conjunction with agricultural use of the premises. 
(e)  These provisions shall not apply to a property within the R-B residential business district if the property is used for commercial purposes. These provisions will apply to home occupations. 
(Ord. No. 645, 3-19-1996; Ord. No. 861, 11-6-2007) 
Cross reference- Licenses, § 86-246 et seq.; parking generally, § 90-101 et seq. 
Secs. 5-25-5-29. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Parking generally, § 90-101 et seq. 

Sec. 5-30. - Number of spaces required. 
(a)  Generally. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for particular uses shall be as set forth in the following schedule. The requirements shall apply to any new building constructed, any enlargement of an existing building, any new use established or any conversion of or change in an existing use. 
(b)  Existing buildings and uses. In the case of any enlargement, expansion or change in an existing building or use that is nonconforming with regard to these requirements, the required number of spaces shall be the sum of the spaces provided prior to the enlargement, expansion or change and any additional spaces required by the schedule as a result of the enlargement, expansion or change. 
(c)  Requirements in the central business district. Off-street parking shall not be required for uses in the CB central business district, except hotels, motels, tourist homes and bed and breakfast establishments. 
(d)  Schedule of parking requirements. 
Use Number of Spaces (1) Singe-family dwelling 2 per dwelling unit (2) Two-family dwelling 2 per dwelling unit (3) Townhouse 2 per each 1 to 2 bedrooms dwelling unit 
3 per each 3 or more bedrooms dwelling unit (4) Multifamily 2 per each 1 to 2 bedrooms dwelling unit 
3 per each 3 or more bedrooms dwelling unit (5) Dwelling unit in B district in a building with nondwelling use 1 per dwelling unit (6) Manufactured home park 2 per manufactured home (7) Bed and breakfast 2, plus 1 per lodging unit (8) Family day home 2, plus 1 per nonresident employee (9) Child care center 1 per employee, plus 1 per 20 children enrolled, plus 1 for each facility vehicle (10) Adult day care home 2, plus 1 per nonresident employee (11) Adult day care center 2, plus 1 per employee (12) Group home 2, plus 1 per employee (13) Assisted care facility 1 per 4 beds, plus 1 per employee (14) Nursing home 1 per 3 beds, plus 1 per employee and staff (15) Rooming[house] or boardinghouse 1 per lodging unit, plus 2 per permanent residence (16) Church, other place of worship 1 per 4 seats in main auditorium or sanctuary (17) Public or private school 2 per classroom, plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. other teaching space (18) Theater, auditorium, stadium, similar place of public assembly 1 per 4 seats (19) Indoor or outdoor recreation facility 1 per 150 sq. ft. of improved recreation area (20) Indoor or outdoor court game facility 1 per 2 players, based on court capacity (21) Bowling alley 4 per lane, plus 1 per table or booth for restaurant area (22) Golf course, country club 40 per 9 holes, plus 1 per employee (23) Miniature golf course 1.5 per hole, plus 1 per employee (24) Office 1 per 300 sq. ft. floor area (25) Bank, other financial service 1 per 200 sq. ft. floor area, plus 5 stacking spaces per drive-up window (26) Medical or dental clinic 5 per doctor, plus 1 per employee (27) Hospital 1 per 2 beds, plus 1 per employee and staff (28) Hotel, motel or tourist home 1.2 per lodging unit (29) Funeral home 1 per 4 seats in chapels, plus 1 per 2 employees, plus 1 per company vehicle (30) Retail store or shop not otherwise listed, video rental store 1 per 250 sq. ft. floor area (31) Personal service business, dance studio, laundromat, dry cleaning 1 per 250 sq. ft. floor area (32) Furniture, carpet, appliance, building materials or supply, repair or wholesale business, art gallery 1 per 500 sq. ft. floor area (33) Shopping center 4 per 1000 sq. ft. floor area (34) Restaurant, including fast food, nightclub, cafe, amusement center 1 per 100 sq. ft. floor area, plus 8 stacking spaces per drive-up window (35) Auto, truck service or repair, self-serve or gasoline service station 4 per service bay, plus stacking space at pump islands as required by site plan approval [(36) Reserved] (37) Self-service or automated auto wash 4 stacking spaces per self-service bay: Stacking and maneuvering space as required by site plan approval for automated facility (38) Miniwarehouse 3 for management office, plus 1 per employee, with a minimum of 4 spaces (39) Manufacturing, processing or fabricating plant, research, warehouse or other industrial use 3 per 4 employees, plus 1 per vehicle regularly used in conjunction with the business or industry  
(Ord. No. 665, § 5-30, 3-18-1997) 
Sec. 5-31. - Method of determining number of spaces. 
    For purposes of determining the number of off-street parking spaces required for a particular use, the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  Floor area shall include the area of the floor space devoted to the use, including space used for related incidental purposes, and shall be measured along exterior faces of enclosing walls or, in the case of different uses in attached buildings or in the same buildings, shall be measured along the center lines of shared walls. 
(b)  Number of employees or staff shall be construed as the maximum number of persons employed on any working shift. 
(c)  When computation of required number of spaces results in a fractional number, the required number of spaces shall be the next whole number. 
(d)  When a building or premises is devoted to more than one use, the total number of spaces required shall be the sum of the spaces required for each use. 
(e)  Required off-street parking spaces may be provided within garages, carports or enclosed building space when the provisions of this article pertaining to dimensions and accessibility of spaces are met. 
(f)  The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for a use not specifically listed on the schedule shall be as required for the most similar use listed as determined by the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 5-32. - Location of required parking spaces. 
    Required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot or on a contiguous lot under the same ownership as the use for which they are required, provided that spaces for any church or any use in the GB, M-1 or M-2 district, other than a dwelling use, hotel, motel, tourist home or bed and breakfast establishment, may be located off the premises when all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The parking area within which such parking spaces are provided shall comply with the use regulations and all other requirements of the district in which it is located. 
(b)  All such parking spaces shall be located within 500 feet by normal pedestrian route of a principal entrance to the building they serve. 
(c)  The property on which such parking spaces are located shall be under the same ownership and control as the property on which the use to be served is located, or under the same ownership and control as the use. At any time the parking is to be discontinued, the zoning administrator shall be given at least 30 days' notice in writing, and unless the parking spaces are no longer required by this appendix, such spaces shall be provided elsewhere in compliance with this appendix. 
Sec. 5-33. - Parking space dimensions. 
(a)  Minimum dimensions. Required off-street parking spaces shall be not less than nine feet in width and 18 feet in length, except that spaces arranged parallel to their means of access shall be not less than eight feet in width and 22 feet in length. The width and length of parking spaces shall be measured perpendicular to one another so as to form a rectangle with dimensions as required herein. Parking spaces required to be accessible to persons with disabilities by the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall comply with the requirements of that Code. 
(b)  Allowance for vehicle overhang area. Up to 30 inches of the required length of off-street parking spaces may be provided as vehicle overhang area and need not be paved, provided that wheel stops are installed. Such overhang area shall be clear of any obstruction to vehicles utilizing the parking space and shall not encroach into any other parking space, access aisle, public right-of-way, adjacent property, pedestrian walkway or required yard within which parking is not permitted. 
Sec. 5-34. - Criteria for access and maneuvering space. 
    All required off-street parking spaces shall be provided with access and maneuvering space meeting the following criteria: 
(a)  Driveway or access aisle. Each required off-street parking space shall be provided with a driveway or common access aisle directly serving such space and of sufficient dimensions to enable vehicles to maneuver into and out of such space without encroaching into another parking space or extending beyond the designated driveway or access aisle area. 
(b)  Obstruction of streets prohibited. No area devoted to parking or access thereto shall be designed, operated or maintained so as to cause any public street, alley or sidewalk area to be obstructed by vehicles entering, leaving or maneuvering within the parking area. Maneuvering space of sufficient arrangement and dimensions shall be provided within parking areas in order to avoid such obstruction. 
(c)  Access aisle dimensions. The minimum dimensions of access aisles serving off-street parking spaces for uses other than single-family and two-family dwellings shall be as set forth in the following schedule, provided that greater widths may be required where necessary for purposes of fire access to buildings. Aisle widths for parking arrangements not listed shall be determined by the zoning administrator based on the nearest arrangement listed. 
Aisle Width 
(in feet) Arrangement 
 of Parking Two-way 
Traffic One-way 
Traffic 90 25 24 60 24 20 45 24 16 30 or parallel 24 12  
Sec. 5-35. - Parking spaces accessible to persons with disabilities. 
    Off-street parking spaces accessible to persons with disabilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Such spaces shall be included in the calculation of total number of spaces required by this article. 
Sec. 5-36. - Driveways and curb cuts. 
    The location and design of all curb cuts and entrance and exit driveways connecting with public streets shall conform to the standards of the Virginia Department of Transportation and shall be approved by the town engineer. 
Sec. 5-37. - Paving, drainage and delineation of spaces. 
(a)  Paving required. Parking areas containing five or more spaces and all related entrances, exits and driveways shall be paved with dustfree, all-weather hard surface material such as asphalt, asphalt and gravel seal coat, concrete, unit pavers or similar material approved by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  Exemption for certain parking areas. The requirements of paragraph [subsection] (a) of this section shall not apply to parking areas serving churches and other public and semipublic uses which, in the judgment of the zoning administrator, involve intermittent, infrequent or nondaily parking use, provided that sufficient improvements are made to ensure that the parking area is usable and that proper access and drainage are provided. 
(c)  Drainage and grades. All parking areas shall be designed and constructed with respect to drainage so as to prevent damage to abutting properties and public streets. No finished grade within any parking area shall exceed ten percent. 
(d)  Delineation of parking spaces. Parking spaces shall be delineated by markings on the pavement surface. Wheel stops, curbs, walls, fences, shrubbery or other means shall be provided along the edges of parking areas where necessary to prevent parked vehicles from encroaching onto adjacent properties or into public streets and alleys, required yards or public walkways. 
Sec. 5-38. - Parking in front yards in certain districts. 
    Off-street parking spaces and access aisles serving uses other than single-family and two-family dwellings shall not be located within any required front yard or required side yard along a street in a residential or R-B district. This restriction shall not be construed to prohibit driveways from the street when approved by the appropriate authority. 
Sec. 5-39. - Screening of certain parking areas. 
    Parking areas containing five or more spaces located in any district shall be screened from adjacent properties located in residential districts. An adjacent property shall be construed to be a property which abuts or is situated directly across a public alley from the parking area. A parking area need not be screened from another parking area containing five or more spaces located on an adjacent property. Screening shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in article V of this appendix, except that where screening is not required in conjunction with a transitional yard, the height of such screening may be reduced to four feet. 
Sec. 5-40. - Off-street loading areas. 
    Space for the loading and unloading of trucks and other vehicles shall be provided on sites developed for commercial and industrial uses. Loading areas shall be so located on the site and shall be of such dimensions as not to occupy or obstruct required off-street parking spaces or to obstruct any public street or any fire lane or emergency access route during the loading or unloading of vehicles. When necessary to meet the criteria, designated loading areas with adequate maneuvering space shall be shown on each site plan submitted for approval for commercial or industrial use and, subject to approval of such site plan, shall be provided and maintained on the site. 
DIVISION 7. - SIGN REGULATIONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 887, adopted June 16, 2009, amended division 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 7, §§ 5-41-5-56, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 754, adopted August 21, 2001; Ord. No. 789, adopted August 19, 2003; and Ord. No. 845, adopted February 20, 2007. 

Sec. 5-41. - Purpose, applicability and definitions. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to provide comprehensive sign regulations, which will promote and carry out the following objectives of the town: 
(1)  To regulate the type, placement, and size of signs and other graphic devices within the town; 
(2)  To ensure equity in the distribution of the privilege of using the public environment to communicate private information; 
(3)  To emphasize assets of community appearance and high environmental quality in promoting business, industry and economic development; 
(4)  To promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the public by prohibiting improperly designed or located signs which could distract, confuse, mislead, obstruct vision or create traffic hazards or other hazards to the community; 
(5)  To protect property values by improving the quality of the environment; 
(6)  To promote the economic growth of the town by creating a community image that is conducive to attracting new business and industrial development; 
(7)  To permit reasonable legibility and effectiveness of signs and to prevent their overconcentration, improper placement and excessive height, bulk, density, and area; and 
(8)  To provide for the reasonable advertising of business and civic products and services, with recognition of the effects of signage on the character of the community. 
(b)  Applicability. The regulations contained in this division shall be applicable to signs in all districts. No sign shall be erected, constructed, installed or attached except in conformity with all of the provisions set forth in this division for the particular sign in the district in which it is located. 
(c)  Definitions. Definitions of a sign, the various types of signs and the method of measuring the area of signs. 
(1)  Sign. A presentation of letters, numbers, figures, pictures, emblems, insignia, lines of colors, or any combination thereof which can be viewed from a public right-of-way, private road or another property, and which is displayed for the purpose of information, direction or identification or to advertise or promote a business, service, activity, interest or product, or any otherwise lawful noncommercial message that does not attract attention to a business operated for profit or to a commodity or service offered for sale. 
(2)  Sign, animated. Any sign having a conspicuous and intermittent variation in illumination, message or physical position of any or all of its parts. A time and/or temperature display which changes its messages not more than once every five seconds or any permitted flag or banner which is entirely dependent upon wind for movement shall not be considered an animated sign. 
(3)  Sign, banner. A sign applied to cloth, paper, flexible plastic, nylon, canvas or similar material, and generally intended to be displayed on a temporary basis. No banner sign may be converted to a permanent sign. 
(4)  Sign, billboard. A sign used as an outdoor display for the purpose of advertising or promoting a business, service, activity or product which is not located, offered for sale or otherwise related to use of the premises on which such sign is situated. A "billboard sign" may also be referred to as an "off-premises sign." 
(5)  Sign, electronic message board. A sign which is electronically controlled and which displays event and/or related advertising information for a business which is located on the same premises as the sign, on which the intensity of illumination is maintained at a constant level, and on which the message screen may not change more frequently than every five seconds. The message may scroll no more than ten words in a sequence, and must remain static for a minimum of five seconds before changing. The message shall not flash. 
(6)  Sign, freestanding. Any affixed sign which is a monument sign or which is supported by upright poles, posts or braces at least three inches in diameter, or five inches if measured diagonally. A freestanding sign shall be considered a structure within the meaning of this appendix. 
(7)  Sign, fuel pump accessory. A sign attached to a gasoline pump or to the island in which the gasoline pump is located, which identifies acceptable methods of payment or other important information related to the use the pumps and sale of fuel. These signs may not contain any advertising matter for the gas station or its products. 
(8)  Sign, fuel pump topper. A sign located on the top of gasoline pumps, which may display the price per gallon of gasoline or advertisements for products sold on the premises. 
(9)  Sign, historic site. A sign erected and maintained by a public agency, or nonprofit historical society, that identifies the location of, and provides information about, a historic place or event. A maximum of 20 square feet in area shall be allowed per sign and shall be permitted in all districts and not more than one site sign shall be permitted on a lot, subject to approval by the zoning administrator. 
(10)  Sign, movable merchandise. A sign which is not attached to a building or anchored within the ground and is capable of being moved easily from one location to another on its own chassis or by other means, which bears advertising matter for products which are sold on the premises. No movable merchandise sign may be converted to a permanent sign unless a new zoning permit is issued pursuant to section 5-56 of this appendix. 
(11)  Sign, nonconforming. A sign which was lawfully existing at the effective date of this appendix or subsequent amendment thereto, and which does not conform with the area, height, location, placement, type, number, lighting or other regulation pertaining to signs set forth in this appendix or an amendment thereto. 
(12)  Sign, off-premises. Any sign which directs attention to a message, or business, commodity, activity, service or product not conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where the sign is located. These signs may also be known as location signs, billboards, outdoor advertising signs, or general advertising signs. 
(13)  Sign, permanent. A sign that is intended to be permanently in place for the duration of the permit use. Examples of permanent signs may include, but are not limited to wall signs, projecting signs, freestanding or monument signs, awning and canopy signs, permanent window or door signs, and on-site directional signs. 
(14)  Sign, portable. A sign consisting of a fixed message or a changeable message panel, and which sign is not attached to a building or anchored within the ground and is capable of being moved easily from one location to another on its own chassis or by other means. Portable signs may not be illuminated or include audio equipment. No portable sign may be converted to a permanent sign. 
(15)  Sign, projecting. A sign which is attached to and projects from a wall of a building so that the face of the sign is perpendicular or nearly perpendicular to the face of such wall. 
(16)  Sign, public service. A sign advertising a fair, carnival, festival, or similar event when conducted by or for the benefit of any civic, religious, educational, or charitable cause, provided that the sign shall be displayed no longer than 21 days per calendar year. 
(17)  Sign, temporary campaign or election. A sign announcing or advertising a political campaign, candidacy for public office, a matter to be voted on at public election, or similar activity of a temporary nature. 
(18)  Sign, wall. A sign which is painted on or attached flat against a wall, on the outside of a window or other vertical or nearly vertical surface of a building, and which extends no more than 15 inches from the building, and the message portion of which is parallel or nearly parallel to the surface to which the sign is attached. 
(19)  Sign, window and door. A sign that is applied or attached directly to the interior or exterior of a window or door, or that is suspended from or located within one foot of a window or door, so that it is visible from any street, sidewalk, or public or private outdoor common space. This term shall not include merchandise located in a window. The window sign area shall be the total area of the imaginary rectangles contiguous to and surrounding each word, picture, logo, logotype, symbol, banding, or graphic. 
(20)  Sign area. The area of the smallest individual rectangle, triangle or circle or combination of not more than two contiguous rectangles, triangles or circles which will encompass all elements of the sign which form an integral part of the display, including background, borders and structural trim. The area of a double-faced sign shall be construed to be the area of the largest single face of the sign, provided that the two faces are back-to-back or the interior angle formed by them does not exceed 30 degrees. A pole, post or similar structural support for a freestanding sign, including pole covers, shall be considered as part of the sign area if such pole, post, structural support or pole cover exceeds three feet in width or contains an integral part of the sign display. 
(21)  Sign structure. Any portion of a sign, including the area devoted to message or display, and all poles, posts, supports, uprights, bracing, framework, border, background and structural trim. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-42. - Exempted signs, displays and devices. 
    The following signs, displays and devices shall be exempted from the regulations contained in this division: 
(a)  Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property numbers, post box numbers or names of occupant of premises; 
(b)  Flags and insignia of a governmental unit except when displayed in connection with commercial promotions, and decorative flags or banners containing no advertising, commercial logo or message and not displayed as part of a commercial promotion or in connection with any presentation otherwise considered a sign; 
(c)  Legal notices; identification, informational or directional signs erected or required by governing bodies; 
(d)  Integral decorative or architectural features of a building, except for letters, trademarks, logos or moving parts or moving lights; 
(e)  Public service signs that do not to exceed 32 square feet in area. 
(f)  Memorial signs and historical markers pertaining to the site on which they are located, when erected and maintained by a public agency or not-for-profit organization; 
(g)  Signs not exceeding four square feet in area providing directions to a public use, provided such signs contain no advertising matter and are erected and maintained by a public agency or not-for-profit organization; 
(h)  Signs placed by a public utility showing the location of underground facilities; 
(i)  Nonilluminated signs, not more than four square feet in area, displayed on private property for the direction or convenience of the public and containing no advertising matter, including signs that identify restrooms, location of public telephones, freight entrances, no trespassing and similar signs; 
(j)  Political campaign or election signs located outside of public right-of-way, provided such signs are not erected for more than 120 days, each sign is not to exceed 32 square feet, and are removed within 14 days after the campaign or election to which they pertain; 
(k)  Signs on the inside of establishments, except those specified in subsections 5-43.2(d), (f), and (g). Signs located closer than 12 inches from any window or door, whose main purpose is to draw attention to a message, or business, commodity, activity, service or product conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises, shall not be exempted. 
(l)  Signs displayed on major holidays; 
(m)  Street address signs, not exceeding four square feet in area; 
(n)  Clocks that display time and temperature through the use of mechanical means or the controlled display of lights, provided these devices do not display any other message and do not change more than every five seconds; 
(o)  Signs displayed on a truck, bus, or other vehicle while in use in the normal conduct of business. This section shall not be interpreted to permit the parking for display purposes a vehicle to which a sign is attached or the use of such a vehicle as a portable sign. 
(p)  All signs placed within public right-of-way, including the Virginia Department of Transportation's Integrated Directional Signage Program, shall fall under the authority of the town manager or his authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-43. - General provisions. 
Sec. 5-43.1. - Signs in all districts. 
(a)  All signs shall conform to applicable provisions of the International Building Code (IBC) and all amendments thereto. 
(b)  Pennants, sandwich-board type signs and balloons or other air or gas-filled devices shall be permitted only for promotion of a new business within the RB, CB, GB, M-1, or M-2 districts, and shall be removed within 14 days after the opening of such business. 
(c)  No sign shall be permitted to be nailed or otherwise affixed to any existing sign structure unless it is to become an integral part of such existing sign structure. 
(d)  No sign shall be located, arranged or designed so that it interferes with traffic by any of the following means: glare; blocking of reasonable sight lines for streets, sidewalks or driveways; confusion with a traffic control device by reason of its color, location, shape, or other characteristic; or any other means. If sign is to be placed on a corner lot, it shall be located outside of the visibility triangle, as described in article V, section 5-11, visibility at intersections, of this appendix. 
(e)  Except as specifically permitted in the CB district, no portion of any sign or its supporting structure shall extend beyond the property lines of the lot on which it is located or extend into or project over the right-of-way of a public street or alley. 
(f)  No wall sign or other sign shall be attached to or obstruct any window, door, stairway or other opening intended for ingress or egress or for needed ventilation and light. 
(g)  No person except a public officer or employee in performance of a public duty shall paste, paint, print, nail, tack, erect, place or fasten any sign, pennant, banner or notice of any kind within, facing or visible to any public street or public open space, except as provided for in this appendix. 
(h)  Within the CB, GB, M-1, and M-2 districts, and at shopping centers, the zoning administrator may issue permits for movable A-frame or "sandwich board" signs to be placed on private property unless permitted on the town sidewalks or right-of-way in locations approved by the zoning administrator. Such signs shall not project over any portion of a street nor shall they obstruct the sidewalk to less than four feet in width. Within the GB, M-1 and M-2 districts, such signs shall not be greater than six feet in height or two and one-half feet in width. Within the CB district, such signs shall not be greater than four feet in height or two and one-half feet in width. All such signs shall be of durable construction, and when displayed shall be anchored in a manner approved by the zoning administrator. Such signs shall only be displayed during business hours. Within the CB, GB, M-1 and M-2 districts, one sandwich board sign is permitted for each business and for shopping centers are not to exceed a total of 12 sandwich board signs. 
(i)  For gasoline service stations, self-service gasoline stations or convenience stores located within the CB district, GB district, M-1 and M-2 districts, and at shopping centers, the zoning administrator may issue a permit for the following signs: 
(1)  Movable merchandise sign. Such sign shall not project over any portion of a street nor shall it obstruct the sidewalk to less than four feet in width. Such sign shall not be greater than six feet in height or two and one-half feet in width, shall be of durable construction, and shall be anchored in a manner approved by the zoning administrator. Within the CB, GB, M-1 and M-2 districts, one movable merchandise sign is permitted for each gasoline station or convenience store. For gasoline stations located within shopping centers, the movable merchandise sign shall be counted towards the total of 12 sandwich board signs which are allowed for the shopping center. Such signs shall not be required to be taken in after business hours. 
(2)  Fuel pump accessory sign. Not more than two such signs shall be permitted to be displayed per each gasoline island, with the maximum of one sign being displayed on the end of each gasoline island that is visible from the public right-of-way. Each sign shall not exceed six square feet in area. Each sign shall count towards the maximum number of signs allowable in each district. 
(3)  Fuel pump topper sign. One such sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, shall be permitted for each gasoline pump station. Sign shall be permanently anchored to the top of the gasoline pump in a manner approved by the zoning administrator. Such sign shall not be counted towards the maximum number of signs allowable in each district, provided that the sign is not visible from the public right-of-way. 
(j)  A zoning permit shall be required for each sign or for any changes or additions to existing signs. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-43.2. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  Any sign that due to its size, location, color, or illumination obscures a sign displayed by a public agency for the purpose of giving traffic or safety instructions or directions. 
(b)  Any sign, except an official public notice, which is nailed, tacked, posted, or in any other manner attached to any utility pole, or structure supporting wire, cable, or pipe; or to public property of any description. 
(c)  Any sign located within a public right-of-way, except for signs displayed by a duly constituted governmental authority, or those signs for which written authorization has been obtained from the town manager or his authorized agent. 
(d)  Flashing or revolving lights, or beacons intended to direct attention to a location, building or service, or any similar device otherwise displayed that imitates by its design or use, emergency service vehicles or equipment. 
(e)  Any sign that simulates an official traffic sign or signal, and which contains the words "STOP," "GO," "SLOW," "CAUTION," "DANGER," "WARNING," or similar words. 
(f)  Animated signs shall not be permitted in any district. 
(g)  Any sign or portion thereof that rotates, or otherwise moves through the use of electrical or wind power, with the exception of the following: 
(1)  The changing of messages on electronic message boards; 
(2)  Rotating barber poles not exceeding six feet in height and one foot in width. 
(h)  Signs advertising activities or products that are illegal under federal, state, or town law. 
(i)  Off-premises directional and advertisement signs. Signs directing and guiding traffic to a business which is not located on the property on which the sign is located, except for those directional signs which are permitted under subsection 5-42(g) of this appendix, or those signs for which written authorization has been obtained from the town manager or his authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-43.3. - Illuminated signs. 
(a)  Signs may be illuminated either through the use of backlighting or direct lighting provided the following standards are met: 
(1)  Information on any illumination proposed as part of a sign must be provided by the applicant on the sign permit application. 
(2)  No light from any illuminated sign shall cause direct glare into or upon any building other than the building to which the sign is related. 
(3)  No light from any illuminated sign shall cause direct glare onto any adjoining piece of property or any adjoining right-of-way. 
(4)  Arrows or other directional indicators on a sign may not be illuminated. 
(b)  Any sign containing electrical components shall conform to current UL, ETL, CSA, or ULC standards and display a label from one of these recognized testing labs; or as an alternative, shall be designed and constructed to standards that would allow one of the above-referenced labels to be affixed and thereafter inspected to insure compliance with these standards. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-43.4. - Damaged or neglected signs. 
(a)  The zoning administrator shall have the authority to order the removal, without compensation, of any sign or sign structure that due to neglect or damage poses a clear danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(b)  The town may collect the cost of such removal, obliteration or abatement from the person erecting, using, operating, posting or displaying such signs. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-43.5. - Historic signs. 
(a)  Intent. Identify the architectural, cultural, and historic significance to the town and encourage their preservation, enhancement, and maintenance. 
(b)  Designation. A sign may be designated historically significant if it was installed prior to January 1, 1960, and meets at least three or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  The sign exemplifies, symbolizes, or manifests elements of the cultural, social, economic, political or historic heritage of the town; 
(2)  The sign identifies with a person or persons or groups who significantly contributed to the history and development of the town, regional, state or national culture and history; 
(3)  The sign exemplifies one of the best remaining architectural type in a community; or contains outstanding or exemplary elements of attention to architectural design, detail, materials, or craftsmanship of a particular historic period. 
(4)  The sign is in a unique location or singular physical characteristic(s) represents an established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood, community or the town; 
(5)  The sign has been in existence for more than 40 years and it possesses integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association; 
(6)  The sign has been continually displayed for more than 40 years, with the exception of routine maintenance, repair or restoration; 
(c)  Designation of historic sign(s) shall be subject to approval by the zoning administrator. 
(d)  A zoning permit will be required for a historic sign and any historic sign displayed shall comply with all applicable provisions of the IBC and all amendments thereto. 
(e)  A historic sign shall be restored to its original condition. 
(f)  A historic sign shall only be allowed in the following zoning districts: CB, GB, RB, M-1, and M-2 and shall be exempted from being included in the maximum permitted sign area and the maximum number of signs allowed in the designated districts. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-43.6. - Obsolete signs. 
(a)  Signs which have been abandoned or have become obsolete due to closing of a business, change in the nature of the business establishment, or for any other reason rendering the sign nonapplicable to the property upon which it is displayed, shall be painted out or otherwise removed by the owner of the building or premises upon which it is situated within 30 days from the date of the action that caused the sign to be abandoned or obsolete. 
(b)  Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the zoning administrator is hereby authorized to order painting out or removal of such sign within 30 days of written notification, and any incidental expenses thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building, structure or lot on which such sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-44. - Portable signs. 
    Portable signs shall be permitted in designated districts subject to the following limitations. 
(a)  Purpose. A portable sign shall be used only for the purpose of identifying or directing attention to the business, product, commodity or service conducted, sold or offered on the same lot where it is located. 
(b)  Size, location and lighting. Portable signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. No portable sign shall be located within five feet of any street right-of-way, other property line or any driveway. No portable sign shall be illuminated. 
(c)  Number of signs. Not more than one portable sign shall be permitted on a lot, except additional portable signs shall be permitted within a shopping center when spaced not less than 200 feet apart and when not more than one such sign is erected for a particular business. 
(d)  Duration and frequency. No portable sign shall remain on a lot for a period exceeding 21 days at a time, nor shall portable signs be placed on a lot more frequently than six times in a calendar year. 
(e)  Permits required. A zoning permit shall be required for each portable sign. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-45. - Banner signs. 
    Banner signs shall be permitted as temporary signs in designated districts subject to the following limitations. 
(a)  Purpose. A banner sign shall be used only for the purpose of identifying or directing attention to the business, product, commodity or service conducted, sold or offered on the same lot where such sign is located. 
(b)  Area and number. 
(1)  The total area of all banner signs located on a lot at a time shall not exceed: 
Linear feet of building frontage on the lot Maximum square feet of banner sign area 0-75 30 76-125 60 126 or greater 100  
(2)  Maximum number of banner signs. Not more than one banner sign shall be permitted on a lot, except that: 
a.  On a building having frontage on more than one street, the maximum permitted area of banner signs shall apply to each frontage, provided that banner signs shall not be attached to more than two building frontages at a given time, nor shall more than one banner sign be attached to any building frontage. In no case shall a banner sign exceed 100 square feet of sign area. 
b.  Where more than one main building is located on a lot, or where more than one business occupies a building, no more than two banner signs may be displayed at one time, per 100 linear feet of lot frontage. In no case shall more than one banner sign be displayed for each business. For lots with a combined width of 33 feet or less along their principal street frontage, the combined surface area of all banner signs for the lot shall not exceed 30 square feet. 
(c)  Duration and frequency. 
(1)  No banner sign shall be displayed for a period exceeding 21 days, nor shall banner signs be displayed on a lot more frequently than six times in a calendar year. 
(2)  Where more than one business is located on a lot, no banner sign shall be displayed on each business more frequently than six times per year, nor shall any banner sign be displayed for a period exceeding 21 days. 
(d)  Attachment. Banner signs shall be securely fastened in a manner to eliminate excessive movement and billowing and shall be capable of withstanding such minimum wind pressure as determined by the zoning administrator. A banner sign shall be removed immediately if it is not securely fastened or becomes torn or damaged, as determined by the zoning administrator. Banner signs shall be erected a minimum of seven feet above grade, except where mounted flush against the face of a building. 
(e)  Permits required. A zoning permit shall be required for each banner sign. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-46. - Signs permitted in all districts. 
    The following signs shall be permitted in all districts, and the area of such signs shall not be included in calculating the maximum permitted area of signs on any lot. 
(a)  Temporary sale or lease signs. One or more temporary signs not exceeding an aggregate area of six square feet pertaining to the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which they are located shall be permitted in the residential zoning districts, provided such signs shall not be illuminated. One or more temporary signs not exceeding an aggregate area of 18 square feet pertaining to the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which they are located shall be permitted in commercial or industrial zoning districts. Any such sign shall be located at least five feet from any public right-of-way and shall be removed within 14 days after the property has been sold, rented or leased. Zoning permits for such signs shall not be required. 
(b)  Temporary construction signs. Not more than three temporary signs not exceeding an aggregate area of 96 square feet identifying the use to be made of a building under construction on the property or identifying a contractor, architect, lending institution or other party involved with such construction shall be permitted, provided such signs shall not be illuminated and shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction. Any such sign shall be located at least five feet from any public right-of-way. Zoning permits for such signs shall not be required. 
(c)  On-premises directional signs. Signs directing and guiding traffic on private property, and bearing no advertising matter, when such signs do not exceed eight square feet in area. If freestanding, such signs shall not exceed four feet in height or be located within three feet of a street line or other property line. Zoning permits shall be required for such signs only if they are freestanding, contain advertising matter and visible from adjacent properties or streets. 
(d)  Signs identifying public uses. The following signs shall be permitted for any public-owned property to identify schools, parks, playgrounds, community centers and other public uses, subject to approval by the zoning administrator. 
(1)  Identification signs not exceeding in the aggregate 32 square feet in area. Such signs shall be attached flat against a main building or may include one freestanding; 
(2)  Not more than two bulletin or notice boards with an aggregate area not exceeding 32 square feet; 
(3)  Not more than two temporary signs or banner signs in connection with special events taking place on the premises, provided such signs shall not exceed an aggregate area of 32 square feet or remain on display for more than the duration of the event, plus one week prior to the event. 
(4)  A pole, post or similar structural support for a freestanding sign, including pole covers, with presentation of letters, numbers, figures, pictures, emblems, insignia, lines or colors, or any combination thereof, and which is displayed for the purpose of information, direction or identification or to advertise or promote activity, interest or product, or any lawful noncommercial message, should not be considered as part of the sign area. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-47. - Sign regulations in residential districts. 
    In addition to the regulations generally applicable to signs in all districts, the signs shall be permitted and the following regulations shall apply in the R-LD, R-1, R-2 and R-3 residential districts. 
(a)  Identification sign. One identification sign not exceeding two square feet in area containing only the name of the premises and/or the occupant, or announcing a home occupation on the premises shall be permitted on each lot. 
(b)  Temporary signs. In addition to permitted real estate and construction signs, one temporary civic or public event announcement sign not exceeding four square feet in area shall be permitted on a lot. 
(c)  Signs identifying residential neighborhoods. A maximum of 32 square feet in area identifying the name of a residential neighborhood shall be permitted at each principal entrance to the neighborhood. No residential neighborhood shall be allowed more than two signs. Identification signs may include freestanding signs. 
(d)  Subdivision development signs. One subdivision development sign shall be permitted advertising the sale, rental, lease, or trade of more than four lots or dwellings in the subdivision, provided such sign shall be located along a street within or at the entrance to the subdivision and shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. No such sign shall be displayed for longer than one year. 
(e)  Signs identifying nonprofit organizations. The following signs shall be permitted for religious facilities and any nonprofit organizations: 
(1)  Identification signs not exceeding in the aggregate 32 square feet in area. Such signs shall be attached flat against a main building or may include one freestanding sign. 
(2)  Not more than two bulletin or notice boards with an aggregate area not exceeding 32 square feet. 
(3)  Not more than two temporary signs or banner signs in connection with special events taking place on the premises, provided such signs shall not exceed an aggregate area of 32 square feet or remain on display for more than the duration of the event, plus one week prior to the event. 
(f)  Signs identifying certain uses. Signs not exceeding aggregate 20 square feet in area shall be permitted identifying a townhouse development, multifamily use, nursing home, rooming or boarding house, tourist home or child or adult day care center. Such signs shall be attached flat against a main building or may include one freestanding sign. 
(g)  Freestanding signs. The following restrictions shall apply to all freestanding signs permitted by the provisions of this section: 
(1)  No freestanding sign shall exceed a height of eight feet. 
(2)  No freestanding sign shall be located within ten feet of any street line or other property line. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-48. - Sign regulations in the R-B district. 
    In addition to the regulations generally applicable to signs in all districts, the following signs shall be permitted and the following regulations shall apply in the R-B residential-business district. 
(a)  Signs permitted in residential districts. Any sign permitted in residential districts as set forth in section 5-47 of this article shall be permitted. In any case where the provisions of this section are less restrictive or permit a sign of greater area, height or dimension than permitted in a residential district, the provisions of this section shall govern. 
(b)  Wall signs. Signs may be painted on or attached flat against a wall of a main building, provided that such signs shall not extend more than six inches beyond the surface of the building wall and shall not be attached to any roof. The total area of all wall signs shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
(c)  Window and door signs. Signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the window or door area to which they are applied or attached, from which they are suspended, or through which they are displayed. No window or door sign shall be placed on the inside or outside of a window or door which will obstruct the view of the cashier and the counter area from the outside. 
(d)  Freestanding signs. One freestanding sign shall be permitted on each lot, provided such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area or ten feet in height. No freestanding sign shall be located within ten feet of any street line or other property line. 
(e)  Projecting signs. One sign, attached to and projecting from the face of the main building shall be permitted for the main building frontage. Signs, including poles or other support structures, shall not project greater than three feet from the face of the building, shall not be closer than two feet from any curb line, shall not exceed 12 square feet in area, and shall provide a minimum underclearance of seven feet. Any such sign shall not extend above the height of the wall to which it is attached. Signs that extend less than six inches from the surface of the building shall be considered wall signs. 
(f)  Portable signs and banner signs. Portable signs and banner signs shall be permitted subject to regulations set forth in this division. 
(g)  Maximum number of signs. Not more than four permanent signs shall be provided on a lot. 
(h)  Maximum permitted sign area. The aggregate area of all permanent signs located on a lot shall not exceed 76 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-49. - Sign regulations in GB and M-1 districts. 
    In addition to the regulations generally applicable to signs in all districts, the following signs shall be permitted and the following regulations shall apply in GB general business and M-1 limited industrial districts. 
(a)  Maximum permitted sign area. For lots with a combined width of 33 feet or less along their principal street frontage, the combined surface area of all signs for the lot shall not exceed 50 square feet. For all other lots the aggregate area of all permanent signs located on a lot shall not exceed one and one-half square feet for each linear foot of lot frontage along the street, nor in any case 500 square feet, provided that: 
(1)  In the case of a lot having frontage on more than one street, permitted sign area shall apply along each street frontage; 
(2)  In the case of a shopping center, the maximum area of signs attached to any portion of a building devoted to a particular tenant shall not exceed one and one-half square feet for each linear foot of building frontage devoted to such tenant, nor in any case 500 square feet. In addition thereto, each shopping center shall be permitted freestanding signs subject to the restrictions set forth in paragraph [subsection] (f) of this section. 
(b)  Maximum number of signs. Not more than five permanent signs shall be provided on a lot except a shopping center as defined in article X of this appendix. 
(1)  In the case of a lot having frontage on more than one street, and the main building having multiple tenants, not more than six permanent signs shall be allowed on the lot. 
a.  In no such case shall more than four permanent signs be displayed on a single lot frontage. 
(c)  Wall signs. Signs may be painted on or attached flat against a wall of a main building, provided such signs shall not extend more than six inches beyond the surface of the building wall and shall not be attached to any roof. 
(d)  Window and door signs. Signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the window or door area to which they are applied or attached, from which they are suspended, or through which they are displayed. No window or door sign shall be placed on the inside or outside of a window or door which will obstruct the view of the cashier and the counter area from the outside. 
(e)  Projecting signs. One sign attached to and projecting from the face of the main building shall be permitted for the main building frontage, provided that: 
(1)  Signs, including poles or other support structures, shall not project greater than four feet from the face of the building, shall not be closer than two feet from any curb line, and shall not exceed 32 square feet in area; 
(2)  Projecting signs with less than 15 feet clearance above the sidewalk shall not extend into or occupy more than two-thirds the width of the sidewalk measured from the building. In no case will a projecting sign be allowed to have an underclearance of less than seven feet; 
(3)  Any such sign shall not extend above the height of the wall to which it is attached; 
(4)  Projecting signs that extend less than six inches from the surface of the building shall be considered wall signs. 
(f)  Awning and canopy signs. Lettering, symbols and combinations thereof, constituting a sign, may be painted on or affixed to an awning or canopy attached to a main building, when such sign does not extend beyond the extremities of the awning or canopy. 
(1)  One awning or canopy containing a sign shall be permitted to be attached to each building frontage, provided that no projecting sign shall be attached to the same building frontage; 
(2)  Not more than one sign shall be attached to each face of an awning or canopy and no such sign shall exceed 50 square feet; 
(3)  Awnings and canopies with less than 15 feet clearance above the sidewalk shall not extend into or occupy more than two-thirds the width of the sidewalk measured from the building. In no case will an awning or canopy be allowed to have an underclearance of less than seven feet; 
(4)  Stanchions or columns that support awnings and canopies shall be located not less than two feet in from the curb line; 
(5)  Any awning or canopy which is not securely fastened or becomes torn or damaged as determined by the zoning administrator, shall constitute a violation of this article and shall be removed or repaired upon written order by the zoning administrator. 
(g)  Freestanding signs. One freestanding sign shall be permitted along each street frontage of 100 feet or more in length, provided that: 
(1)  No freestanding sign shall exceed 100 square feet in area or 25 feet in height; 
(2)  No freestanding sign shall be located within 50 feet of any lot in a residential district, or within five feet of any street right-of-way line, other property line or driveway intersecting a street; 
(3)  Where more than one freestanding sign is permitted on a lot as a result of the lot having multiple street frontages, the distance between freestanding signs on the same lot shall be not less than 100 feet; 
(4)  In the case of a shopping center, one freestanding sign not exceeding 200 square feet in area or 35 feet in height shall be permitted when no other freestanding signs are located on the shopping center site or any adjacent out-parcel or pad site. 
(h)  Portable signs and banner signs. Portable signs and banner signs shall be permitted subject to the regulations set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-50. - Sign regulations in the CB district. 
    In addition to the regulations generally applicable to signs in all districts, the following signs shall be permitted and the following regulations shall apply in the CB central business district. 
(a)  Maximum permitted sign area. For lots with a combined width of 33 feet or less along their principal street frontage, the combined surface area of all signs for the lot shall not exceed 50 square feet. For all other lots the aggregate area of all permanent signs located on a lot shall not exceed one and one-half square feet for each linear foot of building frontage along the street, nor in any case 50 square feet, provided that: 
(1)  In the case of a building having frontage on more than one street, permitted sign area shall apply along each street frontage; 
(2)  Where more than one main building is located on a lot, the aggregate area of all signs attached to each building shall not exceed one and half square feet for each linear foot of building frontage along the street, nor in any case 50 square feet. 
(b)  Wall signs. Signs may be painted on or attached flat against a wall or other vertical surface of a building, provided that such signs shall not extend more than six inches beyond the surface of the building wall. Signs attached to the lower plane of a mansard or gambrel roof of a main building shall be permitted as wall signs, provided they are attached flat to the roof surface or parallel to the building wall above which they are located, and shall in no case extend beyond the extremities of the roof surface to which they are attached. 
(c)  Window or door signs. Signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the window or door area to which they are applied or attached, from which they are suspended, or through which they are displayed. No window or door sign shall be placed on the inside or outside of a window or door which will obstruct the view of the cashier and the counter area from the outside. 
(d)  Projecting signs. One sign attached to and projecting from the face of the main building shall be permitted for the main building frontage, provided that: 
(1)  Sign, including poles or other support structures, shall not project greater than five feet from the face of the building, shall not extend above the height of the wall to which it is attached, shall not be closer than two feet from any curb line, and shall not exceed 12 square feet in area; 
(2)  Projecting signs with less than 15 feet clearance above the sidewalk shall not extend into or occupy more than two-thirds the width of the sidewalk measured from the building. In no case will a projecting sign be allowed to provide an underclearance of less than seven feet; 
(3)  Projecting signs conforming to the provisions of this section shall be permitted to extend over the sidewalk portion of a right-of-way of a public street when authorized by the town council and when such signs do not extend closer than two feet from the face of the curb; 
(4)  Projecting signs that extend less than six inches from the surface of the building shall be considered wall signs. 
(e)  Awning and canopy signs. Lettering, symbols and combinations thereof constituting a sign may be painted on or affixed to an awning or canopy attached to a main building when such sign does not extend beyond the extremities of the awning or canopy, and provided that: 
(1)  One awning or canopy containing a sign shall be permitted to be attached to each building frontage, provided that no projecting sign shall be attached to the same building frontage; 
(2)  Not more than one sign shall be attached to each face of an awning or canopy, and no such sign shall exceed 12 square feet in area; 
(3)  Awnings and canopies with less than 15 feet clearance above the sidewalk shall not extend into or occupy more than two-thirds the width of the sidewalk measured from the building. In no case will an awning or canopy be allowed to provide an underclearance of less than seven feet; 
(4)  Stanchions or columns that support awnings and canopies shall be located not less than two feet in from the curb line; 
(5)  Awnings or canopies containing signs conforming with the provisions of this section shall be permitted to extend over the sidewalk portion of a right-of-way of a public street when authorized by the town council; 
(6)  Any awning or canopy which is not securely fastened or becomes torn or damaged, as determined by the zoning administrator, shall constitute a violation of this article and shall be removed or repaired upon written order by the zoning administrator. 
(f)  Freestanding signs. Not more than one freestanding sign shall be permitted along each frontage of a lot, provided that: 
(1)  Freestanding signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area; 
(2)  Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height of 12 feet; 
(3)  Where more than one freestanding sign is permitted on a lot as a result of the lot having multiple street frontages, the distance between freestanding signs on the same lot shall be not less than 100 feet. 
(g)  Portable signs and banner signs. Portable signs and banner signs shall be permitted subject to the regulations set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-51. - Sign regulations in the M-2 district. 
    In addition to the regulations generally applicable to signs in all districts, the following signs shall be permitted and the following regulations shall apply in the M-2 general industrial district. 
(a)  Signs permitted in GB and M-1 districts. Any sign permitted in GB and M-1 districts as set forth in section 5-49 of this appendix shall be permitted. 
(b)  Billboard signs. Billboard signs shall be permitted, provided that: 
(1)  No billboard sign shall exceed 378 square feet in area; 
(2)  There shall be no more than one billboard sign attached to or painted on a sign structure, except that two billboard signs may be attached back-to-back on a single structure, in which case such arrangement shall be considered double-faced sign for purposes of calculating permitted area; 
(3)  No billboard sign or sign structure shall exceed a height of 35 feet, nor shall any billboard sign be installed on the roof of any structure; 
(4)  No billboard sign shall be located within 500 feet of another billboard sign; 
(5)  No billboard sign shall be located within 15 feet of any street line or other property line, or within 200 feet of any residential or R-B district. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-52. - Sign regulations in the planned development district. 
    In addition to the regulations generally applicable to signs in all districts, the following signs shall be permitted in the planned development district: 
(a)  Signs permitted in residential districts. Any sign permitted in residential districts as set forth in section 5-47 of this appendix shall be permitted. 
(b)  Signs permitted in the CB district. Any sign permitted in the CB district as set forth in section 5-50 of this appendix shall be permitted for commercial uses. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-53. - Sign regulations in the public/open space district. 
    In addition to the regulations generally applicable to signs in all districts, the following signs shall be permitted and the following regulations shall apply in the public/open space district. 
(a)  Identification signs. Not more than two identification signs with a total area of not more than 32 square feet shall be permitted. 
(b)  Temporary signs. Not more than two temporary signs or banner signs with a total area of not more than 32 square feet shall be permitted in connection with special events, provided that such signs shall be displayed no longer than the duration of the event plus one week before it begins. 
(c)  Location of signs. No sign shall be erected within ten feet of any residential property line or within 15 feet of any street line. Signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises may be erected up to the street line. 
(d)  Height. No sign shall exceed a height of eight feet. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-54. - Signs identifying nonconforming uses. 
    One sign identifying a nonconforming use located in a residential district shall be permitted, provided that such sign shall be attached flat against the building occupied by the use and shall not exceed eight square feet in area. Signs identifying nonconforming uses located in districts other than residential districts shall conform to the sign regulations applicable in the district in which the use is located. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-55. - Nonconforming signs. 
    A nonconforming sign shall be permitted to remain subject to the restrictions and limitations set forth in this section. 
(a)  Maintenance and alteration. A nonconforming sign may be maintained and repaired, provided that such sign shall not be moved, replaced, structurally altered, or modified as to size, shape or height except in conformity with the provisions of this article. Lighting or illumination shall not be added to a nonconforming sign. The face of a nonconforming sign or the copy thereon may be changed when all other provisions of this paragraph are met. 
(b)  Restoration or removal of damaged signs. Any nonconforming sign damaged to the extent that it represents a public hazard as determined by the building official or zoning administrator, or any nonconforming sign damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or the public enemy to an extent exceeding 50 percent of its replacement cost, shall be removed or made to conform to the provisions of this article. In the case of damage of 50 percent or less of the replacement cost of a nonconforming sign damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or the public enemy, such sign may be restored as before the damage, if such restoration is completed within six months of the damage. 
(c)  Obsolete signs. Any sign that no longer identifies a use or activity conducted or product sold on the premises, shall be painted out or otherwise removed or made to comply with this article by the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or lot upon which such sign is located within 30 days of such cessation. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the zoning administrator is hereby authorized to order painting out or removal of such sign within 30 days of written notification, and any incidental expenses thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building, structure or lot on which such sign is located. 
(d)  Signs nonconforming due to lighting or animation. Any sign that is nonconforming due to lighting or animation shall be eliminated or made to conform to the regulations pertaining to lighting and animation within 90 days from the effective date of this provision. 
(e)  Nonconforming portable or temporary signs. Any nonconforming portable sign or nonconforming temporary sign shall be eliminated or made to conform with the regulations set forth in this article within 90 days from the effective date of this provision. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 5-56. - Zoning permits required for signs. 
(a)  No sign, unless specifically exempted by the provisions of this division, shall be erected or installed unless a zoning permit for such sign has been issued by the zoning administrator after determination that such sign conforms to all applicable provisions of this appendix. 
(b)  No sign containing electrical components shall be erected or installed unless an electrical permit for such sign has been issued by the zoning administrator after determination that such sign conforms to all applicable provisions of this appendix. 
(c)  Other permits may be required, as applicable. 
(d)  Applications for zoning permits, as well as other applicable permits, for signs shall be submitted and considered in accordance with the provisions of article VII of this article. Failure to obtain the required permits shall constitute a violation of this appendix. 
(e)  No zoning permit shall be required for signs placed within public right-of-way. However, written authorization must be obtained from the town manager prior to any sign being placed within a right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
DIVISION 8. - ADULT USES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, § 86-246 et seq. 

Sec. 5-57. - Application. 
    In any district in which a use is otherwise permitted, if such use constitutes an "adult use," as defined herein, the minimum requirements and standards set out in this division shall apply to such use. 
(Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 5-58. - Definition. 
    In this division, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and terms are defined as set out herein: 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store. An establishment which has as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, periodicals, films, videos or similar printed materials and which, with respect to the entire premises or a portion or a section of the premises, limits its customers to persons over 18 years of age, or as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale, rental or viewing for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(a)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records or other forms of visual or audio representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(b)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
    Adult drive-in theater. An open lot or part thereof, with appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the presentation of motion pictures, films, theatrical productions and other forms of visual productions, for any form of consideration, to persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor seats, and presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons. 
    Adult entertainment establishment. A restaurant, nightclub, private club or similar establishment which features, on a regular basis, live performances involving persons who are seminude. For the purposes of this provision, "seminude" shall mean: 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae, excepting any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided the areolae are not exposed, but under no circumstances less than completely covered genitals, anus, or areolae of the female breast; 
(b)  Male genitals in a state of arousal even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Any establishment which features such performances more than one day in a 30 days' period shall be deemed to be an adult entertainment establishment. The above restrictions shall not apply to a legitimate theatrical performance where nudity or seminudity is only incidental to the primary purpose of the performance. 
    Adult minimotion picture theater. An establishment, with a capacity of more than five, but less than 50 persons, where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons. 
    Adult model studio. Any establishment open to the public where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display "specified anatomical areas" are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons, other than the proprietor, paying such consideration or gratuity. This provision shall not apply to any school of art which is operated by an individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or institution which meets the requirements established in Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer, a diploma. 
    Adult motion picture arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult motion picture theater. An establishment, with a capacity of 50 or more persons, where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown; and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons. A finding by the zoning administrator that sexually oriented films predominate or that a predominant number of films are restricted to adults shall be presumed to be correct unless the subject owner or operator rebuts the presumption by clear and convincing evidence. 
    Adult use. Any adult bookstore, adult video store, adult entertainment establishment, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult model studio, or adult drive-in theater, as defined herein. 
    Specified anatomical areas. 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(1)  Human genitals, pubic regions; 
(2)  Buttocks; and 
(3)  Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(b)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely covered and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities. 
(a)  Human genitals in a state of stimulation or arousal; 
(b)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and 
(c)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts. 
(Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 5-59. - Requirements and standards. 
(a)  No adult use may be established within 1,000 feet of any other such adult use in any zoning district. 
(b)  No adult use may be established within 500 feet of a residentially zoned district (R-LD, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-B), nor within 500 feet of any property occupied by a church or other place of worship, public library, public or private school, educational institution, public park, playground, playfield, lodginghouse, tourist home, child day care center, hotel, or motel. 
(c)  The establishment of an adult use as referred to herein shall include the opening of such business as a new business, the relocation of such business, the enlargement of such business in either scope or area, or the conversion, in whole or in part, of an existing business to any adult use. 
(Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 5-60. - Measurement of distance. 
    All distances specified in this division shall be measured from the property line of one use to another. The distance between an adult use and a residentially zoned district shall be measured from the property line of the use to the nearest point of the boundary line of the residentially zoned district. 
(Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998) 
DIVISION 9. - TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 94. 

Sec. 5-61. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to establish general guidelines for the siting of wireless communication towers and antennas which will promote and carry out the following objectives of the town: 
(a)  To ensure the adequate provision of telecommunications infrastructure in the town which will support economic growth, public safety, and provide other essential communications services for town residents; 
(b)  To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; 
(c)  To encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas; 
(d)  To minimize the total number of telecommunications facility sites, while acknowledging the need for effective telecommunications operations; 
(e)  To encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; 
(f)  To encourage location of towers and antennas in areas where adverse impact on the town is minimal; 
(g)  To minimize the adverse effect of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(h)  To promote public health, safety, and welfare by prohibiting improperly designed and siting of telecommunication facility. 
(Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 5-62. - Applicability. 
(a)  The requirements set forth in this division shall govern the location of all telecommunications towers, monopoles, antennas and amateur radio antennas, constructed to a height greater than 20 feet in height from ground level. 
(b)  Existing structures and towers. The placement of antenna on an existing structure such as a building, sign, lightpole, water tank or other freestanding nonresidential structure or existing municipal, utility or commercially owned tower or pole shall be permitted so long as the addition shall not add more than 20 feet in height to said structure or tower. Such permitted use shall include the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna. Such building or equipment shall be placed within the existing structure or property and shall be necessary for such use and properly screened. Existing structures shall not be intentionally altered to circumvent this division. 
(Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 5-63. - Definitions. 
    In this division, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and terms are defined as set out herein: 
    Alternative tower structure. Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, lightpoles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
    Antenna. Communication device which transmits or receives electromagnetic signals. Antennas may be directional, including panels and microwave dishes, and omnidirectional including satellite dishes, whips, dipoles, and parabolic types. An antenna does not include the tower or other supporting structure to which it is attached. 
    Collocate. To locate with another user or existing structure such as a tower, pole, phone or lightpole, water tank or standpipe, building, steeple, billboard sign or similar structure. 
    FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FFC. The Federal Communications Commission. 
    Height. The distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure even if said highest point is an antenna. 
    Monopole. A single pole structure, usually self-supporting, used to support antennas. 
    Telecommunication facility. Any structure used for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas or microwave dishes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, alternative antenna support structures, such as buildings and rooftops, and other existing support structures. 
    Tower. Facility generated [generally] designed to provide or facilitate a link in a wireless communications system, serving a specific area or region. A tower may be guyed or self-supporting and guy wires, framework or other supporting and stabilizing devices are considered part of the structure of the tower. 
(Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 5-64. - General requirements. 
(a)  Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. 
(b)  Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the planning and zoning department an inventory of its existing and potential future facilities, towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers and antennas, that are either within the town or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The department may share such information with other applicants applying for approvals or special use permits under this ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdictions of the governing authority; provided, however, that the department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 5-65. - Special provisions. 
(a)  An antenna and any related unmanned equipment buildings for mobile and land based wireless transmission, shall be permitted by right in M-1, M-2, and in any zoning district on property owned or controlled by the town; shall be permitted in R-LD, R-1, R-2, R-3, GB, CB and PD districts, subject to approval of a special use permit by the town council as set forth in article VII of the zoning ordinance and in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  An antenna may be located on nonresidential structures. 
(2)  An antenna may be located on an existing tower or monopole. 
(3)  An antenna may be located on buildings and structures owned or controlled by a public use or the Town of Vinton. 
(4)  An antenna shall not add more than 20 feet in height to any structure or tower and shall comply with all other height requirements contained in this ordinance. 
(5)  An omnidirectional or whip antenna shall not exceed 20 feet in height or seven inches in diameter and shall be of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building or structure. 
(6)  A directional or panel antenna shall not exceed six feet in height or two feet in width and shall be of a material or color which matches the exterior of the building or structure. 
(7)  Satellite and microwave dish antennas shall not exceed six feet in diameter, shall be of a neutral or nonreflective color with no logos, and when building or rooftop mounted shall be located or screened so as not to be visible from abutting public streets. 
(8)  No commercial advertising shall be allowed on an antenna. 
(9)  No signals, lights, or illumination shall be permitted on an antenna unless required by the FCC, FAA, or the Town of Vinton. 
(10)  A related unmanned equipment building shall not contain more than 750 square feet of gross floor area or be more than 12 feet in height. 
(11)  If the unrelated unmanned equipment building is located on the roof of a building, its area and the area of the other equipment and structures shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the roof area. 
(12)  A related unmanned equipment building and antenna shall meet all zoning and building code requirements including, but not limited to, minimum yard requirements for primary structures. 
(13)  A related unmanned equipment building shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the building from adjacent property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaping strip of at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. Existing mature tree growth and natural land form on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In locations where the visual impact of the unmanned equipment building would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived by the council. 
(14)  An antenna that is not operational for a continuous period of 90 days shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the planning and zoning department or town manager notifying the owner of such removal requirement. Removal includes the removal of the antenna, all subterranean building and fence footers, underground cables and support buildings. The buildings may remain with the approval of the landowner. If there are two or more users of a single unmanned equipment building, then this division shall not become effective until all users cease using the unmanned equipment building. If the antenna and related unmanned equipment building are not removed per this section, the town may require the landowner to have them removed. In all cases, the site shall be returned as closely as possible to its original condition. 
(b)  Towers and/or monopoles and the installation of antennas and accessory equipment structures for such shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The height of monopoles or towers shall not exceed 199 feet, including antennas. 
(2)  Satellite and microwave dishes attached to monopoles shall not exceed two feet in diameter and shall not exceed six feet in diameter when attached to towers. 
(3)  Monopoles or towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FCC or FAA, be painted a neutral color. 
(4)  At a facility site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the facilities to the natural setting and the built environment. Dish antennas and covers will be of a neutral, nonreflective color with no logos or markings. 
(5)  The related building shall not contain more than 750 square feet of gross floor area or be more than 12 feet in height, and shall be located in accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which located. 
(6)  Transitional yard and screening shall be provided on accordance with the provisions of article V of the zoning ordinance. Monopole or tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the support buildings from adjacent property. Existing mature tree growth and natural land form on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. 
(7)  Monopoles and towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FCC or FAA. If lighting is required, the council may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to surrounding views. 
(8)  No advertising or signs of any type shall be allowed on any monopole or tower. 
(9)  All monopoles or towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards as required. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(10)  To ensure the structural integrity of monopoles and towers, the owner of such shall ensure that it is constructed and maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable federal, state, and local building codes and regulations. 
(11)  Monopoles, towers, guys, and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements for primary structures. 
(12)  Monopoles or towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with appropriate anticlimbing device. 
(13)  Each applicant for a monopole or tower shall submit six copies of a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, height and antenna location requirements, setbacks, ingress/egress, parking, fencing, landscaping, easements, adjacent uses, and other information deemed necessary to assess compliance with the regulations of this ordinance. Additionally, the applicant shall provide actual photographs of the site from designated relevant views that include a simulated photographic image of the proposed monopole or tower. The photograph with the simulated image shall include the foreground, the midground, and the background of the site. An engineering report, certifying that the proposed monopole or tower is compatible for collocation with [a] minimum of three compatible users including the primary user, must accompany the application. The applicant shall provide copies of their collocation policy. 
(14)  No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the council that no existing monopole, tower, or structure can accommodate the proposed antenna, and that neither of the sites identified in section 5-65 (c) can accommodate construction of the proposed antenna or of an antenna which reasonable [reasonably] meets the applicant's needs. Evidence submitted with respect to accommodation may consist of any of the following: 
a.  No existing monopoles, towers, or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements and the sites identified in section 5-65 (c) do not meet such requirements. 
b.  Existing monopoles, towers, or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements, and monopoles, towers, or structures that meet such requirements cannot be constructed on either site identified in section 5-65 (c). 
c.  Existing monopoles, towers, or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna or related equipment, and monopoles, towers, or structures of sufficient structural strength cannot be constructed on the sites identified in section 5-65 (c). 
d.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing monopole, tower, or structure, or the antenna on the existing monopole, tower, or structure would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
e.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing monopoles, towers, or structures unsuitable, or render unsuitable the construction of monopoles, towers, or structures upon the sites identified in section 5-65 (c). 
(15)  Every applicant for a monopole or tower, as a condition for the issuance of the special use permit, file with the town a continuing bond in the penal sum of not less than $10,000.00, and conditioned for the faithful observance of the provisions of this division and all amendments thereto, and of all the laws and ordinances relating to monopoles and towers, and which shall indemnify and save harmless the town from any and all damaged judgments, costs, or expenses which the town may incur by reason of the removal [of], or the causing to be removed, any monopole or tower, as provided for in section 5-65(b)(16) of this division. 
(16)  Any monopole or tower, that is not operational for a continuous period of 90 days shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such monopole or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the planning and zoning department or town manager notifying the owner of such removal requirement. Removal includes the removal of the monopole or tower, all subterranean tower and fence footers, underground cables and support buildings. The buildings may remain with the approval of the landowner. If there are two or more users of a single monopole or tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the monopole or tower. If the monopole or tower is not removed per this section, the town may require the landowner to have it removed. In all cases, the site shall be returned as closely as possible to its original condition. 
(17)  Owners of monopoles or towers shall provide the town collocation opportunities without compensation as a community benefit to improve radio communication for town departments and emergency services, provided it does not conflict with the collocation requirement of section 5-65(b)(12). 
(c)  Sites that are appropriate for wireless communication towers, monopoles or other structures for joint use are Roop Street (located at 303 Roop Street, tax map number 61.17-1-13, zoned GB General Business District) and Town of Vinton Water Tank Site (located at 945 Third Street, tax map number 70.08-1-1.2, zoned M-2 General Industrial District). To ensure that those sites are properly developed and used, the following requirements are adopted. 
(1)  A single communication tower, monopole or other structure may be constructed at the Roop Street site conditioned upon compliance by the owner(s) of the tower, monopole or other structure with the requirements that (i) the tower, monopole, or other structure be able to accommodate the owner and at least three tenants; (ii) collocation of antennas and ground equipment by other operators at a reasonable price and upon reasonable terms and conditions be permitted; (iii) the town be given the right, at no charge, to install and use solely for governmental purposes an antenna and a transmission line on the tower, monopole or other structure; and (iv) the town be provided space at the Roop Street Site (either in the building or on land), at no charge, for equipment associated with such antenna and transmission line. The owner of the tower, monopole or other structure shall agree to binding arbitration by a neutral arbitrator if agreement cannot be reached on the collocation prices or other collocation terms and conditions. Failure to comply with either of the conditions shall be grounds for revocation of any permit or other permission obtained from the town by an owner of any tower, monopole or other structure. 
(2)  If there is no remaining capacity to collocate antennas at the Roop Street Site, a tower (or towers), a monopole (or monopoles) or other structure(s) may be constructed only at the town water tank site, subject to section 5-56 (b)(14), conditioned upon compliance by the owner(s) of each tower, monopole or other structure with the requirements that (i) the tower, monopole or other structure be able to accommodate other operators; and (ii) collocation of antennas and ground equipment by other operators at a reasonable price and upon reasonable terms and conditions be permitted. The town may sell, develop or lease sufficient property at the site to accommodate the tower(s), monopole(s), other structures and necessary appurtenances. The owner(s) of each tower, monopole or other structure shall agree to binding arbitration by a neutral arbitrator if agreement cannot be reached on the collocation rate or other collocation terms and conditions. Failure to comply with either of the conditions shall be grounds for revocation of any permit or other permission obtained from the town by an owner of any tower, monopole or other structure. 
(3)  The owner of any tower, monopole or other structure shall be responsible for obtaining any required FAA permits or other FAA approvals and for complying with any FAA requirements. 
(Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998; Ord. No. 692, 6-16-1998; Ord. No. 701, 2-2-1999) 
Sec. 5-66. - Review fees. 
    Any costs associated with the review of the special use permit for the town by a licensed engineer of any of the above required information shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 690, 4-7-1998) 
ARTICLE VI. - NONCONFORMING USES, FEATURES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 931, adopted March 19, 2013 amended and restated former art. VI, §§ 6-1-6-9, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 634, 12-19-1995; Ord. No. 909, 4-5-2011. 

Sec. 6-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate nonconforming uses, structures, and lots. The intent of these regulations is to: 
(a)  Permit such nonconforming uses, structures, and lots to remain until removed, discontinued, abandoned, or changed to conform with the regulations of this chapter; 
(b)  Recognize that nonconforming uses, structures, and lots are generally incompatible with the character of the districts in which they occur and, as such, in certain circumstances, such continuances should not be indefinite and that the nonconforming uses should gradually be removed in favor of uses, structures, and lots that conform to this chapter and the official zoning map; and 
(c)  Recognize that nonconforming uses, structures, and lots need not be entirely unchanged, and that under certain circumstances may change according to law and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 931, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 6-2. - Generally. 
(a)  Within the zoning districts established by this ordinance, or by future amendments which may later be adopted, or by legitimate and legal actions taken by the town council or any other governmental agency, there exists or may exist lots, parcels, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of site design and/or use, which were lawful before this ordinance was adopted or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance, or future amendment. Some of such structures, lots, parcels, uses, and characteristics are considered nonconforming. 
(b)  A nonconforming use, structure, lot, or parcel may continue, as it existed when it became nonconforming, until removed, discontinued, abandoned, or changed to conform to the regulations of this ordinance. It is the intent of this ordinance that the continuance of nonconformities should not be indefinite, and that the nonconforming uses, structures, or characteristics should gradually be removed. 
(c)  Except as provided within this article, no nonconforming use, structure, or lot shall be changed, moved, increased, enlarged upon, expanded, extended, or resumed after removal, discontinuance, or abandonment, or used as grounds for adding other lots, structures, uses of land and structures, or characteristics of use not in keeping with the regulations for the district in which such nonconformity exists. 
(Ord. No. 931, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 6-3. - Nonconformities; establishment of vested rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize the impairment of any vested right. Without limiting the time when rights might otherwise vest, a property owner's rights shall be deemed vested in a land use and such vesting shall not be affected by a subsequent amendment to this chapter, when the property owner: 
(1)  Obtains or is the beneficiary of a significant affirmative governmental act which remains in effect allowing development of a specific project; 
(2)  Relies in good faith on the significant affirmative governmental act; and 
(3)  Incurs extensive obligations or substantial expenses in diligent pursuit of the specific project in reliance on the significant affirmative governmental act. 
(b)  For purposes of this section and without limitation, the following are deemed to be significant affirmative governmental acts allowing development of a specific project: 
(1)  The town council has accepted proffers or proffered conditions which specify use related to a zoning amendment; 
(2)  The town council has approved an application for a rezoning for a specific use or density; 
(3)  The board of zoning appeals has granted a special exception; 
(4)  The board of zoning appeals has approved a variance; 
(5)  The town council or its designated agent has approved a preliminary subdivision plat, site plan, or plan of development for the property and the applicant pursues approval of the final plat or plan within a reasonable period of time under the circumstances; or 
(6)  The town council or its designated agent has approved a final subdivision plat, site plan, or plan of development for the applicant's property. 
(7)  The zoning administrator or other administrative officer has issued a written order, requirement, decision or determination regarding the permissibility of a specific use or density of the landowner's property that is no longer subject to appeal and no longer subject to change, modification, or reversal under Subsection C of § 15.2-2311 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(c)  Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or amendments thereto, and upon which actual building construction was carried out diligently. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has begun in preparation for rebuilding, such activities shall be deemed actual construction provided the work has been carried out diligently. 
(Ord. No. 931, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 6-4. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Where, at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendment thereto, lawful use exists of buildings, structures or land, individually or in combination with another structure, which use is no longer permissible under the terms of this ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued provided: 
(1)  The use is not abandoned for more than two years and so long as the structure in which such use is located is maintained in its then structural condition. Abandonment means the actual cessation of the nonconforming use of the property for more than two years regardless of whether or not the owner of the property intends to resume the nonconforming use at some point in the future. 
(2)  Should a structure in which such nonconforming use is located be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered, except as otherwise permitted by the provisions of this article, the use of such a structure thereafter shall conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(b)  No nonconforming use shall be enlarged, intensified or increased, or extended to occupy a larger square footage of building or lot area than was occupied on the effective date of the adoption or subsequent amendment of this ordinance. Such intensification, increase, or extension shall include enlargement of the building or other structure, expansion of the use on the premises, or the erection of an additional principal or accessory structure associated with such nonconforming use on the property on which the nonconforming use is located. 
(c)  No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel unoccupied by such use at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of this ordinance. 
(d)  No building or structure not conforming to the requirements of this ordinance shall be erected in connection with the nonconforming use of land. 
(e)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a building or structure, removal of the building or structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the building or structure or land. 
(f)  Any legally established use which existed prior to the adoption of this ordinance, or any subsequent amendments, shall not be considered a nonconforming use where a special use permit is now required for establishment of such use. The use shall be allowed to continue operation, as well as reconstruct or structurally alter the building or structure without the necessity of obtaining a special use permit. However, approval of a special use permit shall be required, in accordance with special use provisions, when either of the conditions below are present, in the opinion of the zoning administrator. 
(1)  There is a ten percent or greater net increase in the square footage of the use or structure proposed for expansion or enlargement; or 
(2)  The expansion or enlargement will substantially alter the site design and layout as it relates to circulation, parking or other site characteristics so as to adversely affect surrounding properties. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to broadcasting towers and associated antenna allowed by right as set forth by the ordinance. 
(g)  A manufactured home park legally established prior to June 1, 1986 shall be allowed to continue operation in conformance with the provisions, provided the use as a park has not been discontinued for a period of more than two years. 
(h)  Notwithstanding (a) through (g) above, a nonconforming manufactured home existing on an individual lot of record that has served as an active dwelling for at least six months may be replaced with another manufactured home provided: 
(1)  The replacement home is installed on the lot within two years of the removal of the home to be replaced; and 
(2)  The replacement home is installed in approximately the same location on the lot, and is installed to comply with the district setback regulations for principal structures; and 
(3)  The installation of the replacement home complies with the use and design standards for manufactured homes. 
(i)  Notwithstanding any provision in this Article to the contrary, a single family home legally established prior to a zoning amendment that renders the property nonconforming may continue to be used as a single family home so long as the use is not converted or replaced, in whole or in part, by a use permitted in the district regulations, and the building or structure of the home is maintained in its then structural condition. If the home is damaged, it shall comply with section 6-9 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 931, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 6-5. - Alterations to buildings devoted to nonconforming use. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, no building or portion of a building devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended, structurally altered, or moved, unless such building or portion of a building is thereafter devoted to a use which conforms with the use regulations of this appendix. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit repair, maintenance or incidental alteration of a building or the alteration, strengthening or restoring of a building to safe condition as may be required by law. 
(b)  A single-family dwelling which is a nonconforming use in a GB, CB, M-1 or M-2 district may be structurally altered and may be enlarged or extended, and a building or structure accessory thereto may be altered, enlarged or constructed, provided that in no case shall the total amount of floor area, including all enclosed and unenclosed space and garage or carport space, be increased more than 800 square feet. No existing lot area, lot width or yard shall be reduced to less than required for single-family dwelling use in the R-3 residential district. 
(Ord. No. 931, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 6-6. - Change of nonconforming use. 
(a)  A nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to a use which conforms with the use regulations of the district in which it is located or to a use, other than a multifamily dwelling, which is first permitted by right in a more restricted zoning district. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use or to a more restricted use, such use shall not thereafter be changed back to the original nonconforming use. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, a more restricted zoning district shall be construed to be a district in which the permitted uses and intensity of use are more limited. The term "use" shall be construed to be a type of activity as listed in the use regulations of a zoning district, and a change in occupancy, ownership or management shall not in itself constitute a change in use. 
(Ord. No. 931, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 6-7. - Discontinuance of nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided herein, whenever a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a building is discontinued for a period of more than two years (except if the premises is damaged or destroyed as a direct result of conditions resulting in a federal disaster declaration as set forth in section 6-9 herein), whether or not equipment or fixtures intended for such uses are removed, any subsequent use shall conform with the use regulations of the district in which the property is located. 
(b)  In case of determination by the zoning administrator that a nonconforming use has been changed to an illegal use, such illegal use shall cease and any subsequent use of the premises shall be in conformity with the use regulations of this appendix, or the illegal use may be changed to the last lawful nonconforming use to occupy the premises, so long as it has not been more than two years since the non-conforming use ceased. 
(Ord. No. 931, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 6-8. - Use and alteration of buildings with nonconforming features. 
(a)  A building which is nonconforming with respect to the bulk regulations or other feature required by this appendix may nonetheless be converted to and occupied by a use permitted in the district in which the building is located, provided that off-street parking and other requirements applicable to the new use are satisfied. 
(b)  A building which is devoted to a conforming use and is nonconforming with respect to the bulk regulations or other feature required by this appendix may be enlarged, extended or structurally altered, provided that the degree or extent of any nonconforming feature is not increased. 
(c)  An increase in the height of any portion of a building which is nonconforming with respect to a yard requirement shall be deemed to be an increase in the extent of the nonconforming yard of the building. 
(Ord. No. 931, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 6-9. - Damage to nonconforming buildings and uses. 
(a)  Damage not exceeding 50 percent of value. A building having a nonconforming feature or a building devoted to a nonconforming use which is damaged by an accidental fire, or an explosion, natural disaster or other act of God or the public enemy to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of its most recent assessed taxable value may be restored, repaired, reconstructed and used as before the damage, provided that the degree or extent of any nonconforming feature that existed prior to the damage shall not be increased, and the area devoted to any nonconforming use prior to the damage shall not be increased. For purposes of this section, an "act of God" shall be defined as any natural disaster or phenomena including, but not limited to, a hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water, wind-driven water, tidal wave, earthquake or fire caused by lightning or wildfire. For purposes of this section, owners of property damaged by an accidental fire have the same rights to rebuild such property as if it were damaged by an act of God. 
(b)  Damage greater than 50 percent of value. Whenever a building having a nonconforming feature or a building devoted to a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by a natural disaster or other act of God to an extent greater than 50 percent of its most recent assessed taxable value, and cannot be repaired, rebuilt, or replaced except to restore it to its original non-conforming condition, the owner shall have the right to do so. However, the owner shall apply for a building permit and any work done to repair, rebuild, or replace such building shall be in compliance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (Code of Virginia § 36-97, et seq.) and the provisions of the local flood plain regulations adopted as a condition of participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any restoration, repair, reconstruction, or reuse undertaken pursuant to this section shall be completed within two years of the date of damage. If the nonconforming building is in an area under a federal disaster declaration and the building has been damaged or destroyed as a direct result of conditions that gave rise to the declaration, then any restoration must be started and completed within forty-eight (48) months of the date of the damaging event. Owners of property damaged by an accidental fire shall have the same right to rebuild such nonconforming property as if it were damaged by an act of God. Nothing herein shall be construed to enable the property owner to commit arson under Code of Virginia §§ 18.2-77 or 18.2-80, and obtain vested rights under this section. 
(Ord. No. 931, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 6-10. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia (1950) § 15.2-2261(F), an approved final subdivision plat that has been recorded, from which any part of the property subdivided has been conveyed to third parties (other than to the developer or local jurisdiction), shall remain valid for an indefinite period of time unless and until any portion of the property is subject to a vacation action as set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2270 through 15.2-2278, as amended. 
(b)  A lot of record that is nonconforming due to lack of adequate frontage, width, depth, or area may be developed, provided the development proposed on the lot is in accordance with the applicable use and design standards contained in the district regulations. 
(c)  Any lot of record to which Code of Virginia§ 15.2-2261(F) does not apply that has legal access but is nonconforming because it has no public street frontage, may be developed or an existing structure on the lot may be expanded, provided the Town reviews and grants a special use permit for the proposed development, expansion, and use in accord with the standards and procedures contained in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 931, 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 6-11. - Intermittent, temporary or illegal use. 
    Intermittent, temporary or illegal use of land or buildings shall not be construed to establish the existence of a nonconforming use for the purposes of this article, provided that a lawful seasonal use that was in operation for at least two consecutive seasons immediately prior to the adoption of this appendix or subsequent amendment thereto shall be considered a nonconforming use for seasonal purposes only and shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 931, 3-19-2013) 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - ZONING ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 7-1. - Designation of zoning administrator. 
    The provisions of this appendix shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator, who shall be designated by the town council, and who may hold other appointed office in the town. It shall be the responsibility of all other appointed officers and employees of the town to cooperate with the zoning administrator in the administration and enforcement of this appendix. 
Sec. 7-2. - Duties of zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator and his authorized agent (both of whom hereafter in this section will be referred to as zoning administrator) shall have all necessary authority on behalf of the town council to administer and enforce this appendix and carry out the duties prescribed in this article and elsewhere in this appendix, including the authority to make findings of fact in connection with the administration, application and enforcement of this appendix in specific cases. Duties of the zoning administrator shall include the following: 
(a)  Interpretation of ordinance. Subject to appeal to the board of zoning appeals as provided in article IX of this appendix, the zoning administrator shall be the final authority in the interpretation of the provisions of this appendix. 
(b)  Review and approval of zoning permits. The zoning administrator shall review all applications for zoning permits required by this article and shall approve or disapprove each zoning permit based on compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this appendix. 
(c)  Issuance of certificates of zoning compliance. The zoning administrator shall review all requests for certificates of zoning compliance required by this article and shall issue such certificates when the provisions of this appendix are met. 
(d)  Review and approval of site plans. The zoning administrator shall review all site plans submitted under the provisions of this appendix and shall approve or disapprove each site plan based on compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this appendix. 
(e)  Enforcement and correction of violations. The zoning administrator shall use his or her best efforts to prevent violations of this appendix and to detect and secure the correction of violations in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(f)  Maintenance of records and map. The zoning administrator shall maintain records of all official actions taken with respect to administration and enforcement of this appendix and shall retain copies of all zoning permit applications, certificates of zoning compliance, site plans and related information as a permanent record. The zoning administrator shall also maintain the official zoning map. 
(g)  Other duties. The zoning administrator shall have such additional duties as specifically described elsewhere in this appendix. 
(Ord. No. 910, 4-5-2011) 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 7-3. - Zoning permit required. 
    No building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, erected, enlarged, structurally altered, moved, or converted to accommodate a different use, nor shall any sign be erected or installed, until a zoning permit for such building, structure or sign has been issued by the zoning administrator. A zoning permit shall not be required for any fence, wall, deck or patio for which a building permit is not required under the provisions of the uniform statewide building code. 
Sec. 7-4. - Application for zoning permit. 
(a)  Every application for a zoning permit shall be submitted to the zoning administrator by the owner of the property involved or by an agent of the owner or tenant of the property, with the written consent of the owner. 
(b)  Applications shall be submitted on forms provided by the zoning administrator for such purpose and shall include all plans, documents and information necessary to determine compliance or noncompliance with this appendix. 
(c)  Every application for a zoning permit shall include the following, together with any additional information required by the zoning administrator: 
(1)  Statement by the public works director that necessary sewer and water facilities are or will be available to serve the site in accordance with town policies and regulations. 
(2)  Statement of the intended use of buildings and structures, and the number of dwelling units, if applicable. 
Sec. 7-5. - Plans to be submitted with zoning permit application. 
(a)  Every application for a zoning permit which does not require site plan review as specified in division 3 of this article shall be accompanied by three copies of a plot plan legibly drawn and showing the following: 
(1)  Area, shape and dimensions of the property involved and existing and proposed easements, watercourses, drainageways and floodplains. 
(2)  Dimensions and heights of proposed buildings, structures or additions and existing buildings and structures to remain, and the dimensions of yards and setbacks with respect to property lines and existing and proposed street lines. 
(3)  Existing and proposed driveways providing access to the site and the arrangement, dimensions and improvement of off-street parking and vehicular circulation areas. 
(4)  Existing permanent signs to remain and proposed permanent signs, including location, lettering, dimensions, lighting, and means of attachment or support. 
(5)  Any additional information deemed necessary by the zoning administrator to determine compliance with specific requirements of this appendix or other applicable provision of the town Code. 
(b)  Every application for a zoning permit which requires site plan review as specified in division 3 of this article shall be accompanied by such plans as required by that division. No such zoning permit shall be issued until the required site plan is reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator as provided in that division. 
Sec. 7-6. - Waiver of certain plan requirements. 
    With prior approval by the zoning administrator, particular information may be omitted from required plans when, due to the nature or limited scope of a project, such information is not necessary for evaluation of the zoning permit application or for purposes of maintaining a record of zoning permit approval. 
Sec. 7-7. - Zoning permits for signs. 
(a)  In the case of zoning permit applications for signs, only the plan requirements of section 7-5(a)(4) shall apply, provided that the location of any freestanding sign shall be shown on a site drawing. Where necessary to depict existing and proposed signs, building elevation drawings shall be submitted. 
(b)  In any case where a sign is approved in conjunction with a zoning permit for construction, alteration or conversion of a building and no change to the sign is proposed, a separate zoning permit for such sign shall not be required. 
Sec. 7-8. - Issuance of zoning permit. 
    The zoning administrator shall issue a zoning permit only if he or she is satisfied that the proposed construction and use are in conformity with applicable provisions of this appendix. 
Sec. 7-9. - Expiration of zoning permit. 
    A zoning permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance by the zoning administrator and shall become null and void if, within such period, no building permit pursuant thereto has been issued. In a case where no building permit is required, a zoning permit shall become null and void if, within one year from the date of its issuance, the feature authorized by the zoning permit has not been established. In any case where a zoning permit has expired, application may be made for a new zoning permit in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 7-10. - Certificate of zoning compliance required. 
(a)  A certificate of zoning compliance issued by the zoning administrator shall be required prior to any of the following: 
(1)  Use or occupancy of a building after completion of any construction, reconstruction, erection, enlargement, structural alteration, moving, or conversion for which a zoning permit is required by this article; 
(2)  Change in use or occupancy of an existing building, including a change in tenant of a building or premises, provided that change in occupancy or tenant of an existing dwelling use shall not be subject to this requirement; and 
(3)  Use of land or any change in use or occupancy of land, except for agricultural or forestry uses permitted by this appendix. 
(b)  The certificate of zoning compliance shall certify that the building or premises and the proposed use and occupancy thereof comply with the applicable provisions of this appendix. Where a certificate of zoning compliance required by this section involves a nonconforming use or the use or occupancy of a nonconforming building, such certificate shall state the nature and extent of the nonconformity. 
Sec. 7-11. - Procedure for issuance of certificate of zoning compliance. 
(a)  Application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be made by the owner of the property involved or by an agent of the owner or tenant of the property, with the written consent of the owner. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall issue the certificate of zoning compliance if the zoning administrator is satisfied that the building or premises and the proposed use and occupancy thereof comply with the applicable provisions of this appendix. Otherwise, the certificate of zoning compliance shall not be issued, and the building, premises or use shall be deemed to be in violation of this appendix. 
Sec. 7-12. - Temporary certificate of zoning compliance. 
(a)  To the extent that such action does not conflict with any provisions of the uniform statewide building code, the zoning administrator may issue a temporary certificate of zoning compliance for a specified period not to exceed six months and under such conditions and safeguards as deemed necessary by the zoning administrator to protect the health, safety and welfare of occupants of the building or premises and the general public. Such temporary certificate shall be issued only for purposes of enabling limited or partial use or occupancy of a building or premises pending completion of construction or site improvements. 
(b)  The zoning administrator may require a bond with surety or other performance guarantee approved by the town attorney, payable to the town and in an amount adequate to ensure satisfactory completion of required improvements. 
(c)  The zoning administrator may grant one extension of a temporary certificate of zoning compliance for a period not to exceed six months. 
Sec. 7-13. - Building permit; relation to zoning permit. 
    No building permit or permit to erect a sign shall be issued by the building official until a zoning permit as required by this article has been issued by the zoning administrator and the building official has been provided with a copy thereof. 
Sec. 7-14. - Certificate of use and occupancy and certificate of zoning compliance. 
    No certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued by the building official until a certificate of zoning compliance as required by this article has been issued by the zoning administrator and the building official has been provided with a copy thereof. 
Sec. 7-15. - Land disturbing permit; relation to zoning. 
    No land disturbing permit required by the provisions of the erosion and sediment control ordinance applicable within the town shall be issued until the zoning administrator has reviewed the application for such permit and certified that the proposed land disturbing activity and the intended use of the property will not result in any violation of the provisions of this appendix. 
DIVISION 3. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Sec. 7-16. - Purpose of site plan review. 
    The purpose of site plan review is to provide sufficient plans and information for review and approval by the zoning administrator to ensure compliance with the regulations contained in this appendix and ensure that the purpose and intent of the appendix are met. 
Sec. 7-17. - Applicability of site plan review. 
    Site plan review shall be required prior to issuance of any zoning permit, building permit or land disturbing permit for any of the following: 
(a)  Construction of a new building, other than a single-family dwelling or building accessory thereto. 
(b)  Enlargement of an existing building, other than a single-family dwelling or building accessory thereto, when such enlargement exceeds ten percent of the floor area of the building or 500 square feet, whichever is less. 
(c)  Construction of a parking area for five or more vehicles, or any addition to or alteration of the arrangement or means of access to an existing parking area for five or more vehicles. 
Sec. 7-18. - General requirements for site plans. 
    Site plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer, certified land surveyor, licensed architect or certified landscape architect in accordance with criteria established by the zoning administrator regarding scale and format. 
Sec. 7-19. - Required information on site plans. 
    Six copies of site plans drawn to scale and containing the following information shall be submitted: 
(a)  Location of the property by an insert vicinity map at appropriate scale. 
(b)  Identification of the property by street address, tax parcel number and subdivision name, block and lot number. 
(c)  North arrow, scale of plans, preparation date, revision date(s) and names, addresses and telephone numbers of preparer, owner and developer. 
(d)  Existing zoning classification of and zoning district boundaries located on the property and adjoining properties. 
(e)  Boundary survey of the property showing property lines, distances and bearings and existing and proposed easements and street right-of-way lines. 
(f)  Width of existing streets, location and size of existing sanitary and storm sewers, culverts, curbs and gutters, water lines, gas lines and other utilities. 
(g)  Floodplain and floodway boundaries, including base flood elevation, and watercourses and other prominent physical features of the property and of adjoining property. 
(h)  Existing wooded areas on the property, and significant trees and other vegetated areas to be retained. 
(i)  Existing topography of the property prior to grading and proposed finished grades with contour intervals of not greater than two feet and spot elevations where needed. 
(j)  Existing and proposed uses of land, buildings and structures, and the number and types of dwelling units on the property, where applicable, and the present uses of adjoining properties. 
(k)  Locations, dimensions, height, number of floors and floor areas of proposed buildings and structures, existing buildings and structures to remain and additions or alterations to existing buildings and structures, including dimensions of yards and setbacks. 
(l)  Entrances, driveways, parking and loading spaces, access aisles, fire lanes and other areas for vehicular circulation and related pedestrian walkways, including the arrangement, dimensions and surface improvements of such areas and a schedule showing numbers of parking spaces provided. 
(m)  Utilities plans, including proposed water and sanitary sewer pipe locations, sizes, types, grades, related capacity and strength calculations and connections to town or other systems, and proposed gas lines, other utility lines and all utility easements. 
(n)  Stormwater management plan and related calculations, and detailed plans showing locations, sizes, types and grades of ditches, catch basins, pipes and other drainage structures, including connections to existing drainage systems or suitable outlets. 
(o)  Provisions for the adequate control of erosion and sedimentation in accordance with applicable erosion and sedimentation control standards and practices, indicating the proposed temporary and permanent control practices and measures that will be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading and construction. 
(p)  Locations, dimensions and functions of proposed recreation areas, open spaces and similar amenities and improvements, including pedestrian walkways. 
(q)  Buffers, screening, fencing, major landscaping and similar features required by this or other town ordinance, including location and improvement of trash receptacle areas. 
(r)  Location, type, height and intensity of outdoor lighting, if provided. 
(s)  Existing permanent signs to remain and proposed permanent signs, including location, lettering, dimensions, lighting, and means of attachment or support. 
(t)  Any additional information deemed necessary by the zoning administrator to determine compliance with specific requirements of this appendix, other town ordinances, requirements of the Virginia Department of Transportation or other applicable requirements. 
Sec. 7-20. - Waiver of certain site plan requirements. 
    Required plans described in section 7-19 are intended in cases where extensive plans and information are necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this appendix. With prior approval by the zoning administrator, particular information may be omitted from required plans when, due to the nature or limited scope of a project, the zoning administrator determines such information is not necessary for evaluation of the site plan or for maintaining a record of site plan review. 
Sec. 7-21. - Procedure for site plan review and approval. 
(a)  Every site plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, who shall review such plan for compliance with the applicable provisions of this appendix and other applicable requirements. The zoning administrator shall circulate the site plan to the town engineer and other relevant town and state agencies and officials for review and comment prior to taking action. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove the site plan within 45 days of receipt of all required plans and information. The zoning administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the action taken. In the case of approval with modifications or conditions or disapproval of the site plan, such notification shall describe the modifications or conditions of approval or reasons for disapproval, including changes which would make the site plan acceptable. 
(c)  All site plans approved by the zoning administrator shall comply with the district regulations, supplementary regulations and other applicable requirements of this appendix. The zoning administrator shall have no authority to waive such regulations or requirements unless specific authority to do so is set forth in this appendix. 
Sec. 7-22. - Modifications to approved site plan. 
(a)  Minor modifications to an approved site plan may be authorized in writing by the zoning administrator when such modifications comply with the requirements of this appendix and do not materially affect approvals granted or permits issued pursuant to the approved site plan. Any deviation from an approved site plan without the written approval of the zoning administrator shall void the site plan and require submission of a new site plan for consideration in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Major revisions to an approved site plan which, in the judgment of the zoning administrator, significantly alter the proposed development or materially affect approvals granted or permits issued pursuant to the approved site plan shall require that a new site plan be prepared and submitted for consideration. 
Sec. 7-23. - Guarantees. 
    The zoning administrator shall have the authority to require execution of an agreement by the applicant to construct required or proposed improvements located within public rights-of-way or easements or connected to any public facility. The zoning administrator may require a performance guarantee or surety in form acceptable to the town attorney in the amount of the estimated cost of such improvements as determined by the applicant and verified by the town engineer. 
Sec. 7-24. - Compliance with approved site plan. 
(a)  Periodic inspections shall be made during the installation of required on-site and off-site improvements by the zoning administrator and public works director or their designated representatives in order to determine compliance with approved site plans. 
(b)  The owner or developer shall be responsible for providing adequate supervision at the site during installation of required improvements. A copy of the approved site plan and construction plans shall be maintained at the site at all times work is being performed. 
Sec. 7-25. - Expiration of approved site plan. 
(a)  An approved final site plan shall be valid for a period of one not less than five years from the date of approval by the zoning administrator and shall become null and void if, within such period, work has not proceeded and no building permit pursuant thereto has been issued. In any case where an approved site plan has expired, the site plan may be resubmitted for review and approval in accordance with the provisions of this article. A site plan shall be deemed final once it has been reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator if the only requirement remaining to be satisfied in order to obtain a building permit is the posting of any bonds and escrows. 
(b)  Application for minor modifications to final site plans made during the periods of validity of such plans established in accordance with this section shall not constitute a waiver of the provisions hereof nor shall the approval of minor modifications extend the period of validity of such plans. 
(Ord. No. 910, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 7-26. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the zoning administrator regarding a site plan may appeal such decision to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with the provisions of article IX of this appendix. 
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL USES 

Sec. 7-27. - Intent of special use provisions. 
    Special use provisions are intended as a means for the town council, after review and recommendation by the planning commission, to authorize certain uses which, although generally appropriate in the district in which they are permitted, have potentially greater impacts on neighboring properties than uses which are permitted by right. The special use permit procedure provides the opportunity for the town council to review each proposed special use and impose such conditions as reasonably necessary to ensure the use will be compatible with the surrounding area and consistent with the purposes of this appendix. 
Sec. 7-28. - Special use permit required. 
(a)  When required. A use indicated as permitted as a special use in article IV of this appendix shall be authorized only upon approval of a special use permit by the town council in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Relation to other permits. Zoning permits, certificates of zoning compliance, site plans and other reviews and approvals required by this appendix are required for special uses in the same manner as for other uses. No zoning permit or certificate of zoning compliance for a special use or for a building devoted to a special use shall be issued unless a special use permit has been approved. 
(c)  Existing uses. A use lawfully existing at the effective date of this division which is specified as a special use in the district in which it is located and for which no special use permit has been approved shall not be considered a nonconforming use because of its classification as a special use. No zoning permit or certificate of zoning compliance involving expansion of such use or reconstruction, enlargement or moving a building devoted to such use shall be issued unless a special use permit is approved in accordance with this article. 
Sec. 7-29. - Application for special use permit. 
(a)  Submission of applications. Applications for special use permits shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and may be filed by the owner of the property or, with the written consent of the owner, the contract purchaser of the property or an agent of the owner. 
(b)  Applicant's report. Every application for a special use permit shall be accompanied by three copies of a report from the applicant describing the proposed special use and explaining the manner in which it complies with the requirements and standards of this division. 
(c)  Content of plans. Every application for a special use permit shall be accompanied by three copies of plans drawn to scale and showing the following: 
(1)  Area, shape and dimensions of the property involved and existing and proposed street lines, easements, watercourses, drainage ways and floodplains. 
(2)  Existing and proposed uses of land, buildings and structures, and the number and types of dwelling units on the property, where applicable. 
(3)  Dimensions and heights of proposed buildings, structures or additions and existing buildings and structures to remain, and the dimensions of yards and setbacks with respect to property lines and existing and proposed street lines. 
(4)  Elevation drawings of proposed buildings and structures and additions or modifications to the exterior of existing buildings and structures. 
(5)  Existing and proposed driveways providing access to the site and the arrangement, dimensions and improvement of off-street parking and vehicular circulation areas. 
(6)  Buffers, screening, fencing, major landscaping, pedestrian walkways and similar features, existing wooded areas, significant trees and other vegetated areas to be retained, location and improvement of trash receptacle areas and location, type, height and intensity of outdoor lighting, if provided. 
(7)  Existing permanent signs to remain and proposed permanent signs, including location, lettering, dimensions, lighting, and means of attachment or support. 
(d)  Waiver of plan elements or additional plans. The zoning administrator may waive plan elements that are unnecessary to determine compliance with this appendix and may require such additional information as necessary to determine compliance with this appendix and to assist the planning commission and town council in evaluating potential impacts of a proposed special use. 
Sec. 7-30. - Procedure for issuance of special use permits. 
(a)  Review by zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall review each application for [a] special use permit and forward the application to the planning commission. At such time as requested by the commission, the zoning administrator shall submit to it a report indicating the manner in which the proposed special use complies or does not comply with the provisions of this appendix and any recommendations the zoning administrator may have regarding approval, disapproval or conditions to be attached. 
(b)  Action by planning commission. The planning commission shall review each special use permit application for compliance with the provisions of this appendix and shall provide a recommendation to the town council in accordance with the following. 
(1)  The commission shall give notice and hold a public hearing as required by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204. A joint public hearing may be held with the town council. 
(2)  After holding a public hearing, the commission may recommend approval or disapproval of the special use permit or that conditions be imposed to ensure compliance with requirements of this appendix. In making its recommendation, the commission shall consider at least the factors indicated in section 7-31 of this article. 
(3)  Action by the commission shall be in the form of a motion, giving the reasons for its action and the vote of each member, and shall be recorded in the commission's records. Each recommendation to the council shall include a statement of the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan. 
(4)  In any case where the commission is unable to adopt a motion to recommend approval or disapproval, it shall forward a written report to the council stating such fact and summarizing its discussions on the matter. 
(5)  Failure of the commission to provide a recommendation or report to council within 90 days of receiving the special use permit application shall be considered a recommendation of approval. 
(c)  Action by town council. The town council shall take action on each special use permit application in accordance with the following: 
(1)  After receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, the town council shall give public notice as required by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204, and shall hold a public hearing. A joint public hearing may be held with the planning commission. 
(2)  The town council may approve or disapprove the special use permit application and may impose conditions that it deems reasonable and necessary to ensure the special use will comply with the requirements of this appendix. Action of the town council shall be by resolution, which shall include the reasons for its action. Conditions imposed in connection with residential special use permits where affordable housing, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2201, is proposed by the applicant shall be consistent with the objective of providing affordable housing. When imposing conditions on residential projects specifying materials and methods of construction or specific design features, the town council shall consider the impact of the conditions upon the affordability of housing. 
(3)  The town council shall take action on the special use permit application within one year of the date of submission of the application. Failure of the council to act within such time shall be considered denial of the application. 
(4)  The town council may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that conditions imposed will be satisfied, and may specify a date for expiration of a special use permit as a condition of approval. 
Sec. 7-31. - General requirements for approval of special use permits. 
    A special use permit shall be approved by the town council only if it finds that the proposed special use and related plans: 
(a)  Will not be contrary to the purposes of this appendix as stated in section 1-3; 
(b)  Will not be in conflict with the objectives of the comprehensive plan for the town; 
(c)  Conform with all applicable provisions of this article and all other applicable requirements of the district in which such use is located; and 
(d)  Include satisfactory provision for or arrangement of the following, if applicable: 
(1)  Sewer, water and other public utilities; 
(2)  Ingress and egress, including access for fire and other emergency vehicles; 
(3)  Off-street parking and vehicular circulation, including safety of motorists and pedestrians; 
(4)  Yards, open spaces and other elements of the site plan; 
(5)  Retention of natural vegetation and topographic features; and 
(6)  Landscaping, buffers, screening, fences and other features to protect adjacent properties from potential adverse effects of the special use. 
Sec. 7-32. - Modifications or amendments to approved special use permits. 
(a)  Minor modifications. Minor modifications to approved plans or building details of an approved special use permit may be authorized by the zoning administrator when such modifications do not: Significantly alter the boundaries of the property; conflict with specific requirements of this appendix or conditions of the approved special use permit; significantly decrease the width or depth of any yard, setback or buffer area; or significantly alter points of access to the property or the internal arrangement of site plan elements. 
(b)  Change of substance; amendment. Any change to an approved special use permit other than a minor modification as described in paragraph [subsection] (a) of this section shall require an amendment subject to the same procedures and requirements as a new application. 
Sec. 7-33. - Expiration of special use permits. 
    An approved special use permit shall become null and void if no application for a building permit to construct the authorized improvements has been submitted within one year of the date of approval by the town council. A special use permit for which no building permit is required shall become null and void if the use is not established within one year of the date of approval by the town council. The town council may specify a longer period in its approval of a special use permit. 
Sec. 7-34. - Discontinuance of special use permits. 
    A special use permit shall run with the land, provided that any use established pursuant to an approved special use permit shall not be reestablished if replaced by a different use or if discontinued for a period of two years or longer. 
Sec. 7-35. - Compliance with approved plans. 
(a)  Violation of appendix. Failure to comply with approved plans or conditions of a special use permit shall constitute a violation of this appendix. 
(b)  Revocation. Upon determination by the zoning administrator of any violation of a special use permit, such permit may be subject to revocation if the violation is not corrected within 90 days of written notice to the owner of the property by the zoning administrator. If the violation is not corrected within the specified time, and the zoning administrator is not satisfied that appropriate means are being taken to correct the violation, the town council shall have the authority to revoke the special use permit after notice and hearing as provided by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204. 
Sec. 7-36. - Reconsideration. 
    Whenever a special use permit application is denied, substantially the same application shall not be considered again by the town council within one year from the date of denial. 
Sec. 7-37. - Appeals. 
    Appeals from any decision of the town council regarding a special use permit may be taken to the circuit court by any aggrieved party in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2286. 
DIVISION 5. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 7-38. - Notice of violation and order of remedy. 
(a)  Notice and order. Upon finding that any provision of this appendix is being violated, the zoning administrator shall notify in writing the person or persons responsible for such violation and order the remedy of conditions found to be in violation, including the discontinuance of illegal uses of land and buildings, the removal or bringing into compliance of illegal buildings, structures, additions and alterations, and the discontinuance of illegal work being done. Such notice shall specify the provision of this appendix that is being violated, the remedy necessary to correct the violation and a reasonable time period within which the violation shall be corrected. 
(b)  Right to appeal. Any written notice of a zoning violation or written order of the zoning administrator shall include a statement informing the recipient that he or she may have a right to appeal such notice or order to the board of zoning appeals within 30 days, and that the decision of the zoning administrator shall be final and unappealable if not appealed within 30 days. The appeal period shall not commence until such statement is given. 
Sec. 7-39. - Legal action to correct violation. 
    Should notice of violation and order of remedy fail to result in correction of a violation, the zoning administrator shall have the authority to bring legal action to ensure compliance with the ordinance, including injunction, abatement or other appropriate action or proceeding authorized under the laws of the commonwealth. 
Sec. 7-40. - Coordination of town attorney and zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator shall provide to the town attorney a copy of every written notice and order involving a violation of this appendix. The town attorney shall advise and assist the zoning administrator in his or her efforts to obtain abatement of such violation. 
Sec. 7-41. - Penalties. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this appendix shall be a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AMENDMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-1. - Authority to amend. 
    Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice require, and subject to the requirements set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2285 and 15.2-2286, the town council may by ordinance amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations, district boundaries, or classifications of property established by this appendix. All such ordinances shall be enacted in the same manner as all other ordinances. 
Sec. 8-2. - Initiation of amendments. 
    Amendments to the provisions of this appendix may be initiated by any of the following methods: 
(a)  Resolution of the town council. The town council may, by its own resolution, initiate an ordinance to amend any of the provisions of this appendix, including the official zoning map. Every such resolution shall state the public purpose for the amendment. 
(b)  Motion of the planning commission. The planning commission may, by adoption of a motion, initiate an amendment to any of the provisions of this appendix, including the official zoning map. Every such motion shall state the public purpose for the amendment. The motion shall be forwarded to the town council, which shall cause an ordinance to be prepared for its consideration. 
(c)  Petition of a property owner. A petition to change the zoning classification of property by amendment to the official zoning map may be filed by the owner of such property or, with the written consent of the owner, the contract purchaser of the property or an agent of the owner. 
Sec. 8-3. - Rezoning application. 
(a)  A petition on behalf of a property owner to change the zoning classification of property shall be in the form of an application for rezoning addressed to the town council and filed with the zoning administrator. The application shall be accompanied by the required fee and a certified plat of the property proposed to be rezoned. The application shall include indication of the current and proposed zoning classification of the property and a statement of the applicant's reasons for requesting rezoning. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall review the application for compliance with the requirements of this section. When the zoning administrator is satisfied that submission requirements are met, the application shall be forwarded to the town council, with a copy to the planning commission. The town council shall cause an ordinance to be prepared for its consideration of the rezoning application. 
Sec. 8-4. - Action by the planning commission. 
    No amendment to this ordinance shall be acted upon by the town council unless it has been referred by the council to the planning commission for its review and recommendation in accordance with this section. 
(a)  Public notice and hearing. Before taking action on any amendment, the planning commission shall give public notice and hold at least one public hearing on the proposed amendment as required by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204. A joint public hearing may be held with the town council. 
(b)  Report of zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall submit a written report and recommendation to the commission prior to its action. 
(c)  Recommendation of commission. The commission may recommend that the town council adopt or reject the amendment or may recommend changes in the amendment. In making its recommendation, the commission shall consider the matters listed in section 1-4 of this appendix. 
Failure of the commission to consider the amendment and report to the council within 90 days after the first regular meeting of the commission after the amendment was referred to it by the council shall be considered a recommendation of approval. 
(d)  Form of action by commission. All actions by the commission shall be in the form of a motion, giving the reasons for the action and the vote of each member. All actions shall be recorded in the commission's records. Each recommendation to the council shall include a statement of the relationship of the proposed rezoning to the comprehensive plan of the town. In any case where the commission is unable to adopt a motion to recommend approval or disapproval, it shall forward a written report to the council stating such fact and summarizing its deliberations on the matter. 
Sec. 8-5. - Action by town council. 
    Final action shall be taken by town council on all proposed amendments in accordance with the following provisions: 
(a)  Public notice and hearing. Before taking action on any ordinance to amend the provisions of this appendix, the town council shall give public notice as required by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204, and shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed amendment. A joint public hearing may be held with the planning commission. In the case of a proposed amendment to the zoning map, the public notice shall state the general usage and density range of the proposed amendment and the general usage and density range, if any, set forth in the applicable part of the comprehensive plan for the property involved. 
(b)  Final action. After receiving a report from the planning commission and after giving public notice and holding a public hearing, the town council may adopt or reject the proposed amendment, or may make appropriate changes to the amendment, provided that no land may be zoned to a more intensive use classification nor shall a greater area of land be rezoned than was described in the public notice without referral to the planning commission and an additional public hearing after public notice as required by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204. 
(c)  Continuance or withdrawal. Final action on any proposed amendment may be continued by the town council for good cause, provided that all resolutions, motions or petitions for amendments shall be acted upon by the council within one year of the date of the resolution, motion or petition. This provision shall not apply if the petitioner requests or consents in writing to action beyond such period or if a petition is withdrawn by providing written notice to the council. 
Sec. 8-6. - Reconsideration of rezoning application. 
    Whenever a rezoning application is denied, substantially the same application shall not be reconsidered by the town council for one year from the date of denial, except: 
(a)  When a new application, although involving all or a portion of the same property, is for a different zoning classification than the original application; or 
(b)  When a new application is submitted after a finding by the town council that conditions or circumstances that provided the basis for denial of the original application have changed to an extent sufficient to justify reconsideration. 
DIVISION 2. - CONDITIONAL ZONING 

Sec. 8-7. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to applicable provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2296, the purpose of conditional zoning is to recognize that frequently, where competing and incompatible uses conflict, traditional zoning methods and procedures are inadequate, and that in such cases more flexible and adaptable zoning methods are needed to permit differing land uses, and at the same time to recognize the effects of change. 
    It is, therefore, the intent of this division to provide a more flexible and adaptable zoning method to cope with such situations, whereby a change in the zoning classification of property may be allowed subject to certain conditions proffered by the petitioner for the protection of the community that are not generally applicable to land similarly zoned. It is the intent of the town council that the provisions of this division shall not be used for the purpose of discrimination in housing. 
Sec. 8-8. - Procedure. 
(a)  Conditions may be proffered. In conjunction with an application for rezoning of property and as a part of a proposed amendment to the zoning map as described in division 1 of this article, the owner of such property may voluntarily proffer in writing reasonable conditions in addition to the regulations specified for the zoning district by this appendix, provided such conditions meet the criteria in this division. 
(b)  Submission of conditions. The owner may submit such conditions at the time of submission of the application for rezoning or at any other time before the planning commission makes its recommendation on the application to the town council. The planning commission and the town council shall not be obligated to accept any or all proffered conditions. 
(c)  Modifications to conditions. In the event additions, deletions or other modifications to conditions are desired by the owner of the property that is the subject of the rezoning request, they shall be made in writing to the planning commission before the commission makes its recommendation to the town council. The town council may consider additional conditions, deletions or modifications to conditions after the planning commission makes its recommendation, provided that such are voluntarily proffered in writing prior to the public hearing at which the town council is to consider the application for rezoning. In any case where modifications to conditions are proposed after the planning commission makes its recommendation, the town council may refer the rezoning application back to the commission for further review and action. 
Sec. 8-9. - Permitted conditions. 
    All conditions proffered shall meet the following criteria: 
(a)  The rezoning itself must give rise to the need for the condition. 
(b)  The conditions shall have a reasonable relation to the rezoning. 
(c)  The conditions shall be in conformity with the town's comprehensive plan. 
(d)  The conditions shall not be less restrictive than the provisions of this appendix, and shall not require or permit a standard that is less than required by any law. 
(e)  The conditions shall be drafted in such manner as to be clearly understandable and enforceable. 
Sec. 8-10. - Enforcement and guarantees. 
(a)  Authority of zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall be vested with all necessary authority on behalf of the town council to administer and enforce conditions attached to a rezoning or amendment to the zoning map, including: 
(1)  The ordering in writing of the remedy of any noncompliance with conditions; 
(2)  The bringing of legal action to ensure compliance with conditions, including injunction, abatement or other appropriate action or proceeding; and 
(3)  Requiring a guarantee satisfactory to the town council in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of any physical improvements required by the conditions, or a contract for the construction of such improvements and the contractor's guarantee, in like amount and so conditioned, which guarantee shall be reduced or released by the town council, or its agent, upon the submission of satisfactory evidence that construction of such improvements has been completed in whole or in part. 
(b)  Denial of permits. Failure to meet all conditions attached to a rezoning or amendment to the zoning map shall constitute cause to deny issuance of any required site plan, zoning permit, certificate of zoning compliance, or other use, occupancy, or building permit, as may be appropriate. 
Sec. 8-11. - Records. 
    The zoning map shall shown by appropriate symbol the existence of conditions attached to the zoning on the map. The zoning administrator shall maintain and make available for public inspection a conditional zoning index. The index shall provide ready access to the ordinance creating conditions in addition to the regulations provided for in a particular zoning district. 
Sec. 8-12. - Review of zoning administrator's decision. 
    Any rezoning applicant or any other person who is aggrieved by a decision of the zoning administrator made pursuant to the provisions of section 8-10 of this article may petition the town council for review of such decision by filing a petition with the zoning administrator and with the clerk of the town council within 30 days of the decision. Such petition shall specify the grounds upon which the petitioner is aggrieved. 
    In deciding any such case, the town council shall have the same authority as vested in the zoning administrator, but shall not modify or delete any condition attached to a zoning map amendment except by formal amendment pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 8-13. - Amendments and variations of conditions. 
    Amendments and variations of conditions attached to a zoning map amendment shall be made only after public notice and hearing in the same manner as an original zoning map amendment and in accordance with the provisions of this article and applicable provisions of Code of Virginia, title 15.2, as amended. 
ARTICLE IX. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-136 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - MEMBERSHIP AND ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 9-1. - Members. 
(a)  Appointments. Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2308, there shall be a board of zoning appeals which shall consist of five members who shall be residents of the town and shall be appointed for five-year terms by the circuit court of Roanoke County. Members may be reappointed to succeed themselves. 
(b)  Vacancies. The secretary of the board shall notify the court at least 30 days in advance of the expiration of any term and shall also notify the court promptly if any vacancy occurs. The filling of vacancies and procedures for removal of members of the board shall be as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2308. 
Sec. 9-2. - Officers and support. 
(a)  Chairman and vice-chairman. The board shall elect from among its members a chairman and a vice-chairman who shall serve in the absence of the chairman. The chairman and vice-chairman shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. 
(b)  Secretary. The board shall elect a secretary who may be the zoning administrator or other qualified person and may be a member of the board. The secretary shall be responsible for preparing notices of hearings and minutes of meetings, keeping records, conducting official correspondence and such other duties as assigned by the board. The secretary shall not be entitled to vote on matters before the board. 
(c)  Support services. With the approval of the town council and within limits of funds that may be appropriated for such purposes, the board may employ or contract for such clerical, technical or legal services necessary for it to carry out its responsibilities. 
Sec. 9-3. - Rules, forms and records. 
(a)  Rules. The board shall adopt such rules as it deems necessary for the conduct of its business consistent with the provisions of this article and Code of Virginia, title 15.2, as amended. Copies of such rules shall be available to the public. 
(b)  Forms. The board shall see that standard forms are available for the filing of applications and appeals. Forms shall be provided to applicants by the zoning administrator. 
(c)  Records. The board shall keep records of all its official actions, including minutes of its proceedings with the vote of each member on each question and the reasons of the board for each action taken. Minutes and records shall be public and shall be filed in the office of the board. 
(d)  Annual report. The board shall submit an annual report of its activities to the town council with a copy to the planning commission. 
Sec. 9-4. - Meetings and public hearings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. The board shall, in accordance with its rules, schedule regular monthly meetings which shall be open to the public. The board may cancel any regular meeting if, by the filing deadline for applications and appeals to be heard at such meeting, there is no business to be brought before the board. The board may hold such other meetings as may be called by its chairman or by a quorum of its members. 
(b)  Public hearings. The board shall make no decision on any application or appeal until it has conducted a public hearing in accordance with this article, after giving public notice as required by the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204. Such notice provisions shall be incorporated in or attached to the board's rules. 
(c)  Quorum. A quorum of not less than three members of the board shall be required for the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action. 
DIVISION 2. - POWERS AND DUTIES 

Sec. 9-5. - Authority. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2309, the board of zoning appeals shall have such powers and duties as set forth in this division. 
Sec. 9-6. - Appeals. 
    The board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator or any other administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this appendix. 
Sec. 9-7. - Variance. 
(a)  Criteria for authorization of variance. The board shall have the power to authorize upon application in specific cases, such variance as defined in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2201, from the terms of this appendix as will not be contrary to the public interest, when, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this appendix will result in unnecessary hardship, provided that the spirit of this appendix shall be observed and substantial justice done. All variances shall be in harmony with the intended spirit and purpose of this appendix. The board shall grant a variance only when: 
(1)  A property owner can show that his or her property was acquired in good faith; and 
(2)  Where by reason of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness, size or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the effective date of this appendix or subsequent amendment thereto, or where by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation or condition of such piece of property, or of the condition, situation, or development of property immediately adjacent thereto, the strict application of the terms of this appendix would effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property; or 
(3)  Where the board is satisfied, upon the evidence heard by it, that the granting of such variance will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship approaching confiscation, as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience sought by the applicant. 
(b)  Required findings by the board. No variance shall be authorized by the board unless it finds that: 
(1)  The strict application of this appendix would produce undue hardship; 
(2)  Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity as the subject property; 
(3)  The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property, and the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance; and 
(4)  The condition or situation of the property concerned is not of so general or recurring nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted by the town council as an amendment to this appendix. 
(c)  Prohibition of use variance. No variance granted by the board shall include a change in use. 
(d)  Conditions. In authorizing a variance, the board may impose such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed structure or use as it may deem necessary in the public interest, and may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be satisfied. 
Sec. 9-8. - Interpretation of official zoning map. 
    The board shall have the power to hear and decide applications for interpretation of the district map where there is any uncertainty as to the location of a district boundary. After notice to the owners of the property affected by the question, and after public hearing with notice as required by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204, the board may interpret the map in such way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the ordinance for the particular section or district in question. However, when giving any required notice to the owners, their agents or the occupants of abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected, the board may give such notice by first class mail rather than by registered or certified mail. The board shall not have the power to change substantially the locations of district boundaries as established by ordinance. 
Sec. 9-9. - Special exception. 
(a)  General authority. The board shall have the power to hear and decide applications for such special exceptions as may be specifically authorized elsewhere in this appendix to be considered by it. In granting any such special exception, the board may impose such conditions relating to the use provided for as it may deem necessary in the public interest, including limiting the duration of 
the special exception, and may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be satisfied. 
(b)  Revocation of special exception. The board shall have the authority to revoke a special exception if the board determines that there has not been compliance with the terms or conditions of the permit. No special exception may be revoked except after notice and hearing as provided by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204. However, when giving any required notice to the owners, their agents or the occupants of abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected, the board may give such notice by first class mail rather than by registered or certified mail. 
Sec. 9-10. - Prohibition on rezoning of property. 
    No provision of this article shall be construed as granting the board the power to rezone property, which power shall be vested in the town council. 
DIVISION 3. - PROCEDURES 

Sec. 9-11. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Who may file appeal. An appeal to the board of zoning appeals pursuant to section 9-6 of this article may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the town affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or by any order, requirement, decision or determination made by any other administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this appendix. Notwithstanding any Charter provision to the contrary, any written notice of a zoning violation or a written order of the zoning administrator dated on or after July 1, 1993, shall include a statement informing the recipient that he may have a right to appeal the notice of a zoning violation or a written order within 30 days in accordance with this section, and that the decision shall be final and unappealable if not appealed within 30 days. The appeal period shall not commence until the statement is given. 
(b)  Filing of appeal. An appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the decision appealed from by filing with the zoning administrator and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers and other materials constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. A copy of the notice of appeal shall also be transmitted to any other individual, officer, department or agency involved in the appeal. 
(c)  Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his or her opinion cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order granted by the board or by a court of record, on application and with notice to the zoning administrator, and for good cause shown. 
Sec. 9-12. - Application for variance, interpretation of zoning map, and special exception. 
(a)  Who may file application. An application for a variance, interpretation of the official zoning map or special exception pursuant to sections 9-7, 9-8 or 9-9 of this article may be made by any property owner, tenant, government official, department, board or bureau, on forms provided for such purpose by the board and available from the zoning administrator. 
(b)  Application procedure. Applications shall be submitted to the zoning administrator in accordance with rules adopted by the board. The application and accompanying maps, plans or other information shall be transmitted promptly to the secretary of the board who shall place the matter on the docket to be acted upon by the board, or if the zoning administrator serves as secretary of the board, he or she shall place the matter on the docket to be acted upon by the board. The zoning administrator shall transmit copies of all applications to the planning commission, which may send a recommendation to the board or appear as a party at the hearing. 
(c)  Reconsideration of application. Substantially the same application for a variance, interpretation of the official zoning map or special exception which has been decided by the board shall not be considered again by the board within one year of the date of its decision, except that the board may, pursuant to its rules, reconsider an application if its finds that new or additional information is available which would have a direct bearing on the case and which could not reasonably have been presented at the initial hearing. 
Sec. 9-13. - Public hearings and decisions. 
(a)  Notice and hearing. No decision on any application or appeal shall be made by the board until it has conducted a public hearing after giving public notice, including newspaper advertisements and written notices to affected parties, as required by the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an application or appeal, give the required public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within 90 days of the filing of the application or appeal. 
(b)  Action by the board. In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify an order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. The concurring vote of not less than three members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant in any matter upon which it is required to pass under this appendix, or to effect any variance from the provisions of this appendix. 
(c)  Oaths and witnesses. The chairman of the board or, in his or her absence, the acting chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
Sec. 9-14. - Expiration of variance. 
    A variance granted by the board shall lapse and be of no effect if, after the expiration of one year from the date of such action by the board, no site plan has been submitted, provided that the board may, for good cause shown, specify a longer period of time in conjunction with its action to grant a variance or special exception. 
(Ord. No. 911, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 9-14.1. - Expiration of special exception. 
    A special exception granted by the board shall lapse and be of no effect if, after the expiration of one year from the date of such action by the board, no construction or change in use pursuant to such special exception has taken place, provided that the board may, for good cause shown, specify a longer period of time in conjunction with its action to grant a special exception. 
(Ord. No. 911, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 9-15. - Amendment of variance or special exception. 
    The procedure for amendment of a variance or special exception granted by the board, including any changes in the conditions attached thereto, shall be the same as for a new application. 
Sec. 9-16. - Enforcement of decisions. 
    Decisions of the board shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator. Noncompliance with any action taken by the board, including conditions imposed by the board, shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this appendix. 
Sec. 9-17. - Appeals from decisions of the board. 
    Appeals from decisions of the board shall be presented to the Circuit Court of Roanoke County in accordance with the procedures set forth in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2314, as amended. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the town may present to the circuit court a petition specifying the grounds on which aggrieved within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. 
ARTICLE X. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 10-1. - Applicability of article. 
    For the purposes of this appendix, and unless specifically prescribed to the contrary elsewhere in this appendix, certain words and terms shall be interpreted as set forth in this article. Words and terms not defined here or elsewhere in this appendix shall be interpreted in accordance with such normal dictionary meaning or customary usage as is appropriate to the context. 
(Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 10-2. - Words and terms defined. 
(a)  General rules. The following general rules of interpretation shall apply throughout this appendix as they are appropriate to the context: 
(1)  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual. 
(2)  The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. 
(3)  The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. 
(4)  The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied." 
(5)  The words "building" or "structure" include any part thereof, and the word "building" includes the word "structure." 
(6)  The terms "main" and "principal" are synonymous. 
(7)  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel." 
(8)  The word "land" includes the words "water" and "marsh." 
(9)  All references to public officials, agencies and bodies are those of the Town of Vinton, Virginia, unless indicated otherwise. 
(b)  Certain words and terms defined. The following words and terms shall be interpreted as having such meaning as described herein, unless a specific meaning to the contrary is indicated elsewhere in this appendix: 
(1)  Accessory building or structure. A building or structure separate from the main building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to the principal use of the lot on which it is located. Where such building or structure is attached by walls or roof to a main building, it shall be considered to be a part of the main building. 
(2)  Accessory use. A use of land or a use of a building or structure for purposes customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to the principal use of the lot on which it is located. 
(3)  Adult day care center. A facility which provides supplementary care and protection during a part of the day only to four or more aged, infirm or disabled adults who reside elsewhere, except a facility or portion of a facility licensed by the state board of health or department of mental health, mental retardation and substance abuse services. 
(4)  Adult day care home. A single-family dwelling in which is operated a facility which provides supplementary care and protection during a part of the day only to less than four aged, infirm or disabled adults who reside elsewhere, except a facility or portion of a facility licensed by the state board of health or department of mental health, mental retardation and substance abuse services. 
(5)  Agricultural use. Tilling of the soil, general farming, truck gardening, horticulture, cultivation of field crops, orchards, groves and nurseries for growing trees and other plants, and including incidental processing, storing and selling of products raised or produced on the premises, together with structures and activities necessary to support such uses. A garden accessory to a dwelling use shall not be considered agricultural use. 
(6)  Alley. A public way affording or intended to afford secondary means of vehicular access to abutting properties and situated along the side or rear of such properties. 
(7)  Amusement center. A building, portion of a building or area outside of a building, where four or more video game machines, pinball machines, pool or billiard tables or other similar player-operated amusement devices or any combination of four or more such devices are maintained for use by the public. 
(8)  Assisted care facility. An establishment that provides shelter and other services, which may include meals, housekeeping and personal care assistance, for elderly residents who are typically functionally impaired and socially isolated, but otherwise in good health and able to maintain a semi-independent lifestyle, not requiring the more intensive care of a nursing home. 
(9)  Auto and truck sales and service establishment. Any establishment or the display and sales of new or used automobiles or trucks, including rental, servicing, major and minor mechanical repair, body repair and painting, when conducted as accessory uses. 
(10)  Auto service center. An establishment for the servicing and minor repair of motor vehicles within enclosed service bays or stalls, and which may include the sale, installation and repair of tires, batteries, shocks, exhaust systems and similar minor automobile parts and accessories. "Auto service center" shall not include an establishment engaging in auto or truck general repair or involving the installation or removal of engines, transmissions or other major body or mechanical parts, or body repair or painting or storage of wrecked vehicles. 
(11)  Automobile graveyard. Any area outside of a completely enclosed building used for the storage, keeping or parking of two or more motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated and not economically practical to make operative. 
(12)  Bed and breakfast establishment. Facilities within an owner-occupied single-family dwelling operated by the owner of such dwelling for the housing of persons on a transient basis for not more than seven consecutive nights, containing not more than four lodging units for overnight guests, and where no meals other than breakfast are served to guests. 
(13)  Boardinghouse or roominghouse. A building in which lodging is provided to more than two but not more than 14 persons for compensation on a weekly or longer basis, and which contains a dwelling unit occupied by the owner or operator. 
(14)  Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or activities of any kind. 
(15)  Building official. The official designated to enforce the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(16)  Child day care center. A facility complying with applicable state licensing requirements and operated for the purpose of providing care, protection and guidance to a group of 13 or more children separated from their parents or guardians during a portion of the day. 
(17)  Clinic. A facility providing medical, dental, optical, surgical or psychiatric services to persons exclusively on an outpatient basis, and involving no overnight stay of patients. The term "clinic" includes the term "office" when used in conjunction with such services. 
(Commercial Vehicle-See Truck or Commercial Vehicle) 
(18)  Commission. The planning commission of the town. 
(19)  Completely enclosed building. A building enclosed on all sides and having no outside openings other than ordinary doors, windows and means of ventilation. 
(20)  Convenience store. Any retail establishment offering for sale a relatively limited selection of prepackaged or deli-style food products, tobacco products, household items, and other related goods, not including gasoline or fuel sales, characterized by a rapid turnover of customers and high traffic generation. 
(21)  Counseling services. A use providing counseling, guidance, recuperative, or similar services for persons requiring rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental illness, alcoholism, detention, or similar conditions for only part of a 24-hour day. 
(22)  Dancehall. An establishment where more than ten percent of the total floor area is designated or used as a dance floor or an establishment where an admission fee is directly collected or some other form of compensation is obtained for dancing, other than an establishment operated exclusively as a studio for the purpose of dance instruction. 
(23)  Development site. All of the land developed or intended to be developed for townhouse dwellings and related accessory uses, structures and facilities, when such land is contiguous, except for internal streets, and under single ownership or control for purposes of planning and initial development. A development shall include the individual lots on which townhouse dwellings are or will be located, as well as all open spaces, parking areas, driveways, recreational facilities, community areas and other areas owned or to be owned in common by owners of individual lots within the development. 
(24)  Drive-up facility or drive-up window. Any window or other facility where service is rendered to or business is transacted directly with customers who are located within motor vehicles. 
(25)  Dwelling, multi-family. A classification of housing where multiple separate housing units for residential inhabitants are contained within one building or several buildings within one complex. A common form is an apartment building. 
(26)  Dwelling, single-family. A building which contains only one dwelling unit and which is completely separated from any other main building. 
(27)  Dwelling, two-family. A building which contains two dwelling units. 
(28)  Dwelling unit. A room or group of rooms within a building and constituting a separate and independent housekeeping unit occupied or intended for occupancy by one family and containing cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities. The term "dwelling unit" shall not include a manufactured home, recreational vehicle or room or group of rooms within a hotel, motel, tourist home, boarding house, rooming house, fraternity or sorority house, or similar lodging facility. 
(29)  Dwelling use. Any principal use containing dwelling units or lodging units which are not generally available for occupancy for periods of less than one week, as distinguished from units located within hotels, motels, tourist homes and similar facilities intended for transient occupancy. The term "dwelling use" shall also include a bed and breakfast establishment, group home, assisted care facility or nursing home. 
(30)  Family. One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, including foster children, or not more than five unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping unit and occupying a single dwelling unit, except as otherwise provided herein. Domestic servants or employees residing on the premises shall be considered as part of a family. The term "family" shall not be construed to include a fraternity, sorority, club or a group of persons occupying a hotel, motel, tourist home, boarding house or institution of any kind, but shall include the occupants of a group home as defined in this article. 
(31)  Family day care home. A single-family dwelling in which a facility as defined in Code of Virginia, § 63.1-195, is operated for the purpose of providing care for more than five but less than 13 children separated from their parents or guardians during a portion of the day, exclusive of the provider's own children and any children who reside in the home. The care of five or less children for portions of a day shall be considered a home occupation. 
(32)  Farmer's market. Any area of land, buildings or structures, open or enclosed, used for the display and retail or wholesale sale of agricultural or horticultural products, but not including livestock. 
(33)  Flea market. An occasional or periodic market conducted in an open area or in buildings or structures, where groups of individual sellers offer a variety of goods for sale to the public and where there are ordinarily no longterm leases of selling space between sellers and operators. 
(34)  Flood. A general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas. (See article IV, floodplain districts, for additional definitions pertaining to flood and floodplains.) 
(35)  Floor area. The sum of the horizontal areas of all usable floors of a building as measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls and including all intervening walls, partitions, hallways, corridors, lobbies and stairways. In calculating the floor area of an attached building or the floor area of a use occupying a portion of a building, measurement shall be made to the centerlines of common or shared walls. Floor area shall not include unenclosed porches, balconies, carports, parking garages, or any basement or attic areas which are not improved and available for use and occupancy. 
(36)  Forestry. The use of land for raising and harvesting timber, pulpwood and other wood products for commercial purposes, including accessory operation of temporary sawmills and similar equipment for harvesting timber on the same or contiguous property. 
(37)  Frontage. That portion of a lot abutting a street and being situated between the lot lines intersecting the street; also referred to as "street frontage" or "lot frontage." 
(38)  Garden center. A business primarily engaged in retail or wholesale sale of trees, shrubs, flowers, plants, seeds, fertilizer, pesticides, and other lawn or garden products, supplies or accessories. 
(39)  Gasoline service station or self-service gasoline station. Any establishment involving the dispensing of motor fuels and related products at retail and having pumps, underground storage tanks and other facilities for such activity, and which may include the retail sale or installation of minor automobile parts and accessories and the inspection, servicing or minor repair of motor vehicles in enclosed service bays or stalls. Such use does not include an establishment engaging in auto or truck general repair or involving the installation or removal of engines, transmissions or other major body or mechanical parts, or body repair or painting or storage of wrecked vehicles. Such establishment may also provide the services of a convenience store. 
(40)  Greenhouse. A structure providing enclosure and protection for the raising of plants which are offered for sale at retail on the premises. 
(41)  Group home. A residential facility in which not more than eight individuals who are aged, infirmed, disabled, mentally ill, mentally retarded, or otherwise developmentally disabled reside, with one or more resident counselors or other staff persons. For the purposes of this definition, mental illness and developmental disability shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3401. The term "group home" shall include any other residential facility for which the Virginia Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services is the licensing authority under state law and shall for purposes of this appendix be considered residential occupancy by a single family. 
(42)  Halfway house. An establishment providing accommodations, rehabilitation, counseling, and supervision to persons suffering from alcohol or drug addiction, to persons re-entering society after being released from a correctional facility or other institution, or to persons suffering from similar disorders. 
(43)  Height. The vertical distance measured from the average of the lowest and highest elevations of the finished grades immediately adjacent to a building or structure to the highest point of a flat roof, mansard roof or parapet, or to the midpoint of a gable, hip or shed roof, or to the highest point of any structure having no roof. 
(44)  Home occupation. An occupation, profession, enterprise or similar activity conducted within a dwelling unit which is the residence of the practitioner. In order to qualify as a home occupation, an activity as described herein must be clearly secondary to the principal dwelling use of the premises and must meet all of the following criteria, which are intended to distinguish such activity from other business uses and to ensure compatibility with nearby residential uses: 
a.  No person other than a member of the family residing on the premises is employed on the premises in the conduct of the activity. 
b.  The home occupation is limited to the main building only and does not occupy more than 25 percent of the floor area of the main building or more than 500 square feet, whichever is less. 
c.  There are no signs, other than specifically permitted by article V of this appendix, and no displays or alterations to the exterior of the building that would distinguish it as being devoted to any nondwelling use. 
d.  There is no group instruction or assembly, no housing of persons for compensation, no repair of vehicles and no product offered for sale on the premises. 
e.  The type, volume and hours of traffic generated by the home occupation are not inconsistent with characteristics of traffic generated by other dwellings in the neighborhood. 
f.  There is no equipment, process or activity conducted that generates any noise, vibration, odor, fumes, glare or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses beyond the premises. 
(45)  Hospital. A facility, licensed by the state, in which the primary function is the provision of diagnosis, treatment and medical and nursing services, surgical or nonsurgical, for sick or injured persons, and which provides inpatient beds, and including ancillary facilities for outpatient and emergency care, training, research, administration and employee, patient and visitor services, but not including a facility exclusively or primarily for the care and treatment of psychiatric patients or persons suffering from substance abuse. 
(46)  Hotel or motel. A building or group of buildings on the same lot containing lodging units for transient guests principally on a daily basis, for which housekeeping services are provided, and in which each lodging unit has a separate entrance through a common lobby, corridor or directly from the outside. The term "hotel or motel" is intended to apply to inns, lodges and similar facilities except when such conform to the definition of tourist home as set forth in this article. 
(47)  Inoperable vehicle. Any motor vehicle on which valid license plates or a valid inspection decal is not displayed, or any motor vehicle which is wrecked, partially or totally dismantled or disassembled, such that it cannot be lawfully operated on a public street. 
(48)  Junkyard. An outdoor area used for the depositing, keeping, storing, buying or selling of discarded materials no longer usable in their present form, including but not necessarily limited to: Scrap metals, building materials, machinery, household appliances, plumbing supplies, furnishings, fixtures, or motor vehicles or parts thereof. The term "junkyard" includes an automobile graveyard as defined herein, but shall not include a garbage dump, tire dump, landfill as defined under the solid waste management regulations promulgated by the Virginia Waste Management Board, or any similar use. 
(49)  Boarding kennel. A place or establishment other than a pound or animal shelter where companion animals not owned by the proprietor are sheltered, fed, and watered, for a period not exceeding 30 consecutive days, in exchange for a fee. 
(50)  Livestock. Animals, other than dogs, cats and other household pets, which are kept or raised for use, profit or enjoyment, including cattle, horses, sheep, goats, swine, fowl, rabbits and similar animals as defined in chapter 10 of the town Code. 
(51)  Lodging unit. A room or group of rooms within a building, constituting living quarters for one or more persons, and not containing cooking facilities. A room or group of rooms within a hotel, motel or tourist home constituting living quarters for transient guests shall be considered a lodging unit even though it may contain partial or complete kitchen facilities. 
(52)  Lot. A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by buildings or uses permitted by the provisions of this appendix together with such area, yards and other open spaces as are required by this appendix. "Lot" includes the terms "tract," "parcel" and "property" and may consist of a single lot of record, a combination of contiguous lots of record, or a unit of land described by metes and bounds. 
(53)  Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or a lot bounded entirely by streets. 
(54)  Lot coverage. That portion of a lot, which when viewed from directly above, would be covered by any building or structure. 
(55)  Lot, interior. A lot, other than a corner lot or through lot, which has frontage on only one street. 
(56)  Lot line. Any boundary of a lot, including a boundary which constitutes a street line. 
(57)  Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court, or a lot or parcel which is described by metes and bounds and is similarly recorded. 
(58)  Lot, through. A lot other than a corner lot having frontage along more than one street. 
(59)  Lot width. The minimum horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured between the points where the minimum required front yard line intersects the side lines of the lot. On a corner lot or through lot on which more than one front yard is required, the lot width shall be measured adjacent to the frontage with the least dimension. 
(60)  Main building. A building in which is conducted the principal or main use of the property on which the building is located. 
(61)  Manufactured home. Any structure complying with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards, which is transportable in one or more sections; is eight body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length in the traveling mode, or is 320 or more square feet when erected on a site; is built on a permanent chassis; is designed to be used for dwelling purposes by one family, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities; and which includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems to be utilized in the structure. The term "manufactured home" includes the term "mobile home." 
(62)  Manufactured home park. A lot or parcel on which are located, or which is arranged or equipped for the accommodation of, two or more manufactured homes with spaces for such available for rent or lease for periods of not less than one year, and including such open spaces and other facilities as may be provided for the use of or service to residents of manufactured homes located on such lot or parcel. 
(63)  Miniwarehouse. A building or group of buildings intended to provide rental storage space within individual cubicles or compartments enclosed by walls and ceilings, each of which has a separate entrance for loading and unloading of stored goods, and from which no sale of goods or services is conducted. 
(64)  Nonconforming building. A building or structure having one or more nonconforming features. 
(65)  Nonconforming feature. A feature of a use, as distinguished from the use itself, or a feature of a building, which feature was lawfully existing at the effective date of this appendix or subsequent amendment thereto, and does not conform with the requirements established by this appendix or an amendment thereto. Features of uses or buildings shall be construed to include density, lot area, lot dimensions, yards, open spaces, height, bulk, number of occupants, screening, landscaping, lighting, and off-street parking requirements. A building having any such nonconforming feature may be referred to as a nonconforming building. 
(66)  Nonconforming use. A principal or accessory use of land or of a building or structure, which use was lawfully existing at the effective date of this appendix or subsequent amendment thereto and is not a permitted use under the provisions of this appendix or an amendment thereto. 
(67)  Not-for-profit. An organization, association or activity which is not operated for purposes of earning a profit, and which has obtained nontaxable status from the United States Internal Revenue Service. 
(68)  Nursing home. Any facility or any identifiable component of a facility in which the primary function is the provision, on a continuing basis, of nursing services and health-related services for the treatment and inpatient care of two or more persons and which is licensed by the commonwealth as a nursing home. 
(69)  Office. An establishment primarily engaged in providing professional, financial, administrative, management, clerical or other services not involving the manufacture, assembly or repair of goods, or the storage or direct transfer of goods to the customer on the premises, except as may be incidental to a service provided on the premises. 
(70)  Off-street parking space. An area for the parking of one motor vehicle located other than within a public street or public alley right-of-way and having such dimensions and access as set forth in article V of this appendix. 
(71)  Outdoor storage. The keeping of goods, materials, products or merchandise outside of a completely enclosed building on the same lot for more than 24 hours. 
(72)  Outpatient mental health center. Establishments with medical staff providing outpatient services related to the diagnosis and treatment of mental health disorders. These establishments may provide counseling and/or refer patients to more extensive treatment programs, if necessary. 
(73)  Outpatient substance abuse center. Establishments with medical staff providing outpatient services related to the diagnosis and treatment of alcohol, drug, or other substance abuse. These establishments may provide counseling and/or refer patients to more extensive treatment programs, if necessary. Included in this use type are outpatient alcohol treatment centers, outpatient detoxification centers, outpatient drug and substance abuse centers. 
(74)  Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
(75)  Parking area. A parcel of land or a portion thereof used for the parking of motor vehicles, including off-street parking spaces as defined herein, as well as the access aisles and maneuvering space directly serving such off-street parking spaces. 
(76)  Parking garage. A structure or portion of a structure generally available to the public and used for the parking of transient motor vehicles either for compensation, whether by prior rental or lease agreement or on an hourly or daily basis. 
(77)  Parking lot. A parcel of land or portion thereof used for the parking of motor vehicles as a commercial enterprise for which compensation is charged, whether by prior rental or lease agreement or on an hourly or daily basis. 
(78)  Personal service business. An establishment or place of business providing a service directly to persons or involving the repair, alteration, maintenance, cleaning or customizing of personal property worn by or carried on a person, and including, health spas, fitness centers, shoe repair shops, tailor and dressmaking shops, travel agencies, clothing rental stores, watch and jewelry repair shops, photographic studios, studios for music, dance or martial arts instruction, tattoo parlors, hobby and craft instruction, and similar uses. 
(79)  Principal street frontage. That frontage of a corner lot in a business district, which is situated along the street which carries the greater volume of pedestrian and vehicle traffic and generally functions as the primary orientation of businesses on properties contiguous to the lot. 
(80)  Principal use. The main use of a lot, building or structure as distinguished from an accessory use. 
(81)  Property. Any land which is identified by an official tax map number, any buildings or structures on the land, and including the area in the public right-of-way which is between the property line of the land and the curb or edge of pavement. 
(82)  Public sewer or public water system. A sewer or water system owned and operated by the town, or by such other unit of government, or authority or individual as may be authorized by the laws of the commonwealth, when such facility is approved by the council of the town. 
(83)  Public utility, major. A public utility facility serving all or a major portion of a community or region and which typically involves a building or structure including, but not limited to, a wastewater treatment plant, water purification plant, generating plant, transmission line, substation, railroad line or appurtenance, a building housing electrical switching equipment, transfer station, administration building, utility storage or maintenance yard or similar use. 
(84)  Public utility, minor. A right-of-way, easement, facility or appurtenance necessary for provision and maintenance of a public utility or public transportation to serve adjacent and nearby development, including but not limited to a street distribution line, pole, pipe, meter, transformer, relay or booster facility, stormwater detention basin, well, well house pump station, water storage facility or similar device. 
(84.5)  Recreational equipment trailers. Wheeled trailers used to transform items including, but not limited to, livestock, watercraft, ATVs, motorcycles, snowmobiles, etc. 
(85)  Recreational vehicle. A vehicle built on a single chassis intended to be towed or self-propelled or attached to the chassis of another vehicle, and designed or used for recreational, travel or sporting purposes or for temporary living quarters conjunction with such purposes. "Recreational vehicle" shall include, but shall not be limited to, travel trailers, pickup campers, camping trailers, motor homes, and converted trucks and buses. 
(86)  Residential district. An R-LD, R-1, R-2 or R-3 district established by this appendix. 
(87)  Retail store or shop. A building wherein the principal activity is the sale of merchandise at retail to the general public, and where such merchandise is typically sold in small quantities and broken lots, and not in bulk. For purpose of illustration, "retail stores and shops" shall include: Drugstores; newsstands; food stores and supermarkets; candy shops; dry goods, notions and clothing stores; boutiques and gift shops; hardware, home furnishings and household appliance and electronics stores; antique shops; furniture stores; florist shops; opticians; shoe stores; jewelry stores; auto accessory stores; and music stores. Convenience stores and establishments for the sale in bulk of coal, wood, fuel, building materials and lumber, and establishments for the sale of vehicles, farm implements, boats, trailers, recreational vehicles, machinery and similar items shall not be considered retail stores and shops. The term "retail stores and shops" does not include any use involving the dispensing of motor fuels or any other use involving retail activity specifically listed as a permitted use in any district, unless such use is clearly included among the uses illustrated in this definition. 
(88)  Roominghouse. See boardinghouse or roominghouse. 
(89)  Satellite dish antenna. An accessory structure that allows the direct reception of communication of other signals from orbiting satellites or other sources, and which includes an antenna or dish antenna, a low noise amplifier and coaxial cable. 
(90)  Setback. The distance a building, structure, feature or activity is separate from a lot line. Depending on the context, the term "setback" may refer to a front yard, side yard or rear yard. 
(91)  Shopping center. A group of three or more retail stores or shops or other business establishments on a site of two acres or more planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit and related in its location, size and types of establishments to the trade area which it is intended to serve, and which is provided with off-street parking on the premises. 
(92)  Sign. A presentation of letters, numbers, figures, pictures, emblems, insignia, lines of colors, or any combination thereof which can be viewed from a public right-of-way, private road or another property, and which is displayed for the purpose of information, direction or identification or to advertise or promote a business, service, activity, interest or product, or any otherwise lawful noncommercial message that does not attract attention to a business operated for profit or to a commodity or service offered for sale. 
(93)  Special exception. An activity or feature specified in this article as permitted in a particular district or under specified circumstances by approval of the board of zoning appeals pursuant to the provisions of article IX of this appendix. 
(94)  Special use. A use specified in this appendix as permitted in a particular district only upon approval of a special use permit by the town council in accordance with the provisions of article VII of this appendix. 
(95)  Sports complex. An indoor facility, with or without seating for spectators, and providing accommodations for individual, organized or franchised sports, including, but not limited to, basketball, ice hockey, wrestling, soccer, tennis, volleyball, racquetball or handball. Such facility may also provide other regular organized or franchised events, health and fitness club facilities, swimming pool, snack bar, restaurant, retail sales of related sports, health or fitness items, and other support facilities. 
(96)  Stable, private. The keeping, breeding or raising of horses or ponies exclusively for the personal use and enjoyment of the owner or occupant of the premises on which such facility is located. A facility otherwise meeting the definition of private stable may include the boarding of horses or ponies for persons other than the owner or occupant of the premises, provided other requirements applicable in the district in which the property is located are met. 
(97)  Street. The right-of-way within which lies a public or private thoroughfare which affords or is intended for the purpose of affording the principal means of vehicular access to abutting property. 
(98)  Street line. The right-of-way line of a street or the boundary line of a private street or access easement. 
(99)  Structural alteration. Any change in the supporting members of a structure, including foundations, bearing walls, bearing partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any change in the supporting members of the roof of a structure or in the means of egress of a structure. 
(100)  Structure. Anything which is constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground including, but not limited to, buildings, walls, fences, signs, manufactured homes and swimming pools. 
(101)  Tourist home. A building containing not more than ten lodging units, with or without board, where lodging units are available for occupancy by transient guests on a daily basis, in which access to each lodging unit is provided from within the building, and which contains a dwelling unit which constitutes the residence of the owner or manager of the facility. 
(102)  Townhouse. A building which contains one dwelling unit located on an individual lot of record and which is attached by means of party walls in a series of three or more buildings, each of which contains one dwelling unit and is located on a separate lot of record. A building meeting the terms of this definition may also be referred to as a single-family attached dwelling. 
(103)  Truck or commercial vehicle. Any vehicle that exceeds an empty weight of 5,000 pounds or is equipped with or designed to have more than two rear wheels, and is designed or regularly used for carrying freight, merchandise, or more than ten passengers, including buses. Empty weight shall be that which is identified as such for vehicle title or registration purposes by the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles. These provisions shall not apply to pickup body type trucks. 
(103.5)  Utility trailer. Wheeled trailers used for the transport of livestock, work tools and equipment, hobby equipment, landscaping supplies, or other nonrecreational equipment. 
(104)  Warehouse. A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. 
(105)  Warehousing and distribution. Uses including storage, warehousing and dispatching of goods within enclosed structures or outdoors. Typical uses include wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, [and] moving/storage firms. 
(105.5)  Watercraft. A boat, ship or other water vehicle. 
(106)  Yard. An open space on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in article V of this appendix. (For projections and encroachments in yards and for yards on corner lots and through lots, see article V of this appendix.) 
a.  Yard, front. A yard extending the full width of a lot and being adjacent and parallel to the street frontage of the lot. 
b.  Yard, rear. A yard adjacent and parallel to the rear lot line of a lot and extending the full width of the lot. 
c.  Yard, side. A yard adjacent and parallel to the side lot line of a lot and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard. On irregular shaped lots, any yard adjacent to a lot line to which the yard definitions of this article do not clearly apply shall be considered a side yard. 
(107)  Zero lot-line home. The strict definition of a zero lot line home relates to the placement of the home on the building lot. In order for a small building lot to provide usable yard space, one side of the home is placed as close to the property line as possible. This placement typically allows marginal space between two homes on adjacent lots. Therefore, there are generally no windows on the sides of the homes closest to the property line. The zero lot line method of development has also been utilized for attached homes, which are commonly known as duplexes in which case the two homes share a common wall that is aligned with the center of the two adjoining lots. 
(108)  Zoning administrator. The person designated by the town council to administer and enforce the provisions of this appendix. 
(Ord. No. 653, § 10-2, 8-6-1996; Ord. No. 680, § 10-2, 9-16-1997; Ord. No. 702, 2-2-1999; Ord. No. 789, 8-19-2003; Ord. No. 793, 11-4-2003; Ord. No. 845, 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 862, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 887, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 893, 12-15-2009; Ord. No. 912, 4-5-2011; Ord. No. 960, 4-21-2015 ) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1982 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1982 Code, as updated through March 19, 1996, which are included herein. Sections of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1982 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-3 1-1-1-3 1-4-1-7 1-6-1-9 1-8-1-11 1-11-1-14 1-13 2-156 2-2 2-21 2-3, 2-4 2-1, 2-2 2-5, 2-6 2-41, 2-42 2-16, 2-17 2-56, 2-57 2-28-2-33 2-71-2-76 2-45-2-50 2-91-2-96 2-61-2-64 2-111-2-114 2-75-2-80 70-21-70-26 3-21-3-28 6-21-6-28 4-9 10-8 4-12 10-11 4-13 10-96 4-14, 4-15 10-12, 10-13 4-19.1-4-19.5 10-66-10-70 4-21 10-41 4-25 10-45 4-30 10-49 4-31-4-34 10-91-10-94 4-41 10-119 5-4 14-23 5-5 22-1 5-21 14-21 5-22 14-24 5-24 14-22 5-41-5-44 14-136-14-139 6-1 26-1 7-1-7-4 38-1-38-4 7-5 38-4 7-6 94-25 7-7, 7-8 38-5, 38-6 7-20, 7-21 38-21, 38-22 8-1-8-4 42-21-42-24 10-13 14-46 10-14-10-19 14-48-14-53 10-20 14-53 10-31-10-35 14-71-14-75 10-46-10-48 14-91-14-93 10-59-10-63 14-111-14-115 10-74-10-81 50-21-50-28 10-92-10-108 50-46-50-62 11-2-11-20 86-246-86-264 11-32 86-281 11-38 86-282 11-40 86-283 11-42, 11-43 86-284, 86-285 11-47, 11-48 86-286, 86-287 11-52 86-288 11-59 86-289 11-62 86-290 11-65 86-291 11-94 86-311 11-94.1 86-312 11-95-11-109 86-313-86-327 12-1 62-1 12-2 62-61 12-3 62-41 12-47, 12-48 46-1, 46-2 12-49 90-114 12-52 62-21 12-71-12-81 46-21-46-31 12-102-12-108 34-21-34-27 12-109-12-114 76-1-76-6 12-121 76-21 12-123-12-127 76-23-76-27 12-222 76-22 14-1-14-6 78-1-78-6 14-21, 14-22 78-26, 78-27 14-23(a)(1)-(3) 78-28 14-23(a)(5) 78-28 14-23(b) 78-28 15-22, 15-23 74-21 15-24, 15-25 74-22, 74-23 16-1-16-4 94-71-94-74 16-5, 16-6 94-76, 94-77 16-21-16-24 94-91-94-94 16-31-16-56 94-111-94-136 18-1-18-4 82-1-82-4 18-6-18-17 82-5-82-16 18-28-18-32 82-36-82-40 19-1 86-21 19-3 86-22 19-4-19-6 86-36-86-38 19-7 86-1 19-21-19-25 86-76-86-80 19-36-19-46 86-101-86-111 19-50-19-64 86-151-86-165 19-75-19-80 86-126-86-131 19-100-19-102 86-186-86-188 19-111-19-123 86-211-86-223 19-130-19-136 86-51-86-57 20-1 98-1 22-1 90-1 22-6 90-4 22-7, 22-8 90-2, 90-3 22-9, 22-10 90-5, 90-6 22-12-22-15 90-7-90-10 22-26-22-29 90-101-90-104 22-29.1 90-105 22-30 90-106 22-32-22-38 90-107-90-113 22-39 90-72 22-39.1 90-73 22-40, 22-41 90-74, 90-75 22-42 90-71 22-43, 22-44 90-76 22-45 90-77 23-1-23-3 58-1-58-3 24-1-24-9 94-21-94-29 24-21-24-25 94-46-94-50 25-2-25-4 62-81-62-83  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code, as updated through March 19, 1996, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1982 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since March 19, 1996, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 506 11- 1-1988 10-1 637  2- 6-1996 App. B, § 4-34 638  2- 6-1996 App. B, § 4-40 639  2- 6-1996 App. B, § 4-34 645  3-19-1996 App. B, § 5-24 648  6-18-1996 16-4 94-74 16-4.1 94-75 649  6- 4-1996 11-109 86-327 652  7- 2-1996 1 90-2 2 90-9 653  8- 6-1996 10-2 App. B, § 10-2 654  8-20-1996 11-109 86-327 655  9- 3-1996 4-23 App. B, § 4-23 656 11- 5-1996 22-38 90-113 657 12- 3-1996 12-109 76-1 658  1- 7-1997 12-107 34-26 659  1-21-1997 7-27-7-32 38-41-38-46 660  2- 4-1997 7-52 30-21 7-53 30-22 
30-26 7-54-7-56 30-23-30-25 7-57-7-59 30-27-30-29 661  2- 4-1997 2-16 2-56 662  3- 4-1997 7-42-7-49 38-66-38-73 665  3-18-1997 5-30 App. B, § 5-30 666  4- 1-1997 4-19 10-15 668  5- 6-1997 6-1 26-1 669  6- 3-1997 19-135 86-56 670  6-17-1997 24-2 94-22 671  6-17-1997 1 86-101 2 86-103 672  6-17-1997 24-21 94-46 673  6-17-1997 16-21 94-91 675  7- 1-1997 1 90-2 2 90-9 677  8-19-1997 4-19.1-4-19.5 10-66-10-70 679  9- 2-1997 19-4 86-36 680  9-16-1997 4-29 App. B, § 4-29 10-2 App. B, § 10-2 684 11- 4-1997 19-7 86-1 685  1- 6-1998 11-16 86-260 690  4- 7-1998 App. B, § 4-2 App. B, § 4-7 App. B, § 4-12 App. B, § 4-17 App. B, § 4-23 App. B, § 4-29 App. B, § 4-34 App. B, § 4-40 App. B, § 5-57-App. B, § 5-66 692  6-16-1998 App. B, § 4-17 App. B, § 5-65 694  6-16-1998 18-51-18-53 82-61-82-63 697  9-15-1998 78-7 700 11-17-1998 4-2, 4-3 10-2, 10-3 4-5-4-8 10-4-10-7 4-10, 4-11 10-9, 10-10 4-18 10-14 4-20 10-16 4-22-4-24 10-42-10-44 4-26, 4-27 10-46, 10-47 4-29 10-48 4-36 10-95 4-37 10-116 4-39, 4-40 10-117, 10-118 4-42 10-17 4-44 10-18 701  2- 2-1999 App. B, § 5-65(b), § 5-65(b)(14)       Added App. B, § 5-65(c) 702  2- 2-1999 App. B, § 4-46(a)(12) App. B, § 10-2(b)(46) 704  2-16-1999       Added 62-3 708  5- 4-1999 1-6 Adopting Ord., p. xi 710  7-20-1999 1 90-2(a) 2       Added 90-2(c) 3 90-9 711  7-20-1999       Added 90-108.1 712  8-17-1999 86-127 713  9- 7-1999 86-126, 86-127 714  9- 7-1999 94-134 718  2-15-2000       Added 83-1       Added 83-10-83-14 721  4-18-2000 14-23 722  5- 2-2000       Added 62-2 723  5-16-2000       Added 62-22 724  5-16-2000       Added 86-56(e) 725  6- 6-2000       Rpld 86-151-86-165       Added 86-166-86-172 726  6- 6-2000 94-76(a)       Added 94-76(b) 728  7-20-1999 1 90-2 2 90-9 730  6-20-2000 94-75(e) 731  7- 5-2000       Added 86-2 733  8-15-2000 86-169 734 10- 3-2000 90-113 735  9-19-2000       Rpld 46-1 736 10-17-2000       Rpld 86-101-86-111       Added 86-112-86-124 86-126-86-131 738  1-16-2001       Added 90-11 739  2- 6-2001 86-126, 86-127 743  4- 3-2001       Added 90-108.1 90-111 745  5- 1-2001 90-114 746  6- 5-2001 86-117 747  6- 5-2001 86-311, 86-315 86-318-86-320 750  6-19-2001 1 90-2 2 90-9 751  8- 7-2001 94-111, 94-113 94-114, 94-119 94-124 752  8-21-2001 86-36 753  8-21-2001       Added 30-40-30-54 754  8-21-01 App. B, §§ 5-41-5-56 755  9- 4-2001 78-4 756 11- 6-2001 86-251 757  2- 5-2002       Added 82-17 758  2-19-2002 86-323 761  4-16-2002 App. B, § 5-7 762  4-16-2002       Added 82-18 763  4-16-2002       Added 86-63-86-66 764  6- 4-2002 ch. 86, art. IV, div. 1      86-114.1 86-115, 86-117 765  6- 4-2002 86-311, 86-315 86-318-86-320 768  8- 6-2002 1 90-2(c) 2 90-9 769  9- 3-2002 App. B, §§ 4-2, 4-7, 4-12, 4-17 770  8-20-2002 94-24       Rpld 94-23 771  9- 3-2002 86-171       Added 86-171.1 86-171.2 772  9- 3-2002       Added 46-1 774 11- 5-2002       Added 90-120, 90-121 775 11-19-2002       Added 10-92.1, 10-92.2 776 12-17-2002 App. B, §§ 4-13, 4-18, 4-25 777 12-17-2002 App. B, § 4-17 778 12-17-2002       Added 82-66-82-75 779  1- 7-2003 94-123(a), (e) 783  6-23-2003 86-113, 86-114 784  6- 3-2003 94-46(a) 785  6- 3-2003 94-91 787  7- 1-2003 1 90-2 2 90-9 788  7-15-2003 86-323 789  8-19-2003 App. B, §§ 5-43.3, 10-2(b)(86) 793 11- 4-2003 App. B, §§ 4-29, 4-37       Added App. B, § 10-2(104)-(107) 794 12- 2-2003 90-114(a) 795 12-16-2003       Added 94-140-94-155 796 12-16-2003 101-5(a)(2) 802  6-15-2004 1 90-2 2 90-9 808  1-18-2005 86-186 809  1-18-2005 2-156 810  3- 1-2005 90-112(b)       Added 90-112(d) 811  3-15-2005 78-4 812  3-15-2005       Added 90-111(e) 816  6-21-2005 94-46 817  6-21-2005 94-91 818  6-21-2005 86-167 821  7- 5-2005 1 90-2 2 90-9 822  8-16-2005       Added 46-40-46-46 825 10- 4-2005       Added App. B, § 5-43.5 830 12- 6-2005       Added 86-58 835  6-20-2006 94-46 836  6-20-2006 94-91(a) 839  9- 5-2006 1 90-2 2 90-9 840 10- 3-2006 10-2 10-66-10-70       Added 10-66.1 843 11-21-2006 94-22, 94-74 844  2- 6-2007 94-91 845  2-20-2007 App. B, §§ 5-41-5-56 App. B, § 10-2 846  4- 3-2007 1-8, 10       Added 15.3-1-15.3-9 847  4- 3-2007       Added 15.1-1-15.1-11 851  5-15-2007 86-54(c), 86-252 90-108.1       Rpld 86-311-86-327       Added 86-328-86-337 853  7- 3-2007 1 90-2 2 90-9 854  9- 4-2007 App. B, §§ 4-56-4-61 856  9- 4-2007 10-44 857 10- 2-2007 App. B, § 4-23 860 11- 6-2007 App. B, § 5-23 861 11- 6-2007 App. B, § 5-24 862 11- 6-2007 App. B, § 10-2 863 11- 6-2007 App. B, §§ 4-29, 4-34 864 11- 6-2007       Added 90-115, 90-116 865 11-20-2007 1       Added 15-1 866 12-18-2007 94-46 867 12-18-2007 94-91 870  5-20-2008 App. B, §§ 4-23, 4-25 873  7-15-2008 1 90-2 2 90-9 876  1- 6-2009       Dltd 94-24, 94-29 94-46, 94-91 883  5-19-2009       Added 86-340-86-351 887  6-16-2009 App. B, §§ 5-41-5-56 App. B, §§ 10-1, 10-2 888  6-16-2009       Rpld 62-81 890  7- 7-2009       Rpld 46-27 892 12-15-2009 App. B, § 4-2(a)(8)       Added App. B, § 4-2(b)(8) App. B, § 4-7(a)(6)       Added App. B, § 4-7(b)(7) App. B, § 4-12(a)(7)       Added App. B, § 4-12(b)(7) App. B, § 4-17(a)(12)       Added App. B, § 4-17(b)(7) App. B, § 4-23(a)(17)       Added App. B, § 4-23(b)(10) 893 12-15-2009 App. B, § 10-2(b)(16)(31) 902  7-20-2010 86-54 903 10-19-2010       Added 2-157 908  4- 5-2011       Added App. B, § 5-15(a)       Rnbd App. B, § 5-17       as App. B, § 5-17.1       Added App. B, § 5-17.2 909  4- 5-2011 App. B, § 6-7(a)(b) 910  4- 5-2011 App. B, § 7-2 App. B, § 7-25(a)(b) 911  4- 5-2011 App. B, § 9-14       Added App. B, § 9-14.1 912  4- 5-2011 App. B, § 10-2(b)(41) 913  4- 5-2011       Added 10-97 917  9- 6-2011 62-83(tit.) 62-83 918  9- 6-2011 34-21-34-27 34-21-34-24, 34-26, 34-27 926  9- 4-2012       Added 94-4-94-14       Rpld 94-47-94-50, 94-92-94-94 928 11- 6-2012       Rpld 50-46-50-62 930  2- 5-2013 2-156 931  3-19-2013       Rpld App. B, §§ 6-1-6-9       Added 6-1-6-11 936  5- 7-2013 App. B, § 4-40 938  6- 4-2013 86-341, 86-349 942  9-17-2013 2-56 948  3-18-2014 86-341 949  4-15-2014       Rpld App. B, §§4-56-4-61       Added 4-65-4-73 950  4-15-2014       Rpld 42-21-42-24 951  4-15-2014 App. B, § 5-17.2 952  5-20-2014       Rpld 15-1       Rpld 15.1-1-15.1-11       Rpld 15.3-1-15.3-9       Added Ch. 79, Intro., 79-1-79-10, 79-15.1-79-30, 79-36-79-43, 79-49-79-59, 79-65-79-69, 79-76-79-79 955  7- 1-2014       Added 14-140-14-146 956 10-21-2014 10-47(a) 960  4-21-2015 App. B, § 2-1       Added App. B, §§4-80-4-89 App. B, § 10-2 970  4-21-2016 1       Added Ch. 79, Intro., 79-1, 79-49, 79-50 3       Rpld 79-1-79-10, 79-15.1-79-30, 79-36-79-43, 79-49-79-59 974  6-21-2016 86-211, 86-212 975  7- 5-2016 86-287 982 11-15-2016       Added Art. III, 74-30-74-41 987  6-20-2017 78-5 992  4- 3-2018 10-2, 10-3 10-5 10-7 10-10 10-14-10-16 10-66       Rnbd 10-66.1       as 10-66 10-67-10-69 995  6- 5-2018 86-259  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Code of Virginia. 
Code of Virginia 
Section Section  
this Code 1-13 et seq. 1-2 1-13.9 1-3 2.1-359 et seq. 2-92 2.2-1159 Ch. 14 2.2-3100 et seq. Ch. 2 2.2-3115 2-42 2.2-3700 et seq. Ch. 2 2.2-4300 et seq. 2-56 3.1-562.4 Ch. 86, Art. VIII 3.1-610.1 et seq. 10-93 3.1-723 et seq. Ch. 10 3.1-796.84 10-116 3.1-796.85 et seq. 10-41 3.1-796.94:1 10-92 3.1-796.122 et seq. Ch. 10 10-9 3.1-796.127, 3.1-796.128       Ch. 10 3.2-2600 10-2 3.2-6500 10-2 3.2-6504 10-16 3.2-6522 10-7 3.2-6540 10-66 3.2-6540(G) 10-67 3.2-6540.1 10-66 3.2-6543 10-5 3.2-6546 10-14 3.2-6555 et seq. 10-2 10-3 3.2-6556 10-69 3.2-6557 10-14 3.2-6570 10-16 3.2-6574(B)(2) 10-2 tit. 4.1 86-281 4.1-100 86-6386-281 4.1-205 86-281 4.1-233 86-281 6.2-301 14-143 10.1-560et seq. Ch. 34 79-49 10.1-600 et seq. Ch. 42 10.1-603.3 Ch. 34 10.1-1142 38-68 10.1-1321 Ch. 34 10.1-1400 78-4 10.1-1412 Ch. 78 10.1-1425 Ch. 46 11-35 et seq. Ch. 2 13.1-501 et seq. 86-248 tit. 15.1 Char. § 2.3 15.1-796 Char. § 4.6 15.1-827 Char. § 3.8 15.1-827.1 Char. § 3.8 15.1-837-15.1-907 Char. § 2.2 tit. 15.2 Char. § 2.2, 
Char. § 2.3 Ch. 2 App. B, § 8-13 App. B, § 9-3 15.2-106 2-156 15.2-901 Ch. 78 15.2-903 Ch. 74 15.2-904 90-114 15.2-911 Ch. 30 15.2-913 Ch. 76 15.2-922 Ch. 38 15.2-927 et seq. Ch. 78 15.2-953 83-1 15.2-1104 Ch. 86 15.2-1113 Ch. 38 62-82 15.2-1114 Ch. 74 Ch. 76 15.2-1414.7 Char. § 3.8 15.2-1115 Ch. 34 82-15 15.2-1116 Ch. 38 15.2-1117 Ch. 14, Art. III 15.2-1118 Ch. 38 15.2-1429, 15.2-1430       1-13 15.2-1432 1-13 15.2-1433 1-1 1-11, 1-12 15.2-1715 Ch. 46 15.2-2000 et seq. Ch. 82 15.2-2009 82-7 15.2-2028 Ch. 90 15.2-2100 et seq. Ch. 94 15.2-2109 Ch. 94, Art. II, Ch. 94, Art. III 15.2-2122 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. III 15.2-2143 Ch. 94, Art. II Ch. 94, Art. II, 
Div. 2 15.2-2157 Ch. 94, Art. III 15.2-2200 App. B, § 1-3 15.2-2200 et seq. Ch. 70 15.2-2201 App. B, § 7-30 App. B, § 9-7 15.2-2204 App. B, § 4-62 App. B, § 7-30 App. B, § 7-35 App. B, § 8-4, App. B, § 8-5 App. B, § 9-4 App. B, § 9-8, 
App. B, § 9-9 
App. B, § 9-13 15.2-2210 70-21 15.2-2212 70-22 70-24, 70-25 15.2-2314 App. B, § 9-17 15.2-2119 94-4, 94-6 94-14 15.2-2223 App. A, § 2 15.2-2240 et seq. Ch. 70 App. A 15.2-2242, 15.2-2243       App. A, § 13 15.2-2247 Ch. 58 15.2-2261 App. B, § 6-10 15.2-2270 et seq. App. B, § 6-10 15.2-2271, 15.2-2272       App. A, § 11 15.2-2280 App. B, § 4-65 15.2-2280 et seq. Ch. 70 App. B App. B, § 1-2 15.2-2283, 15.2-2284 App. B, § 1-3, App. B, § 1-4 15.2-2285 App. B, § 8-1 15.2-2286 App. B, § 7-37 App. B, § 8-1 15.2-2296 App. B, § 8-7 15.2-2308 App. B, § 9-1 15.2-2311 App. B, § 6-3 15.2-2309 App. B, § 9-5 15.2-2800 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. II 15.2-2803 et seq. Ch. 46 16.1-123.1 Ch. 22 16.1-278 et seq. 90-9 17.1-238 Ch. 82 17.1-281 22-1 tit. 18.2 Ch. 62 18.2-9 1-13 18.2-11 1-13 18.2-51.4 90-11 18.2-77 App. B, § 6-9 18.2-80 App. B, § 6-9 18.2-223, 18.2-224 Ch. 86, Art. VIII 18.2-246.3 86-264 18.2-248 86-264 18.2-266 90-11 18.2-266 et seq. 90-9 18.2-280 62-82 18.2-286 62-82 18.2-318 Ch. 46 18.2-319 46-2 18.2-323 Ch. 10 18.2-340.15 et seq. Ch. 6 18.2-389 Ch. 62 18.2-403.1 et seq. Ch. 10 18.2-432 Ch. 6 6-28 18.2-433 Ch. 6 Ch. 6, Art. II 18.2-462 62-61 18.2-510 Ch. 10 10-95 19.2-152.1 Ch. 86, Art. VIII 19.2-260 10-16 19.2-393 et seq. Ch. 46 tit. 24.2 Ch. 26 24.2-225 et seq. Char. § 3.2 24.2-308 26-1 24.2-601 Ch. 26 tit. 25 Char. § 2.3 27-6.1 et seq. Ch. 38 27-30 et seq. Ch. 38 27-39 et seq. Ch. 38 27-94 et seq. 38-21 27-97 Ch. 38 tit. 29.1 Ch. 10 29.1-527 Ch. 10 tit. 32.1 App. A, § 6 32.1-48.1 et seq. 10-6 32.1-138.6 et seq. 30-49 32.1-163 et seq. Ch. 94 32.1-167 et seq. Ch. 94 32.1-202 Ch. 46 tit. 32.2, ch. 5, art. 2.1       30-49 33.1-25 et seq. Ch. 82 33.1-72.1 94-142 33.1-224 et seq. Ch. 82 33.1-346 78-5 33.1-348 Ch. 74 35.1-1 et seq. Ch. 58 36-1 et seq. 14-146 36-3 14-146 36-49.1:1 14-142 14-146 36-70 App.B, § 5-17.2 36-70 et seq. Ch. 58 36-85.2 et seq. Ch. 58 36-85.16 et seq. Ch. 58 36-96.1 et seq. Ch. 50 36-96.21 Ch. 50 36-97 App.B, § 5-17.2 36-97 et seq. Ch. 14 14-21 App. B, § 6-9 36-99.11 Ch. 90 90-113 36-105 14-21 36-106 14-24 tit. 38.2 76-21 40.1-100 Ch. 6 42.1-76 et seq. Ch. 2 App. A 42.1-82 App. A, § 6 tit. 46.2 86-330 90-2 46.2-100 34-22 86-53 90-114 46.2-100 et seq. Ch. 90 46.2-113 90-1 46.2-188 90-2 46.2-310 Ch. 98 46.2-600 86-65 46.2-600 et seq. 90-113 46.2-731 90-113 46.2-739 86-56 90-113 46.2-752 Ch. 86, Art. VIII, Div. 3.1 46.2-752 et seq. Ch. 90 46.2-935 90-5 46.2-936-37 78-5 46.2-941 90-112 46.2-1037 90-109 46.2-1200 et seq. Ch. 90 46.2-1212 Ch. 90 46.2-1213 90-111 90-112 46.2-1216 Ch. 90 46.2-1220 Ch. 90 Ch. 90, Art. III 90-101 46.2-1225 90-112 46.2-1225(1), (2) 90-111 46.2-1239 90-102 46.2-1241 90-113 46.2-1300 90-1 46.2-1300 et seq. Ch. 90 46.2-1301 90-7 46.2-1313 90-9 46.2-2062 et seq. Ch. 98 tit. 54.1, ch. 18, arts. 3, 5       Ch. 86, Art. VIII 54.1-3401 App. B, § 10-2 54.1-4000 et seq. Ch. 74 54.1-4100 et seq. Ch. 74 54.1-4111 Ch. 86, Art. VIII 54.1-4200 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. VIII 55-202 et seq. Ch. 10 55-248.41 et seq. Ch. 58 55-336 et seq. App. A 56-232 82-67 56-257 et seq. Ch. 82 56-468.1 82-62, 82-63 56-594 86-101 57-63 76-21 58-847 86-22 tit. 58.1 86-248 tit. 58.1, ch. 36, art. 4       86-114.1 58.1-1 et seq. Ch. 86 58.1-6 et seq. Ch. 86 58.1-15 86-80 58.1-468.1 82-62 58.1-520 et seq. Ch. 86 58.1-520.1 2-157 58.1-600 et seq. 86-165 58.1-605 et seq. Ch. 86 58.1-1200 et seq. 86-77, 86-78 58.1-1201 86-76 58.1-1204 86-77 58.1-1205 86-76 58.1-1207 86-78 58.1-1208 et seq. Ch. 86 58.1-1211 86-77, 86-78 58.1-1212 86-78 58.1-2901 86-102, 86-104 58.1-3000 et seq. Ch. 86 58.1-3210 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. II, 
Div. 2 58.1-3210-58.1-3218       86-38 58.1-3217 86-36 58.1-3504 86-53 58.1-3511 et seq. 86-52 58.1-3523 86-58 58.1-3650 86-102, 86-103 58.1-3700 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. VIII 86-248, 86-249 58.1-3701 86-248 86-255 58.1-3714(D) 86-248 58.1-3715 86-248 86-251 
86-254 58.1-3717 86-251 58.1-3717 et seq. 86-288 58.1-3718 86-251 58.1-3719.1 86-259 58.1-3720, 58.1-3721       86-283 58.1-3728 86-251 58.1-3731 86-251 86-290, 86-291 58.1-3812 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. IV 58.1-3813 Ch. 86, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 58.1-3814 86-102, 86-103 86-114.1 58.1-3840 Ch. 86, Art. V- 
Ch. 86, Art. VII 58.1-3900 et seq. Ch. 86 Ch. 86, Art. VIII 86-256 58.1-3906 86-172 58.1-3916 86-253 58.1-3940 et seq. 46-42 62-2 58.1-3965 et seq. 46-42 62-2 58.1-3980 86-2 86-57 86-256 58.1-3986 86-255 58.1-3993 86-255 59.1-117, 59.1-118 Ch. 74 59.1-121 Ch. 74 59.1-131 et seq. Ch. 74 59.1-137 et seq. Ch. 38 59.1-142 et seq. Ch. 38 tit. 62, ch. 3.1, art. 2.4       79-49 62.1-44.2 et seq. Ch. 94 62.1-44.15:27 Ch. 79, Intro. 79-1 62.1-44.15:48 79-79 62.1-255 App. B, § 1-3 63.1-164 86-165 63.1-195 App. B, § 10-2 63.2-2200 App. B, § 5-17.2  
