CODE OF THE CITY OF VIRGINIA BEACH, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Adopted March 16, 1981 
Effective, May 25, 1981 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF VIRGINIA BEACH 
____________ 
William D. Sessoms, Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Louis R. Jones 
Vice-Mayor 
____________ 
Jessica Abbott 
M. Benjamin Davenport 
Robert Dyer 
Barbara Henley 
Shannon DS Kane 
John Moss 
John Uhrin 
Rosemary Wilson 
James L. Wood 
City Council 
____________ 
David L. Hansen 
City Manager 
____________ 
Mark D. Stiles 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Ruth Hodges Fraser 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Virginia Beach of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included herein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1965 Virginia Beach City Code as supplemented through March 26, 1979, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of the volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1965 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to correlative Charter provisions and relevant provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the ninth section of chapter 2 is 2-9. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 4-2 and 4-3 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-2.1, 4-2.2 and 4-2.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13 it will be designated as chapter 12.1. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language generally used by government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in section 5 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Robert D. Ussery, Vice-President, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publishers' staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. J. Dale Bimson, City Attorney, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
March, 1981 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
	Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Virginia Beach, Virginia; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing for the Manner of Amending and Supplementing Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the Council of the City of Virginia Beach, Virginia: 
Section 1. That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 38, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of the City of Virginia Beach, Virginia," which Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the City adopted on or before October 27, 1980, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
Section 2. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after May 25, 1981, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Virginia Beach, adopted on final passage on or before October 27, 1980, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of such Code. 
Section 3. That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. That any person convicted of a violation of such Code shall be punished as prescribed in Section 1-9 thereof, or as provided in any other applicable section of such Code. 
Section 5. That any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part of such Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code, so that reference to such Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 6. That in case of the amendment of any section of such Code, or the addition of any section thereto, for Which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty, as provided in Section 1-9 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended or added, or in case such amendment or addition contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended or added, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective from date of adoption. 
Adopted by the Council of the City of Virginia Beach, Virginia, on the 16th day of March, 1981. 
JDB: jh 
2-20-81 
APPROVED AS TO CONTENT 
_____
SIGNATURE 
_____
DEPARTMENT 
APPROVED AS TO FORM 
JDB 3-11-81 
_____
SIGNATURE 
CITY ATTORNEY 
Certified to be a true excerpt from the Minutes of the Council of the City of Virginia Beach adopted March 16, 1981, subject to approval of the Minutes on March 23, 1981. 
(SEAL) 
Ruth Hodges Smith 
  City Clerk  
CHARTER[1] 
An Act to effectuate the consolidation of Princess Anne County and the City of Virginia Beach, a city of the second class, into the City of Virginia Beach, a city of the first class; and to this end to validate, ratify and confirm the consolidation agreement between Princess Anne County and the City of Virginia Beach; to provide a Charter for the new City of Virginia Beach, and to repeal Chapter 33 of the Acts of Assembly of 1952, approved February 14, 1952, which incorporated the City of Virginia Beach, and all amendments thereto. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia: 
1. 
The consolidation of the City of Virginia Beach and Princess Anne County into the consolidated City of Virginia Beach, a city of the first class, as provided in the consolidation agreement to which reference is hereby made and which is made part hereof, is hereby validated, ratified and confirmed in all respects and such consolidation shall be effective on and after January 1, 1963. 
2. 
Chapter 33 of the Acts of Assembly of 1952 and all amendments thereto, which is entitled "An act to incorporate the city of Virginia Beach; and to repeal Chapter 76 of the Acts of Assembly 1906, approved March 6, 1906, which incorporated the town of Virginia Beach, and all amendments thereto", approved February 14, 1952, is repealed as of the first moment of January one, nineteen hundred sixty-three. 
3. 
Be it further enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Charter is derived from chapter 147 of the 1962 Acts of the General Assembly and amendments thereto and is included herein as it appeared in the 1965 Virginia Beach Code, as supplemented through the 1978 Acts. Subsequent amendments have been added with the publication of this Code. Amendments to the original Charter are indicated by history notes appearing in parentheses at the end of the amended sections. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is derived, unamended, from Acts 1962. Ch. 147. 
 
Chapter 1. - Incorporation and Boundaries 
 
Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation. 
The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the limits of the City of Virginia Beach, as they are or hereafter may be established by law, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of Virginia Beach and as such shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with and may have a corporate seal which it may alter at its pleasure. The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the limits of Princess Anne County as it exists at the effective date of this Charter shall also be a part of such body politic and corporate.  
Sec. 1.02. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Virginia Beach shall coincide with the outside boundaries of Princess Anne County so as to include all of the territory comprising Princess Anne County and the City of Virginia Beach as existing immediately preceding the effective date of this Charter.  
Chapter 2. - Powers of City 
 
Sec. 2.01. - General grant of powers. 
The powers set forth in sections 15.1-837 through 15.1-907 of the Code of Virginia as in force on January 1, 1977, and as hereafter amended, are hereby conferred on and vested in the City of Virginia Beach. In addition thereto the City of Virginia Beach shall have and may exercise all other powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred upon or delegated to cities of the first class under the Constitution or laws of the Commonwealth, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated in this Charter and no enumerations of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive but shall be held to be in addition to this general grant of powers. 
(Acts 1977, Ch. 14, § 1)  
Sec. 2.02. - Additional powers. 
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, but in addition hereto, the City of Virginia Beach shall have the following additional powers: 
(a)  Advertisement of city's resources, etc. To spend not exceeding five percent of its annual revenue from all sources in advertisement of and giving publicity to its resources and advantages. 
(b)  Levying of higher tax in areas receiving additional, etc., services. To levy a higher tax in such areas of the City of Virginia Beach as desire additional or more complete services of government than are desired in the city as a whole, provided that such higher tax rate shall not be levied for school, police or general government services but only for those services which, prior to the effective date of this Charter, were not offered in all the territory within the boundaries of the city and provided further that the proceeds from such higher tax rate shall be so segregated as to enable the same to be expended in the areas in which raised. 
(c)  Levying of special tax in borough, etc., for repayment of existing indebtedness. To levy a special tax on real property in any borough, sanitary district or other special taxing district or combination thereof, for a period of not exceeding twenty years, which may be different from and in addition to the general tax rate throughout the city, for the purpose of repaying indebtedness existing on the effective date of this Charter and chargeable to such borough, sanitary district or other special taxing district or combination thereof. 
(d)  Exercise of powers possessed by constituent former political subdivisions; application of laws applicable to constituent former political subdivisions. To exercise all powers possessed by the City of Virginia Beach and Princess Anne County immediately preceding the effective date of this Charter, consistent with general law and not inconsistent with this Charter; provided, however, that except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, all laws heretofore applicable to Virginia Beach or Princess Anne County, respectively, shall continue to apply to the areas theretofore comprising such political subdivisions, now incorporated under this Charter as a single such subdivision, until otherwise provided by law. 
(e)  Imposition of special fees. To establish and collect such fees as may be determined by the council to be reasonable for the rendering of special services. 
(f)  Special service district. A special service district of the oceanfront resort area of the City of Virginia Beach shall be created by the governing body of the City of Virginia Beach upon petition of more than fifty percent of the property owners of the proposed district. The petition shall define the boundaries of the proposed district, which shall be limited in area to the oceanfront resort district, but need not be limited to properties abutting the boardwalk, the oceanfront or Atlantic Avenue. Upon the filing of such petition, the governing body shall fix a date for a public hearing on the question of the proposed service district, which hearing shall embrace a consideration of whether the property within the proposed district will be benefitted by the establishment thereof. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication once a week for three consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Virginia Beach, and the hearing shall not be held sooner than ten days after completion of such publication. 
After creating the special service district, the city council shall have the following powers and duties with respect to the service district: 
(1)  To construct, maintain, and operate such facilities and equipment as may be necessary or desirable to provide additional governmental services and facilities, including but not limited to relocation and placement underground of utility lines and poles, landscaping, boardwalk and beach improvements, recreational facilities, parking facilities, promotion of the business district, and sidewalks and pedestrian malls for the use and benefit of the public in such service district. 
(2)  To acquire by gift, condemnation, purchase, lease, or otherwise and to maintain and operate any such facilities and equipment as may be necessary and desirable to provide such additional governmental services in such district, and to acquire by gift, condemnation, purchase, lease, or otherwise, rights, title, interest, or easements therefor in or to real estate in such service district. 
(3)  To contract with any person, firm, corporation, or political subdivision to provide such additional governmental services or facilities in such district and to construct, establish, maintain, and operate any such facilities and equipment, as may be necessary and desirable in connection therewith. 
(4)  To authorize the city manager to employ and fix the compensation of any technical, clerical, or other personnel which may be necessary or desirable from time to time to provide such additional governmental services in such district or for the construction, operation, or maintenance of any such facilities and equipment as may be necessary or desirable in connection therewith. 
(5)  To levy and collect an annual tax, which shall not be more than fifteen percent higher than the general real estate tax levy, upon any property in such service district subject to local taxation to pay, either in whole or in part, the expenses and charges for providing such additional governmental services or facilities in such district and for constructing, maintaining, and operating such facilities and equipment as may be necessary and desirable in connection therewith, provided that the proceeds from such annual tax shall be so segregated as to enable the same to be expended in the district from which collected. 
(g)  [Abatement of nuisances.] To compel the abatement and removal of all nuisances within the city; to require all lands, lots and other premises within the city to be kept clean; to regulate the keeping of animals, poultry, and other fowl therein; to regulate the exercise of any dangerous or unwholesome business, trade or employment therein; to regulate the transportation of all articles through the streets of the city; to compel the abatement of smoke and dust, and prevent unnecessary noise therein; to compel the removal of grass and weeds from private and public property, and snow from sidewalks; to require the covering or removal of offensive, unwholesome, unsanitary, or unhealthy substances allowed to accumulate in or on any place or premises; the filling in to the street level of the portion of any lot adjacent to a street where the difference in level between the lot and the street constitutes a danger to life and limb; the raising or draining of the grounds subject to be covered by stagnant water; the razing or repair of all unsafe, dangerous or unsanitary public or private buildings, walls or structures; to compel the removal of inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicles or parts thereof from private or public property; and to make and enforce all ordinances, rules and regulations necessary or expedient for the purpose of carrying into effect the powers conferred by this charter or by any general law, and to provide and impose suitable penalties for the violation of such ordinances, rules and regulations, or any of them, and the city may maintain a suit to restrain by injunction the violation of any ordinance. The enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall not be deemed or held to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein, implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the said city shall have and may exercise all other powers which are now and may hereafter be possessed or enjoyed by other cities under the Constitution and general laws of this Commonwealth. If after such reasonable notice as the council may prescribe by ordinance, the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of the property or premises affected by the provisions of this subsection shall fail to abate or obviate the condition or nuisance, the city may do so and charge and collect the cost thereof from the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of the property or premises affected in any manner provided by law for the collection of taxes. 
(Acts 1968, Ch. 192, § 1; Acts 1986, Ch. 313, § 1; Acts 1987, Ch. 228, § 1)  
Chapter 3. - Boroughs; City Council 
 
Sec. 3.01. - Division of city into district. 
A.  The city shall be divided into seven residence districts of approximately equal population which shall be numbered one through seven. The council shall consist of eleven members, including the mayor, one member to be elected by the city at large from the residents of each of the seven districts and three members and the mayor to be elected by and from the city at large. 
B.  The boundaries and names of such districts shall be established by ordinance on or before March 1, 1996, and thereafter the boundaries shall be adjusted periodically as may be necessary to ensure that the populations of the districts remain approximately equal. 
C.  The city council shall, no later than January 1, 1996, petition the circuit court to order an advisory referendum to be held on the question of whether the council member elected from each district shall be elected by the qualified voters of that district rather than at large. The wording of the question shall be determined by majority vote of the city council and shall be included in the petition. Upon the filing of the petition, the circuit court shall order that an advisory referendum be held on the question in the city at the municipal elections to be held in May 1996. 
(Acts 1966, Ch. 39; Acts 1987, Ch. 227, § 1; Acts 1995, Ch. 697, § 1)  
Sec. 3.01:1. - Implementation of districts. 
A.  At the May 1996 general election, three members shall be elected by the city at large from the residents of the Blackwater, Princess Anne, and Virginia Beach boroughs as such boroughs existed on January 1, 1995. The terms of the members so elected shall expire on July 1, 1998. The terms of the mayor and councilmember elected by and from the city at large in May of 1996 shall expire on July 1, 2000. 
B.  At the general election in May of 1998, the members elected at large from district numbered one through three shall be elected for terms of two years and the members elected at large from districts numbered four through seven shall be elected for terms of four years. The terms of the two councilmembers elected by and from the city at large in May of 1998 shall expire on July 1, 2002. Thereafter, all members shall be elected for terms of four years. 
(Acts 1995, Ch. 697, § 1)  
Sec. 3.02. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Section 3.02 was repealed by Acts 1970, Ch. 206.  
Sec. 3.02:1. - Election of councilmembers. 
Pursuant to an ordinance adopted by city council on June 27, 2006, city council elections shall take place during the general election in November 2008, and during the November general election in even years thereafter, for council members whose terms expire at the end of December of that year. Council members, including the mayor, whose terms expire as of June 30, 2008, or June 30, 2010, shall continue in office until their successors have been elected at the November election and take office on January 1. The term of office for each councilmember shall commence on January 1 next following the date of election and shall continue until his successor has been duly elected and qualified. Each candidate shall state, at the time of filing, whether he is running at-large, from the district of his residence or for mayor. Candidates for council shall be nominated only by petition in the manner prescribed by general law. 
(Acts 1970, Ch. 206, § 1; Acts 1971, Ex. Sess., Ch. 86, § 1; Acts 1987, Ch. 227, § 1; Acts 1995, Ch. 697, § 1; Acts 2007, Ch. 725, § 1)  
Sec. 3.02:2. - Election of mayor. 
The mayor shall be elected at the general election in November 2008, and each fourth year thereafter, to serve for a term of four years. Candidates for mayor shall run for one of the at-large seats. A candidate running for mayor shall not run for any other seat. 
In the event any councilman, including the mayor, shall decide during his term of office to be a candidate for mayor, he shall tender his resignation as a councilman not less than ten days prior to the date for the filing of petitions as required by general law. Such resignation shall be effective on December 31, shall constitute the councilman's intention to run for mayor, shall require no formal acceptance by the remaining councilmen and shall be final and irrevocable when tendered. 
The unexpired portion of the term of any council member who has resigned to run for mayor shall be filled at the same general election. 
(Acts 1987, Ch. 227, § 1; Acts 2007, Ch. 725, § 1)  
Sec. 3.03. - Filling vacancies in office of councilmen and mayor. 
Vacancies in the office of councilmen, from whatever cause arising, except where such vacancy occurs due to a resignation to run for the office of mayor, shall be filled within sixty days for the unexpired portion of the term by a majority vote of the remaining members of the council, provided that so long as any councilmen are elected by and from wards or boroughs the vacancy shall be filled by a qualified voter residing in the same ward or borough. 
If a vacancy shall occur in the office of mayor, the council shall choose by majority vote of the remaining members thereof one of its members to be mayor until his successor is elected and qualified in accordance with general law. 
(Acts 1987, Ch. 227, § 1)  
Sec. 3.04. - Compensation of members of council; appointment of member to office of profit. 
Councilmen shall receive as compensation for their services such amounts as the council may determine, not to exceed $8,000 per annum for councilmen and $10,000 per annum for the mayor. No member of the council shall be appointed to any office of profit under the city government during the term for which elected and for one year thereafter. 
(Acts 1970, Ch. 206, § 1; Acts 1975, Ch. 61, § 1; Acts 1981, Ch.350, § 1)  
Sec. 3.05. - Powers of council generally. 
All powers vested in the city shall be exercised by the council except as otherwise provided in this Charter. In addition to the foregoing, the council shall have the following powers: 
(a)  Organization, etc., of city departments, etc. To provide for the organization, conduct and operation of all departments, bureaus, divisions, boards, commissions, offices and agencies of the city. 
(b)  Creation, etc., of departments, etc., generally. To create, alter or abolish departments, bureaus, divisions, boards, commissions, offices and agencies, except as specifically provided herein to the contrary. 
(c)  Creation, etc., of bureaus, etc. To create, alter or abolish and to assign and reassign to departments, all bureaus, divisions, offices and agencies, except as specifically provided herein to the contrary. 
(d)  Powers, as to city officers and employees. To provide for the number, titles, qualifications, powers, duties and compensation of all officers and employees of the city. 
(e)  Oaths and bonds of officers. To provide for the form of oaths and the amount and conditions of surety bends to be required of certain officers and employees of the city. 
(f)  Advisory referendum on proposed ordinance. To provide for the submission of any proposed ordinance to the qualified voters of the city at an advisory referendum to be initiated by a resolution to the circuit court of the city and held not less than thirty nor more than sixty days thereafter in the manner provided by law for general elections. 
(Acts 1964, Ch. 109)  
Sec. 3.06. - Rules of procedures; quorum; action at meeting closed to public. 
The council shall have power, subject to the provisions of this Charter, to adopt its own rules of procedure. Such rules shall provide the time and place of holding regular meetings of the council which shall be not less frequent than once each month. They also provide for the calling of special meetings by the mayor, city manager or any members of the council and shall prescribe the methods of giving notice thereof. A majority of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. No ordinance, resolution, motion or vote, other than motions to adjourn, to fix the time and place of adjournment and other motions of a purely procedural nature, shall be adopted by council except at a meeting open to the public. 
(Acts 1973, Ch. 52, § 1)  
Sec. 3.07. - Selection of vice-mayor; duties of mayor. 
At the first meeting of the term following a general election of councilmen, the council shall choose by majority vote of all the members thereof one of its members to be vice-mayor. The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the council, shall act as head of the city government for ceremonial purposes and shall have such other rights and duties as the council may prescribe, in addition to all the rights and privileges of councilmen of the city. The vice-mayor shall perform the duties of mayor in the absence or disability of the mayor. 
(Acts 1966, Ch. 39; Acts 1970, Ch. 206, § 1; Acts 1973, Ch. 52, § 1; Acts 1987, Ch. 227, § 1)  
Sec. 3.08. - Appointment, term and duties of city clerk. 
The council shall appoint a city clerk who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. He shall be clerk of the council and custodian of the corporate seal of the city and he shall have such further duties as the council may prescribe.  
Sec. 3.09. - Advisory referendums. 
Upon the filing with the clerk of the circuit court of the City of Virginia Beach of a petition signed by a number of qualified voters in Virginia Beach equaling twenty-five per centum of the number of voters voting in Virginia Beach at the last general election, as certified by the city registrar; then the circuit court of the city, by order of record, shall call for an advisory referendum taking the sense of the voters on the question proposed in the petition at the next succeeding general election. The referendum shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of § 24.1-165 of the code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
Following certification of the election results by the electoral board to the chief judge, the court shall enter an order proclaiming the results of such election and a duly certified copy of such order shall be transmitted to the governing body. 
(Acts 1974, Ch. 39; Acts 1981, Ch.88, § 1)  
Sec. 3.10. - Powers of investigation. 
(a)  The council, or any committee of members of the council, when so authorized by council, shall have the power to make such investigations relating to the municipal affairs of the city as it may deem necessary, and shall have the power to investigate any or all departments, boards, commissions, offices and agencies of the city government, including the school board, and any officer or employee of the city, concerning the performance of their duties and functions and the use of property of the city. 
(b)  The council, or any committee of members of the council, when so authorized, may order the attendance of any person as a witness and the production by any person of all relevant books, papers and records of any kind. Witnesses shall be sworn by the person presiding at such investigation, and witnesses shall be liable to prosecution or suit for damages for perjury for any false testimony given at such investigation. Council shall have the power to apply to the judge of the general district court for a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum against any person refusing to appear and testify or refusing to produce books, papers or records as ordered by the council, and the judge of said court shall, upon good cause shown, cause said subpoenas to be issued. Any person failing to comply with any such subpoena shall be subject to punishment for contempt by the court issuing the subpoena. 
(c)  Any board or commission whose members are appointed by the council, when authorized by ordinance to do so, shall have the investigatory powers, or as much of them as are delegated by ordinance or resolution, to make investigations in connection with the performance of their duties and functions, as may be deemed necessary. 
(Acts 1979, Ch. 222, § 1)  
Chapter 4. - City Manager 
 
Sec. 4.01. - Appointment, qualifications and term; to be executive and administrative head of government. 
The council shall appoint a city manager who shall be the executive and administrative head of the city government. He shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications and shall serve at the pleasure of the council.  
Sec. 4.02. - Powers and duties generally. 
The city manager shall have the power and it shall be his duty: 
(a)  Appointment and removal of officers, etc. To appoint all officers and employees of the city and to remove such officers and employees, except as he may delegate such power to appoint and remove to his subordinates and except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
(b)  Additional powers and duties. To perform such other duties and to exercise such other powers as may be imposed or conferred upon him by the council.  
Sec. 4.03. - Council interference in appointment or removals. 
Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct the appointment of any person to or his removal from any office or employment by the city manager or by his subordinates.  
Chapter 5. - Budget, Etc. 
 
Sec. 5.01. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall be established by ordinance unless such fiscal year is established by general law, in which event the fiscal year established by general law shall be the fiscal year of the city. The fiscal year of the city shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. 
(Acts 1964, Ch. 109)  
Sec. 5.02. - Submission of budget and budget message. 
The city manager shall submit to the council a budget and a budget message at least ninety days prior to the beginning of each budget year.  
Sec. 5.03. - Preparation of budget. 
It shall be the duty of the head of each department, the judges of the courts not of record, each board or commission, including the school board, and each other office or agency supported in whole or in part by the city, to file at such time as the city manager may prescribe estimates of revenue and expenditure for that department, court, board, commission, office or agency for the ensuing fiscal year. The city manager shall hold such hearings as he may deem advisable and shall review the estimates and other data pertinent to the preparation of the budget and make such revisions in such estimates as he may deem proper, subject to the laws of the commonwealth relating to obligatory expenditures for any purpose, except that in the case of the school board he may recommend a revision only in its total estimated expenditure. The budget shall be prepared in accordance with accepted principles of municipal accounting and budgetary procedures and techniques.  
Sec. 5.04. - Balancing of budget. 
In no event shall the expenditures recommended by the city manager in the budget exceed the receipts estimated, taking into account the estimated cash surplus or deficit at the end of the current fiscal year, unless the city manager shall recommend an increase in the rate of ad valorem taxes on real estate and tangible personal property or other new or increased taxes or licenses within the power of the city to levy and collect in the ensuing fiscal year, the receipts from which, estimated on the basis of the average experience with the same or similar taxes during the three tax years last past, will make up the difference. If estimated receipts exceed estimated expenditures the city manager may recommend revisions in the tax and license ordinances of the city in order to bring the budget into balance.  
Sec. 5.05. - Composition of budget message. 
The budget message shall contain the recommendations of the city manager concerning the fiscal policy of the city, a description of the important features of the budget and an explanation of all significant changes in the budget as to estimated receipts and recommended expenditures as compared with the current and last preceding fiscal years.  
Sec. 5.06. - Introduction, etc., of appropriation ordinance, etc. 
At the same time that he submits the budget, the city manager shall introduce and recommend to the council an appropriation ordinance which shall be based on the budget. He shall also introduce at the same time any ordinances levying a new tax or altering the rate on any existing tax necessary to balance the budget as provided in section 5.04.  
Sec. 5.07. - Budget hearing. 
The council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted, at which time all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The council shall cause to be published a notice of the time and place of the hearing not less than seven days prior to the date of the hearing.  
Sec. 5.08. - Adoption of budget. 
After the public hearing the council may make such changes in the budget as it may determine, except that no item of expenditure for debt service shall be reduced or omitted. The budget shall be adopted by the vote of at least a majority of all members of the council not later than thirty days prior to the end of the current fiscal year. Should the council take no action prior to such day, the budget shall be deemed to have been finally adopted as submitted. In no event shall the council adopt a budget in which the estimated total of expenditures exceeds receipts, unless at the same time it adopts measures to provide additional revenue estimated to be sufficient to make up the difference.  
Sec. 5.09. - Additional appropriations. 
Appropriations in addition to those contained in the general appropriation ordinance may be made by the council only if there is available in the general fund an unencumbered and unappropriated sum sufficient to meet such appropriations.  
Chapter 6. - Borrowing 
 
Sec. 6.01. - Power to issue negotiable bonds or notes. 
The council may, in the name of and for the use of the city, incur indebtedness by issuing its negotiable bonds or notes for the purposes, in the manner and to the extent provided in this chapter.  
Sec. 6.02. - Purposes for which bonds or notes may be issued. 
Bonds, and notes in anticipation of bonds when the issuance of bonds has been authorized as hereafter provided, may be issued for any purpose for which cities are authorized to issue bonds by the Constitution or general laws. Notes may be issued, when authorized by the council, at any time during the current fiscal year in anticipation of the collection of revenue of such year. 
(Acts 1964, Ch. 109)  
Secs. 6.03—6.05. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Sections 6.03—6.05 were repealed by Acts 1974, Ch. 596, § 2.  
Sec. 6.05:1. - Authority for issuance of bonds. 
No bonds of the city shall be issued until their issuance shall have been authorized by an ordinance adopted by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of all members of the council and approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified voters of the city voting on the question at an election called and held for the purpose in the manner providing by law for submitting any question or proposition to the voters; provided that bonds and other obligations shall not be subject to the foregoing requirements if they are (a) of a type excluded from the computation of indebtedness of cities and towns under section 10(a) of article VII of the Constitution and are authorized and issued so as to satisfy the conditions for exclusion set forth therein or (b) refunding bonds; provided, further, that the council may, without submitting the question of their issuance to the qualified voters, issue bonds or other obligations in any calendar year for any proper purpose in such amounts as shall not increase the total indebtedness of the city, as determined in the manner set forth in section 10(a) of article VII, by more than ten million dollars above the amount of such indebtedness at the beginning of such calendar year. For the purposes of this paragraph, the terms "bonds", "other obligations" and "indebtedness" shall not include contractual obligations of the city other than bonds and notes. For purposes of the amounts of bonds or other obligations that may be issued in any calendar year without an election, there shall not be included (i) bonds or other obligations that were approved at an election and (ii) refunding bonds in each case issued in such year. Authorized bonds or other obligations which could have been issued without an election on December thirty-one in the year they were authorized may be issued in a subsequent year without affecting the annual limitation for such subsequent year. 
The total indebtedness of the city as determined in accordance with the provisions of article VII, section 10 of the Constitution shall not at any time exceed ten per centum of the assessed valuation of the real estate in the city subject to taxation, as shown by the last preceding assessment for taxes, nor shall the limitations imposed by the preceding paragraph on the issuance of bonds or other obligations in any calendar year without a referendum be increased, until after such questions shall have been submitted to the voters of the city in a referendum held pursuant to section 3.09 of this Charter. 
(Acts 1974, Ch. 596, § 1; Acts 1977, Ch. 14, § 1; Acts 1981, Ch. 89, § 1; Acts 1984, Ch. 210, § 1)  
Sec. 6.05:2. - Supplemental authority for issuance of bonds. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, special or general, the city may after a public hearing issue up to eight million dollars of general obligation bonds in any calendar year for road, highway or bridge purposes, provided that no less than twenty percent of the amount of bonds authorized without an election under section 6.05:1 of this Charter for the same calendar year shall have been designated for road, highway and bridge purposes. For purposes of computing such eight million dollar limitation there shall not be included (a) bonds issued in such year that were authorized under this section in a prior year and (b) refunding bonds. The provisions of this section shall expire December 31, 1996. 
(Acts 1986, No. 313, § 2)  
Sec. 6.06. - Payment of bonds and notes. 
The power and obligation of the city to pay any and all bonds and notes issued pursuant to this Charter, except revenue bonds made payable solely from revenue producing properties, shall be unlimited and the city shall levy ad valorem taxes upon all taxable property within the city for the payment of such bonds or notes and the interest thereon, without limitation as to rate or amount. The full faith and credit of the city are hereby pledged for the payment of the principal of and interest on all bonds and notes of the City of Virginia Beach and of Princess Anne County and any sanitary districts therein issued and outstanding on the effective date of this Charter, and of the city hereafter issued pursuant to this chapter, except revenue bonds made payable solely from revenue producing properties, whether or not such pledge be stated in the bonds or notes or in the bond ordinance authorizing their issuance.  
Chapter 7. - Administrative Departments Generally 
 
Sec. 7.01. - Creation of certain enumerated departments; creation, abolition, etc., of departments. 
The following administrative departments are hereby created: 
(a) [Repealed.] 
(a1) Department of finance. 
(b) [Repealed.] 
(b1) Department of law. 
(c) [Repealed.] 
(c1) Department of social services. 
(d) [Repealed.] 
(d1) Department of agriculture. 
(e1) Department of education. 
(f) [Repealed.] 
(f1) Department of public health. 
(g) to (p)[Repealed.] 
The council may create new departments or subdivisions thereof, combine or abolish existing departments and distribute the functions thereof or establish temporary departments for special work; provided, however, that the council shall not have the power to abolish, transfer or combine the functions of the departments of finance, law and education. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 810, § 1; Acts 1975, Ch. 61, § 1; Acts 1977, Ch. 14, § 1)  
Sec. 7.02. - Department heads generally. 
There shall be a director at the head of each department, and the same person may be the director of several departments. The director of each department, except the departments of law and education, shall be appointed by the city manager and may be removed by him at any time; provided, however, that the council may provide that the city manager shall be director of one or more departments. The director of each department shall be chosen on the basis of his general executive and administrative ability and experience and of his education, training and experience in the class of work which he is to administer.  
Sec. 7.03. - Responsibility of department heads to city manager. 
The directors of each department, except the departments of law and education, shall be immediately responsible to the city manager for the administration of their respective departments, and their advice may be required by him on all matters affecting their departments. They shall make reports and recommendations concerning their departments to the city manager under such rules and regulations as he may prescribe.  
Chapter 8. - Financial Administration 
 
Sec. 8.01. - Composition of department of finance. 
The department of finance shall consist of a director of finance, a comptroller or accounting officer, the city treasurer and the commissioner of revenue and their respective offices; insofar as inclusion of these offices is not inconsistent with the Constitution and general laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions and other units as may be provided by the council or by the orders of the director consistent therewith.  
Sec. 8.02. - Director of finance. 
The head of the department of finance shall be the director of finance who may also be the city manager. He shall be a person skilled in municipal accounting and financial control. He shall have charge of the financial affairs of the city, including such powers and duties as may be assigned by the council not inconsistent with the Constitution and general laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia.  
Sec. 8.03. - City treasurer. 
The city treasurer shall be the custodian of all public monies of the city and shall have such powers and duties as are provided by general law. He shall perform such other duties as may be assigned by the director of finance or the council not inconsistent with the laws of the commonwealth.  
Sec. 8.04. - Commissioner of revenue. 
The commissioner of revenue shall perform such duties not inconsistent with the laws of the commonwealth in relation to the assessment of property and licenses as may be assigned by the director of finance or the council.  
Sec. 8.05. - Division of purchasing. 
There shall be a division of purchasing which shall be in charge of purchasing all supplies of the city. The head of the division of purchasing shall be the purchasing agent who shall have such duties as may be assigned by the council.  
Sec. 8.06. - Annual audit. 
The council shall cause to be made an independent audit of the city's finances at the end of each fiscal year by the auditor of public accounts of the commonwealth or by a firm of independent certified public accountants to be selected by the council. One copy of the report of such audit shall be always available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk during regular business hours.  
Sec. 8.07. - Assessment of real estate. 
The council may, in lieu of annual, biennial or triennial assessment, reassessment and equalization of the methods prescribed by general law, provide by ordinance for the assessments of real estate for local taxation and to that end may appoint one or more persons as assessors to assess or reassess for taxation the real estate within the city. Such assessors shall make assessments and reassessments on the same basis as real estate is required to be assessed under the provisions of general law and as of the first day of July of each year in which such assessment, reassessment and equalization of assessments is made, shall have the same authority as the assessors appointed under the provisions of general law and shall be charged with duties similar to those thereby imposed upon such assessors. The judges of the circuit court shall annually appoint a board of equalization of real estate assessments to be composed of three members who shall be freeholders of the city. Such board of equalization shall have and may exercise the powers to revise, correct and amend any assessment of real estate and to that end shall have all powers conferred upon boards of equalization by general law. The provisions of general law notwithstanding, the board of equalization may adopt any regulations providing for the oral presentation, with formal petitions or other pleadings of requests for review, and looking to the further facilitation and simplification of proceeding before the board. This section shall not apply to assessment of any real estate assessable by the state corporation commission. 
(Acts 1964, Ch. 109; Acts 1977, Ch. 14, § 1)  
Chapter 9. - Department of Law, Etc. 
 
Sec. 9.01. - Composition of department of law. 
The department of law shall consist of the city attorney and such assistant city attorneys and other employees as may be provided by the council.  
Sec. 9.02. - City attorney as head of department; appointment and term of city attorney. 
The head of the department of law shall be the city attorney. He shall be an attorney at law licensed to practice law in the Commonwealth of Virginia. He shall be appointed by the council and shall serve at its pleasure.  
Sec. 9.03. - Powers and duties of city attorney. 
The city attorney shall be the chief legal advisor of the council, the city manager and of all departments, boards, commissions and agencies of the city in all matters affecting the interests of the city. He shall have such powers and duties as may be assigned by the council.  
Sec. 9.04. - Restrictions on actions for damages against city. 
No action shall be maintained against the city for injury or damage to any person or property or for wrongful death alleged to have been sustained by reason of the negligence of the city or of any officer, employee or agent thereof, unless a written statement by the claimant, his agent, attorney or representative, of the nature of the claim and of the time and place at which the injury is alleged to have occurred or been received shall have been filed with the city attorney within six months after such cause of, action shall have accrued, except that when the claimant, during such six-months period, is able to establish by clear and convincing evidence that, due to the injury sustained for which a claim is asserted, he was physically or mentally unable to give such notice within the six-months period, then the time for giving notice shall be until the claimant sufficiently recovers from said injury so as to be able to give such notice. 
(Acts 1977, Ch. 14, § 1)  
Chapters 10—12.1. - [Reserved] 
 
Secs. 10.01—12.06. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Sections 10.01—11.03 and 12.04—12.06 were repealed by Acts 1977, Ch. 14, § 2. Sections 12.01—12.03 were repealed by Acts 1972, Ch. 810, § 2.  
Chapter 13. - Department of Public Health 
 
Sec. 13.01. - Composition. 
The department of public health shall consist of the director of public health and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions and other units as may be provided by the council or by the orders of the director consistent therewith.  
Sec. 13.02. - Functions. 
The department of public health shall be responsible for the exercise of all health functions imposed on municipalities by general law and such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the council.  
Sec. 13.03. - Director as head of department. 
The head of the department of public health shall be the director of public health. He shall be a physician licensed to practice medicine in the Commonwealth of Virginia. He shall have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department. He shall have all the powers and duties with respect to the preservation of the public health which are conferred or imposed on municipal boards of health and health officers by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia.  
Chapter 14. - Department of Social Service 
 
Sec. 14.01. - Composition. 
The department of social service shall consist of the director of social service, a welfare board constituted as provided by general law and such officers and employees organized in such divisions, bureaus and other units as may be provided by the council or by the orders of the director consistent therewith. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 810, § 1)  
Sec. 14.02. - Functions. 
The department of social service shall be responsible for the duties imposed by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia relating to public assistance and relief of the poor and such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the council. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 810, § 1)  
Sec. 14.03. - Director as head of department. 
The head of the department of social service shall be the director of social service. He shall have general management and control of the several divisions, bureaus and other units of the department. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 810, § 1)  
Chapter 15. - Department of Agriculture 
 
Sec. 15.01. - Department of agriculture. 
The department of agriculture shall consist of a director of agriculture and such other officers and employees organized in such bureaus, divisions and ether units as may be prescribed by the council or by the orders of the director consistent therewith. 
(Acts 1977, Ch. 14, § 1; Acts 1992, Ch. 416, § 1)  
Sec. 15.02. - Functions. 
The department of agriculture shall exercise all powers which are conferred upon unit chairmen employed in the extension division, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. 
(Acts 1977, Ch. 14, § 1; Acts 1992, Ch. 416, § 1)  
Sec. 15.03. - Director of agriculture. 
The head of the department of agriculture shall be the director of agriculture. He shall have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department. 
(Acts 1977, Ch. 14, § 1; Acts 1992, Ch. 416, § 1)  
Chapter 16. - Department of Education 
 
Sec. 16.01. - Composition of department. 
The department of education shall consist of the city school board, the division superintendent of schools and the officers and employees thereof. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city school board and the division superintendent of schools shall exercise all the powers conferred and perform all the duties imposed upon them by general law.  
Sec. 16.02. - Composition of school board. 
The school board shall consist of eleven members, who shall be appointed by the council of the City of Virginia Beach, Virginia. One member shall be appointed from among the residents of each of the seven boroughs whose terms shall be as follows: two members shall be appointed for one year; two for two years and three for three years. The four additional members shall be appointed from the city at large; two for a term starting July 1, 1966, and ending December 31, 1966; the other two starting July 1, 1966, and ending December 31, 1967. After this initial period, all appointments shall be for a period of three years; however, (i) the appointments of school board members representing the Kempsville and Pungo boroughs and two at-large seats whose terms expire December 31, 1994, shall not extend beyond June 30, 1994; (ii) the appointment of a school board member for the Bayside borough whose term expires December 31, 1995, shall not extend beyond June 30, 1994; (iii) the appointment of a school board member for the Lynnhaven borough whose term expires December 31, 1993, shall be extended to expire on June 30, 1994; (iv) the appointments of school board members representing the Blackwater borough and the two at-large seats whose terms begin January 1, 1994, shall not extend beyond June 30, 1996; and (v) the appointments of school board members representing the Princess Anne and Virginia Beach boroughs whose terms begin January 1, 1993, and expire December 31, 1995, shall be extended to expire on June 30, 1996. Any vacancy in an appointment shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term of the appointment. 
(Acts 1966, Ch. 39; Acts 1992, Ch. 594, § 1; Acts 1992, Ch. 612, § 1; Acts 1993, Ch. 594, § 1; Acts 1993, Ch. 612, § 1)  
Sec. 16.03. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Section 16.03 was repealed by Acts 1993, Ch. 594, § 2 and Acts 1993, Ch. 612, § 2.  
Sec. 16.04. - Election of the board. 
A.  All board members shall be elected in the same manner and according to the same schedule that council members are elected. The term of office for each elected board member shall commence on the first day of January next following the date of election and shall continue until a successor has been duly elected and qualified. Pursuant to an ordinance adopted by city council on June 27, 2006, board members whose terms expire as of June 30, 2008, or June 30, 2010, shall continue in office until their successors have been elected at the November election and take office on January 1. Each candidate shall state at the time of filing whether he is running at large or from the district of his residence. 
B.  Each of the 11 elected board members shall be elected by the voters of the city at large. 
(Acts 1993, Ch. 594, § 1; Acts 1993, Ch. 612, § 1; Acts 1996, Ch. 147; Acts 2007, Ch. 725, § 1)  
Sec. 16.05. - Filling vacancies on school board. 
When a vacancy occurs in the office of an elected school board member, the vacancy shall be filled in the same manner in which general law provides for the filling of vacancies of city council members pursuant to §§ 24.2-226 and 24.2-228 with the interim appointment to be made by a majority vote of the remaining members of the board. If the vacancy is that of a school board member elected from a borough, the vacancy shall be filled by a qualified voter residing in the same borough. 
(Acts 1993, Ch. 594, § 1; Acts 1993, Ch. 612, § 1; Acts 1996, Ch. 147)  
Sec. 16.06. - Qualifications of candidates for election to the board. 
In order to qualify as a candidate for election and to have his or her name placed on the ballot, a candidate for the school board shall meet the qualifications to hold public office in accordance with general law and shall be nominated by petition pursuant to Code of Virginia, section 24.1-168. 
(Acts 1993, Ch. 594, § 1; Acts 1993, Ch. 612, § 1)  
Sec. 16.07. - Selection, responsibilities, and duties of the chairman and vice-chairman. 
The selection, responsibilities, and duties of the chairman and vice-chairman shall be as provided by general law. 
(Acts 1993, Ch. 594, § 1; Acts 1993, Ch. 612, § 1)  
Sec. 16.08. - Charter prevails in the event of a conflict with general statutes. 
In the event of a conflict with statutes of general application, the provisions of this charter shall prevail. 
(Acts 1993, Ch. 594, § 1; Acts 1993, Ch. 612, § 1)  
Sec. 16.09. - Severability of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, section, provision, sentence, clause, or phrase be adjudged to be invalid, the remainder of the chapter shall remain in effect and its validity shall not be impaired. 
(Acts 1993, Ch. 594, § 1; Acts 1993, Ch. 612, § 1)  
Chapters 17—18.4. - [Reserved] 
 
Secs. 17.01—18.015. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Sections 17.01—18.015 were repealed by Acts 1977, Ch. 14, § 2.  
Chapter 19. - City Planning 
 
Sec. 19.01. - Planning commission—Composition; organization; qualifications and appointment of members. 
There shall be a city planning commission which shall consist of not less than five nor more than fifteen members, and shall be organized as provided by general law. All members of the commission shall be qualified voters of the city and shall be appointed by the council for terms of four years.  
Sec. 19.02. - Same—Responsibility for recommendations as to city planning; powers and duties generally. 
The planning commission shall be responsible for making recommendations to the council on all phases of city planning, including a master plan, zoning and subdivision control. It shall have the powers and duties provided by general law and such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the council.  
Sec. 19.03. - Board of zoning appeals—Establishment; composition; appointment and term of members. 
There shall be a board of zoning appeals which shall consist of five (5) members appointed for three-year terms by the circuit court of the city or the judges thereof in vacation.  
Sec. 19.04. - Same—Powers. 
The board of zoning appeals shall have all powers granted to boards of zoning appeals by general law.  
Sec. 19.05. - Same—Appeals. 
Appeals from any action of the board of zoning appeals may be taken to the circuit court of the city in the manner prescribed by general law.  
Chapter 20. - Administration of Justice 
 
Sec. 20.01. - Courts of record—City as part of second judicial circuit; circuit court generally. 
The city shall continue to be in and a part of the second judicial circuit. The circuit court of Princess Anne County shall be known as the circuit court of the City of Virginia Beach and shall have the same jurisdiction in the City of Virginia Beach as is conferred by general law upon circuit courts of cities of the first class. 
(Acts 1978, Ch. 101, § 1)  
Sec. 20.02. - Same—Transfer of actions pending in county to circuit court of city; authority of circuit court of city with reference to actions so transferred. 
All actions of every kind, criminal as well as civil, pending in the circuit court of the county on the effective date of this Charter shall automatically be transferred to, and shall proceed to final judgment in, the circuit court of the city. The circuit court of the city shall have full authority to issue writs, enforce judgments and decrees and exercise every manner of judicial function in relation to former actions in the circuit court of the county as though no change had been made in the status of the latter.  
Secs. 20.03—20.10. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Sections 20.03—20.10 were repealed by Code of Virginia, § 16.1-69.1.  
Sec. 20.11. - High constable. 
The council shall appoint a high constable who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. He shall be the ministerial officer of the courts of the city and shall have such duties as the council may prescribe.  
Sec. 20.12. - Justices of the peace. 
The circuit court of the city shall appoint such number of justices of the peace as it deems necessary, not to exceed eleven, to serve at its pleasure. The justices of the peace holding office in the City of Virginia Beach and Princess Anne County immediately preceding the effective date of this Charter shall continue in office until the expiration of the terms for which they were elected.  
Sec. 20.13. - Authority of notaries public for Princess Anne County. 
Notaries public for Princess Anne County shall have full power and authority in the city until their commissions expire.  
Sec. 20.14. - High constable. 
The council shall appoint a high constable who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. He shall execute all processes, warrants, summons, and notices in the general district court and shall have such other duties as the council may prescribe. The fees collected by the high constable shall be established by duly adopted ordinance, and all such fees shall be deposited into the city treasury for use in the general operation of the city. The sheriff may act as the high constable. 
(Acts 1996, Ch. 147)  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
 This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and the acts amending the Charter. 
Year 	Chapter 	Section 	Disposition 
1962 	147 		1.01—20.13 
1964 	109 		3.05, 5.01, 6.02, 8.07 
1966 	 39 		3.01, 3.07, 16.02 
1968 	192 	1 	2.02 
1970 	206 		3.02(note) 
		1 	3.02:1, 3.04, 3.07 
1971 	 86 	1 	3.02:1 
1972 	810 	1 	7.01, 14.01—14.03 
		2 	10.01—12.06(note) 
1973 	 52 	1 	3006, 3.07 
1974 	 39 		3.09 
	596 	1 	6.05:1 
		2 	6.03—6.05(note) 
1975 	 61 	1 	3.04, 7-.01 
1977 	 14 	1 	2.01, 6.05:1, 7.01, 8.07, 9.04, 15.01—15.03 
		2 	10.01—12.06(note) 
			17.01—18.015(note) 
1978 	101 	1 	20.01 
1979 	222 	1 	3.10 
1981 	 88 	1 	3.09 
	 89 	1 	6.05:1 
	350 	1 	3.04 
1984 	210 	1 	6.05:1 
1986 	313 	1 	2.02 
		2 	6.05:2 
1987 	227 	1 	3.01, 3.02:1, 3.02:2, 3.03, 3.07 
	228 	1 	2.02 
1992 	416 	1 	15.01—15.03 
	594 	1 	16.02 
	612 	1 	16.02 
1993 	594 	1       Amd 	16.02 
		      Added 	16.04—16.09 
		2       Rpld 	16.03 
	612 	1       Amd 	16.02 
		      Added 	16.04—16.09 
		2       Rpld 	16.03 
1995 	697 	1 	3.01, 3.02:1 
		      Added 	3.01:1 
1996 	147 	1 	16.04 
	147 	1 	16.05 
	147 	1 	20.14 
2007 	725 	1 	3.02:1 
			3.02:2 
			16.04 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the City of Virginia Beach, Virginia" and may be so cited. These ordinances may also be cited as the "Virginia Beach City Code." 
(Code 1965, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to codify and recodify its ordinances. Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the interpretation and construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
And, or. "And" may be read "or" and "or" may be read "and" if the sense requires it. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the city, as it now exists and as it may be amended in the future. 
City. The words "city," "the city" and "this city" shall mean the City of Virginia Beach in the State of Virginia. 
Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is used, without further qualification, it shall mean the "Code of the City of Virginia Beach, Virginia," as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a notice is required to be given or any other act to be done a certain time before any proceeding, there must be that time, exclusive of the day for such proceeding, but the day on which such notice is given or such act is done may be counted as part of the time; but when a notice is required to be given or any other act to be done within a certain time after any event, that time shall be allowed in addition to the day on which the event occurred. 
Council. The term "council" or "city council" shall mean the council of the city of Virginia Beach, Virginia. 
Following. The word "following," when used by way of reference to any section or sections in the Code, shall be construed to mean next following that in which such reference is made. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females and to corporations as well as to males. 
Month. Unless otherwise expressed, the word "month" shall be construed to mean a calendar month. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
Occupant. The word "occupant", applied to a building or land, shall mean any person who holds a written or oral lease of, or actually occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Officers, boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to a particular officer, board, commission or other agency, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Virginia Beach, Virginia." 
Official time standard. Whenever particular hours are referred to, the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may be in current use in the city. 
Owner. The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall include a firm, partnership, association of persons, corporation, organization or any other group acting as a unit. 
Preceding. The word "preceding", when used by way of reference to any section or sections in this Code, shall be construed to mean next preceding that in which such reference is made. 
Property. The word "property" shall mean real, personal or mixed property. 
Public grounds. The words "public grounds" shall mean the parks and all public lands owned by the city, and those parts of public places which do not form travelled parts of streets as defined in this section. 
Resort season. The term "resort season" shall mean the time beginning May 1 and ending September 30 of each year. 
Shall. The word "shall" shall be mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State or commonwealth. The word "state" or "commonwealth" shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Virginia." 
State Code. The term "State Code" or "Code of Virginia" shall mean the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
Street. The word "street" shall include avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto, and all other public thoroughfares in the city, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines. It shall also be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. 
Swear, sworn. The word "swear" or "sworn" shall be equivalent to the word "affirm" or "affirmed" in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
Written; in writing. The words "written" and "in writing" shall include typewriting, printing on paper and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1965, § 1-2; Ord. No. 2868, 4-26-05) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions and rules of construction applicable to state law, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.3 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of any section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any section, including its catchline, is amended or re-enacted. 
(Code 1965, § 1-4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions as to sections of state code, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.9.  
Sec. 1-4. - Provisions of Code considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the ordinances of the city included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1965, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-5. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Any ordinance granting any franchise or right; 
(3)  Any ordinance appropriating funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to an annual budget; [1] 
(4)  Any ordinance relative to the liability of the city for structures in or upon streets, sidewalks or alleys or for work done pursuant to a permit granted by the city. 
(5)  Any ordinance authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any public improvement or any special assessment; 
(6)  Any ordinance regulating or otherwise relating to trailers and trailer camps; 
(7)  Ordinance No. 482 [1773], being the zoning ordinance set out in Appendix A of this Code, or any amendment thereto, including amendments to the zoning map and ordinances zoning or rezoning specific property; 
(8)  Ordinance No. 292, being the subdivision ordinance set out in Appendix B of this Code, or any amendment thereto; 
(9)  Ordinance No. 486, being the site plan ordinance set out in Appendix C of this Code, or any amendment thereto; 
(10)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; or 
(11)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, Ch. 35. 
 
Sec. 1-6. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by municipal personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the section of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
State Law reference— Authority to supplement Code, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3.  
Sec. 1-8. - Distribution and sale of Code. 
The city manager is authorized to sell to any person, upon request, an initial bound volume of, or supplements to, the Code, and to make such charges therefor as are reasonable and necessary to reimburse the city for its costs incurred for publication and distribution of the code or supplements. 
(Code 1965, § 2-1.4; Ord. No. 1151, § 1, 3-9-81; Ord. No. 2187, 10-27-92) 
Cross reference— Fees for furnishing copies of portions of Code, § 2-2. 
State Law reference— Copies of Code to be available for public inspection, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3.  
Sec. 1-9. - Classification of and penalties for violations; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city it is provided that a violation of any provision thereof shall constitute a Class 1, 2, 3 or 4 misdemeanor, such violation shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Class 1 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), or by confinement in jail for not more than twelve (12) months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(2)  Class 2 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by confinement in jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(3)  Class 3 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(4)  Class 4 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars, ($250.00). 
(b)  Whenever in any provision of this Code or in any other ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided for the violation of such provision and such violation is not described as being of a particular class of misdemeanor, such violation shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor and be punished as prescribed in subsection (a)(1) above. 
(c)  Each day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, except where otherwise provided. 
(Code 1965, §§ 10-1, 10-1.1; Ord. No. 1992, § 1, 7-9-90; Ord. No. 2038, 2-26-91) 
State Law reference— Classification of misdemeanors and punishment therefor, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-9, 18.2-11; authority of city to provide penalties for violation of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-901; authority of court trying case, upon conviction, to require bond conditioned that the person convicted will not violate the ordinance for the breach of which he was convicted for a period of not more than one year, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-902; injunctive relief for continuing violations of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-905.  
Sec. 1-10. - Liability of corporations, etc., and agents for violations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by an officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provision of this Code, or the result of the act, omission or order of any such person. 
(Code 1965, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-11. - High constable and his deputies generally. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 20.11 of the Charter, the high constable shall be the ministerial officer of the city general district court and the city juvenile and domestic relations district court in their execution of jurisdiction, and he shall serve all warrants and summonses emanating from and returnable to such courts for service within the city. He shall serve or execute in the city all processes, civil warrants, distress warrants, subpoenas, writs, orders, attachments, notices and civil process of all kinds returnable to such courts or any district court in the commonwealth or for serving any papers returnable out of state. 
(b)  The high constable shall appoint such number of deputies as shall be determined and approved by the council. They shall hold office at the pleasure of the high constable and shall receive such salaries as shall be determined by the council to be paid by the city. 
(Code 1965, § 10-2.1) 
Cross reference— Police, Ch. 27.  
Sec. 1-12. - Fees for service of process. 
(a)  The high constable shall charge and collect the following fees for the service of process: 
(1)  For service on any person, a direct declaration in ejectment, order, notice, summons or any other similar process, except as herein otherwise provided, and for serving on any person any process, when the body is not taken, and making return thereof, the sum of twelve dollars ($12.00). 
(2)  For serving a witness or serving a garnishee on an attachment, twelve dollars ($12.00). 
(3)  For serving on any person an attachment or other process under which the body is taken and making a return thereon, twelve dollars ($12.00). 
(4)  For serving any order of court not otherwise provided for, twelve dollars ($12.00). 
(5)  For service of a writ of possession by execution, twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(6)  For serving an execution or distress warrant or attachment by levying, twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(7)  For serving any papers returnable out of state, seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(b)  Such fees as set forth above, collected by the high constable, shall be deposited in the treasury of the city for use in the general operation of the city government. 
(Cod 1965, § 10-2; Ord. No. 3099, 8-11-09)  
Sec. 1-12.1. - Assessment of court costs for construction, maintenance or renovation of courthouse and facilities. 
(a)  As an addition to other fees prescribed by law, the clerks of the circuit court, general district court and juvenile and domestic relations district court shall charge and collect, as a part of the fees taxed as costs, a fee of two dollars ($2.00) in each civil action, criminal and traffic case. 
(b)  Each such clerk shall remit such fees to the treasurer of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(c)  The treasurer shall hold such fees subject to disbursements authorized by city council for the construction, renovation or maintenance of courthouse or jail facilities and court-related facilities and to defray increases in the cost of heating, cooling, electricity and ordinary maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 1958, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 2060, 5-7-91; Ord. No. 2322, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2955, § 1, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 3452, § 1, 5-10-16)  
Sec. 1-12.2. - Assessment of court costs for the cost of persons admitted to jail following conviction and the costs of court house security. 
(a)  (1)  In addition to any other fees prescribed by law, a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee is hereby imposed on every individual admitted to the city jail following conviction in a district or circuit court. 
(2)  This fee shall be ordered as a part of court costs collected by the clerk, deposited into the account of the city treasurer, and shall be appropriated to the sheriff to defray the costs of processing arrested persons in the jail. 
(b)  (1)  In addition to any other fees prescribed by law, a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) is hereby imposed in each criminal and traffic case in which the defendant is convicted of a violation of any statute or ordinance. The clerks of the district and circuit courts shall charge and collect this assessment as a part of the fees taxed as costs. 
(2)  After collection by the clerk of the court in which case is heard, the assessment shall be remitted to the city treasurer and held subject to appropriation by the city council to the sheriff's office for funding courthouse security personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2699, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 2979, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2986, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 3629, § 1, 7-7-20)  
Sec. 1-12.3 - Assessment of court costs to support local criminal justice academy. 
(a)  An additional fee of five dollars ($5.00) to support the city's criminal justice academy is hereby imposed in every case in which costs are assessable pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-69.48:1, 17.1-275.1, 17.1-275.2, 17.1-275.3, 17.1-275.4, 17.1-275.7, 17.1-275.8, or 17.1-275.9. The clerks of the district and circuit courts shall charge and collect this assessment as a part of the fees taxed as costs. 
(b)  After collection by the clerk of the court in which the case is heard, the assessment shall be remitted to the city treasurer and held subject to appropriation by the city council to support the city's criminal justice academy. 
(Ord. No. 2762, 5-13-03)  
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 1-5)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Port advisory commission, § 6-41 et seq.; beach erosion advisory commission, § 6-161 et seq.; board of building code appeals, § 8-69 et seq.; elections, ch. 10; department of fire protection, § 12-21 et seq.; department and director of public library, § 17-2; public library board, § 17-3; concealing, destroying, etc., city records, § 23-42; department and director of parks and recreation, § 24-1 et seq.; police department, § 27-1 et seq.; department and director of social services, § 29-1 et seq.; social services advisory board, § 29-16 et seq.; real estate assessor, § 35-26. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - City seal. 
(a)  The seal of the city shall be represented by a design formed as follows: There shall be two (2) concentric circles, the outer circle being composed of a chain of marlin, the inner circle being composed of a wreath of strawberry leaves. Between these two (2) circles shall be a legend: "City of Virginia Beach, Virginia" in the upper portion and "Landmarks of our Nation's Beginning" in the lower portion; separating the upper and lower portions on both sides will be a five-pointed star. The design within the inner circle shall consist of the Cape Henry Lighthouse, the nation's first lighthouse; to its right will be a replica of the cross which symbolically marks the first landing of settlers on this nation's soil; to the left of the lighthouse blazes the sun above the Atlantic Ocean cresting on the sand beaches of the city. 
(b)  No other design or seal shall be used as the seal of the city. 
(c)  No paper issued with municipal authority which requires the seal of the city shall be valid, unless the seal described in this section shall be affixed to the same. 
(Code 1965, § 1-7). 
Charter reference— Authority of city to have corporate seal, § 1.01; city clerk to be custodian of seal, § 3.08.  
Sec. 2-2. - Fee for furnishing copies of maps, manuals and other documents. 
(a)  A fee shall be charged and paid into the city treasury for furnishing maps or reproductions or copies of maps, photostats, photographs, prints, copies of manuals, land books, portions of the Charter and this Code, council minutes and reports and all documents furnished by the city. 
(b)  The fee provided for above shall be fixed by the department head, unless otherwise established by the city council, and shall be substantially equal to the cost incurred in searching and copying such articles and documents. However, in no event shall such charges exceed the actual cost in supplying such records. Such charges shall be estimated in advance, upon request of the person desiring the copy. 
(c)  The fee provided for in this section shall be paid and collected at the time each such article or document is furnished or supplied. 
(Code 1965, § 2-1.2) 
Cross reference— Distribution and sale of Code, § 1-8; copies of fire reports, § 12-30; copies of police reports, § 27-3. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-342(a).  
Sec. 2-3. - Limitation on terms of members of boards and commissions; appointment of such members. 
(a)  Any person appointed to a board or commission of the city shall be limited to: 
(1)  Eight (8) consecutive one-year terms. 
(2)  Four (4) consecutive two-year terms. 
(3)  Three (3) consecutive three-year terms. 
(4)  Two (2) consecutive four-year terms. 
(5)  Two (2) consecutive five-year terms. 
The council shall limit its selections to those persons who have submitted applications on forms approved by the council and on file with the city clerk. Each member of the council may review the applications fifteen (15) days prior to the appointment. 
No person may be nominated for appointment to an initial term unless that nominee's potential appointment to the board or commission was previously discussed by the city council during a prior council meeting. Such discussion may occur during the open or closed portion of the prior meeting, in accordance with the Virginia Freedom of Information Act. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, city council may, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all of the councilmembers, reappoint a person to an additional term beyond that permitted by subsection (a) when, by virtue of the unique qualifications of the position or other extenuating circumstances, doing so would serve the best interests of the city. 
(c)  Term limits shall not apply to appointees of the board of building code appeals. The members of each division of the board of building code appeals shall serve at the pleasure of city council. 
(Ord. No. 1036, 5-5-80; Ord. No. 1086, 9-8-80; Ord. No. 3158, 1-11-11; Ord. No. 3520, 10-3-17; Ord. No. 3603, 10-1-19)  
Sec. 2-3.1. - Boards and commissions generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law, attendance records shall be kept at each meeting of every board and commission of the city, or other council-appointed agency, which records shall be provided to the city council through the city clerk's office at least forty-five (45) days prior to the scheduled term expiration date for the members of each such board, commission or agency. No member of any such board, commission or agency shall accumulate an annual total of more than three (3) absences, or be absent from more than one-fourth of the total number of meetings held by such board, commission or agency within a given calendar year, for reasons other than personal illness, the illness or death of a relative, or other circumstances beyond the member's control. If this limitation is exceeded, the chairperson of such board, commission or agency shall forthwith report to the city clerk the name of the member whose unexcused absences exceed the number allowed herein. The city clerk shall then notify such member in writing, with a copy of such notification to the members of the city council, that due to unexcused absences in excess of the number allowed herein, his or her term of membership on the board, commission or agency has terminated. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), and except as otherwise provided by law, all members of boards and commissions of the city, and other council-appointed agencies, shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2258, 1-25-94)  
Sec. 2-4. - Recognition of police, fire companies and emergency medical services agencies as part of public safety program. 
The following city departments, police agencies and chartered and nonchartered fire companies and emergency medical services agencies are recognized and acknowledged to be an integral part of the official public safety program of the city, and in gratitude to and in recognition of the valuable and necessary services performed by the volunteer firefighters, volunteer lifesaving or emergency medical service agency members, volunteer law-enforcement chaplains, auxiliary police, volunteer emergency medical technicians, members of volunteer search and rescue organizations, and volunteer members of community emergency response teams, volunteering for the following organizations shall be deemed employees for the purposes of the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act: 
Blackwater Volunteer Rescue Squad, Incorporated. 
Chesapeake Beach Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department, Incorporated. 
Creeds Volunteer Fire Department and Rescue Squad, Incorporated. 
Davis Corner Volunteer Fire Department and Rescue Squad, Incorporated. 
Kempsville Rescue Squad, Incorporated. 
Ocean Park Volunteer Fire and Rescue Unit, Incorporated. 
Oceana Volunteer Fire Department, Incorporated. 
Plaza Volunteer Fire Company and Rescue Squad, Incorporated. 
Princess Anne Courthouse Volunteer Rescue Squad and Fire Department, Incorporated. 
Sandbridge Rescue and Fire, Incorporated. 
Virginia Beach Auxiliary Police. 
Virginia Beach Rescue Squad, Incorporated. 
Virginia Beach Volunteer Law Enforcement Chaplains and Chaplains' Aides. 
Virginia Beach Volunteer Water Rescue Team, Incorporated. 
Virginia Beach Department of Emergency Medical Services. 
Virginia Beach Fire Department. 
Virginia Beach Office of Volunteer Resources. 
(Ord. No. 1264, 4-5-82; Ord. No. 1621, 8-25-86; Ord. No. 1746, 11-2-87; Ord. No. 1956, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 2026, 12-8-90; Ord. No. 2381, 4-23-96; Ord. No. 2584, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 2921, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 3135, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 3432, 11-17-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1264, adopted April 5, 1982, amended Ch. 2 but did not specify a section number; thus, codification as § 2-4 has been at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference— Council of rescue squads to be advisory board to division of emergency medical services, § 2-424; emergency medical agencies, Ch. 10.5; volunteer fire departments generally, § 12-24; auxiliary police, § 27-4. 
State Law reference— Authority for enactment of section, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-136.2, 65.1-4.1.  
Sec. 2-5. - Historic preservation commission. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Virginia Beach Historic Preservation Commission for the purpose of advising city council and the departments of museums and historic resources and planning on all issues related to the preservation of historic buildings, structures, and sites located in the City of Virginia Beach. Such advice shall include, but not be limited to: (1) the terms pursuant to which historic properties are acquired, leased, utilized or sold by the city, (2) the need for, and criteria for designation of, historic and cultural overlay districts in certain areas of the city and (3) to approve or deny applications for inclusion on the Virginia Beach Historical Register. The mission of the commission shall be to preserve, protect and maintain the historic identity of Virginia Beach and the former Princess Anne County through a program of advocacy and increased public awareness and involvement. 
(b)  The commission shall consist of at least nine (9), but not more than fifteen (15), members, with expertise in the fields of architecture, archaeology, and history. The commission shall include at least one (1) representative from the Princess Anne County/Virginia Beach Historical Society. The commission also shall include two (2) Virginia Beach high school students who shall be nonvoting members. The commission shall interview candidates for the student membership positions and make recommendations to city council, which shall make the appointments. The voting members of the commission shall be appointed by the city council to serve terms of three (3) years, and the student members shall be appointed to terms of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 3009, 4-22-08; Ord. No. 3078, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 3238, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 3420, 6-16-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3009, adopted April 22, 2008, repealed the former § 2-5, and enacted a new § 2-5 as set out herein. The former § 2-5 pertained to Francis Land House Board of Governors and derived from Ord. No. 1481, 8-27-84; Ord. No. 1552, 9-30-85; Ord. No. 2249, 12-14-93.  
Sec. 2-5.1. - Historical review board. 
(a)  Duties. The duties of the historical review board shall be as set forth in section 1303 of the city zoning ordinance, and such other and further duties as the city council may from time to time prescribe. 
(b)  Membership; qualifications; term. The historical review board shall consist of eight (8) members or such other number as the city council may determine, and members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. At least two members shall have professional training or equivalent experience in architecture, history, American studies, architectural history, archaeology, or planning, and at least one (1) of these two (2) members shall be a registered architect or architectural historian. All members shall have a demonstrated interest or competence in, or knowledge of, historic preservation by virtue of any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  A college or graduate degree in a preservation-related field; 
(2)  Activity in specific preservation projects; 
(3)  Membership in a local historic preservation organization or on a board of a historic property; 
(4)  Membership in the National Trust for Historic Preservation; 
(5)  Having renovated and lived in a historic building, attended at least one preservation-related conference or workshop; or 
(6)  Having served at least one (1) term on a local historical review board or architectural review board at the time of appointment or reappointment. 
(Ord. No. 3320, 12-3-13)  
Sec. 2-6. - Resort advisory commission. 
(a)  There is hereby created the resort advisory commission. The members of the commission shall be appointed by the city council to serve terms of three (3) years. A chair and a vice-chair shall be elected from the commission by its members. All members shall be residents of the city. 
(b)  The governance and administration of the commission shall be in accordance with its bylaws, incorporated by reference herein, which bylaws shall not be amended without the prior approval of city council. 
(c)  The commission shall consist of at least eleven (11), but not more than nineteen (19), members. In selecting members of the commission, the city council shall appoint at least one (1) representative from each of the following organizations: Virginia Beach Hotel/Motel Association, Virginia Beach Restaurant Association, Virginia Beach Division of the Hampton Roads Chamber of Commerce, and Virginia Beach Council of Civic Organizations. The commission shall also include a resort retailer. The city council shall also appoint to the commission at least three (3) design professionals having expertise in the fields of architecture, urban design, land use planning, landscape architecture, transportation planning, or other design fields relevant to the purposes for which the commission was created. 
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this subsection and any other ordinance or bylaw, the provisions of this subsection shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1806, 8-29-88; Ord. No. 2439, 3-11-97; Ord. No. 2509, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2680, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2826, 6-22-04; Ord. No. 2840, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 3204, 9-27-11)  
Sec. 2-7. - Office of volunteer resources; director. 
The office of volunteer resources shall promote volunteerism within city governmental agencies to enhance the economic, educational, social and physical quality of the community and to support municipal services valued by citizens of the city. The city council shall appoint a director of the office of volunteer resources, who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and shall provide leadership and guidance for the programs and activities of the volunteers of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2734, 1-14-03; Ord. No. 2846, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 3352, 5-27-14)  
Secs. 2-8—2-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council generally, Ch. 3. 
Cross reference— Disrupting meeting of city council, § 23-14. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-15. - Mayoral, city council and school board elections. 
(a)  City council and school board elections shall take place during the general election in November 2008, and during the November general election in even years thereafter, for councilmembers and school board members whose terms expire at the end of December of that year. The term of office for each councilmember and school board member shall commence on January 1 next following the date of the November election and shall continue until his or her successor has been duly elected and qualified. 
(b)  The mayor shall be elected at the general election in November 2008, and each fourth year thereafter. The mayor's term of office shall commence on January 1 next following the date of the November election and shall continue until his or her successor has been duly elected and qualified. 
(c)  Councilmembers, the mayor, and school board members whose terms expire as of June 30 shall continue in office until their successors have been elected at the November election and take office on January 1. 
(d)  Except for the changes to the date of elections and corresponding changes in the terms of office established in this section, all other provisions of the City Charter relating to the election of councilmembers, the mayor, and school board members shall remain in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2947, § 1, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 2-16. - Organizational meetings. 
At an organizational meeting of a newly elected council, the clerk of the circuit court shall swear in the mayor and the newly elected council, and the mayor of the city shall preside for the purpose of electing a vice-mayor. 
(Code 1965, § 2-3; Ord. No. 1790, 6-20-88) 
Charter reference— Selection of mayor and vice-mayor, § 3.07.  
Sec. 2-17. - General powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the council, with the same powers and duties as the other members, with a vote, but no veto power. He shall be the ceremonial head of the city and shall perform such other duties not inconsistent with his office as may be imposed by the council. He shall call the meetings and he shall have general direction of the chamber in which the council meets. In case of disturbance or disorderly conduct, the mayor shall have the chamber cleared. 
(Code 1965, § 2-4; Ord. 3105, 10-27-09) 
Charter reference— Powers and duties of mayor, § 3.07. 
Cross reference— Prohibition against disorderly conduct at council meetings, § 23-14.  
Sec. 2-18. - General powers and duties of vice-mayor. 
The vice-mayor, in the absence or disability of the mayor or upon request by the mayor, shall be invested with all the rights and duties of the mayor. 
(Code 1965, § 2-5) 
Charter reference— Powers and duties of vice-mayor, § 3.07.  
Sec. 2-19. - Acting mayor. 
In the absence of both the mayor and vice-mayor, the council shall elect, by a majority vote, a member as acting mayor, who shall preside over the meeting and shall, while acting as mayor, be invested with all the rights and duties of the mayor. 
(Code 1965, § 2-6)  
Sec. 2-20. - Time and place of regular meetings. 
(a)  Regular formal meetings of the council shall be held in the Council Chamber of the City Hall Building, Municipal Center, Virginia Beach, Virginia, on the first and third Tuesdays of each month at 6:00 p.m., unless such date shall fall upon a legal holiday. However, in July and December of each year, regular meetings shall instead be held on the first two (2) Tuesdays of the month at 6:00 p.m. The council may also convene informal meetings on the dates of regular formal meetings at such times as the council may deem appropriate, and on the second and fourth Tuesday of every month except July and December. Informal meetings, which shall be held in the Council Conference Room adjacent to the Council Chamber and at which no votes shall be cast, shall be for the purpose of discussing matters of interest to the council, and receiving briefings/reports from the city manager, city staff and city boards, commissions, committees and other city agencies. The city manager shall notify the public of the times of such informal meetings in advance thereof. 
(b)  To accommodate citizen participation in public hearings, the council may convene any council meeting at such public facility in the city that will in the judgment of city council accommodate the citizens; provided, however, that notice shall be provided to the press and public by the city manager. 
(c)  Pursuant to section 2-56, the city clerk shall prepare official minutes of all formal and informal meetings of the council. Additionally, all formal and informal meetings of council held in either the Council Chamber or the Council Conference Room shall be cablecast live. Formal and informal meetings held at a different location pursuant to subsection (b) shall be recorded for later cablecast. Notwithstanding the above, the inoperability or other technical malfunction of cablecasting or video recording of a meeting shall have no effect on the validity of either the meeting or any action taken during the meeting. 
(Code 1965, § 2-7; Ord. No. 969, 7-16-79; Ord. No. 1146, 2-2-81; Ord. No. 1354, 1-10-83; Ord. No. 1468, 7-9-84; Ord. No. 1821, 12-5-88; Ord. No. 1989, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 2033, 2-12-91; Ord. No. 2295, 9-27-94; Ord. No. 2313, 3-14-95; Ord. No. 2631, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 3056, 11-18-08; Ord. No. 3333, 2-25-14, eff. 6-1-14) 
Charter reference— Regular council meetings to be held at least once each month and council rules of procedure to provide for time and place for holding regular monthly meetings, § 3.06.  
Sec. 2-21. - Call and notice of special meetings. 
The mayor, any three (3) members of the council or the city manager may call special meetings of the council at any time upon notice to each member personally notified at his usual place of business or residence. Notice, reasonable under the circumstances, of special or emergency meeting shall be given contemporaneously with the notice provided to the mayor, members of the council or the city manager conducting the meeting. 
(Code 1965, § 2-9; Ord. 3104, 10-27-09) 
Charter reference— Call and notice of special meetings, § 3.06. 
Cross reference— Budget amendment procedures hearing and notice, § 2-187.1.  
Sec. 2-22. - Press to be advised of special meetings. 
The city manager shall advise the press of all special meetings of the council in advance of the time of the meeting. 
(Code 1965, § 2-10)  
Sec. 2-23. - Restrictions on post-employment activities of former members of council. 
For one (1) year after their terms of office have ended, members of council may not provide personal and substantial assistance for remuneration of any kind to any party, in connection with any proceeding, application, case, contract, or other particular matter involving the city or an agency thereof, if that matter is one in which the former member of council participated personally and substantially as a member of council through decision, approval, or recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 2779, 7-8-03)  
Secs. 2-24—2-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Authority for adoption. 
The rules of procedure set out in the following sections of this division are adopted pursuant to section 3.06 of the Charter. 
(Code 1965, 2-2)  
Sec. 2-32. - Meetings to be open to public. 
All the meetings of the city council, both regular and special, shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1965, § 2-15) 
Charter reference— Ordinances, resolutions, etc., to be adopted only at meeting open to public, § 3.06.  
Sec. 2-33. - Opening and order of business at regular meetings. 
Upon the appearance of a quorum at a regular meeting of the council, the mayor or, in his absence, the vice-mayor, shall open the business of the meeting. The order of business shall be: 
(1)  Calling of the roll by the clerk. 
(2)  Executive session upon roll call vote. 
(3)  Reading of proceedings of the last meeting; provided, that such reading may be suspended when a copy of the proceedings has previously been read by each councilman. 
(4)  Consent agenda. 
(5)  Regular agenda, including public hearings previously scheduled or called by the council. 
(6)  Old business deferred from previous meetings, including any report of the mayor or committees, boards and commissions named by the council. 
(7)  New business, including presentations by council members, citizens and organizations. 
(8)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1965, § 2-8) 
Charter reference— Council quorum, § 3.06.  
Sec. 2-34. - Order of business at special meetings. 
The order of business at special meetings of the council shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call of the roll. 
(2)  Executive session upon roll call vote. 
(3)  Reading of call for special meeting, if written, or stated, if verbal. 
(4)  Discussion of business on call in order given in call. 
Such order of business shall not be departed from except by the consent of six (6) members of the council. 
(Code 1965, § 2-11)  
Sec. 2-35. - Limitation on business transacted at special meeting. 
No business shall be transacted at a special meeting of the council except that business for which it shall have been called, unless all members of the council attend such special meeting or give their written consent thereto. 
(Code 1965, § 2-12)  
Sec. 2-36. - Calling of matters on docket. 
All matters on the docket provided for in section 2-57 shall be called to the attention of the council in the order of docketing. Any matter not finally disposed of at the meeting for which it is first docketed shall be called at succeeding regular meetings, until final disposition is made. 
(Code 1965, § 2-14)  
Sec. 2-37. - Motions. 
(a)  Every motion made at a meeting of the council shall be reduced to writing, if desired by the mayor or any member, and shall be delivered to the clerk's table to be read. No motion shall be considered by the council unless and until a second to such motion is obtained, and then stated by the mayor before the same is voted upon. 
(b)  When the mayor wishes to make a motion at a meeting of the council, he shall vacate the position of presiding officer thereof and make the motion as any other councilman. 
(Code 1965, § 2-16)  
Sec. 2-38. - Method and recordation of voting. 
All voting at meetings of the council, except on procedural motions, shall be by roll call and the ayes and noes shall be recorded in the journal. 
(Code 1965, § 2-17)  
Sec. 2-39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3105, adopted October 27, 2009, repealed § 2-39, which pertained to reconsidering or rescinding vote at special meeting and derived from § 2-13 of the 1965 Code.  
Sec. 2-40. - Persons permitted within bar. 
No person, other than officers of the city or clerks in the exercise of their official duties, shall be permitted within the bar during meetings of the council, unless by invitation of the mayor, which invitation shall apply only to the meeting for which it is given. 
(Code 1965, § 2-18)  
Sec. 2-41. - Addressing council. 
Time limits for speakers addressing the city council at its meetings shall be in accordance with a written policy of the city council. Such policy shall be included on the city's internet web site, posted outside of the city council chambers, and published in the city council agenda for each regular meeting. 
(Code 1965, § 2-19; Ord. No. 2035, 2-12-91; Ord. No. 2740, 3-11-03)  
Sec. 2-42. - Questions of procedure not otherwise covered. 
Upon all questions of procedure at council meetings not covered by this article or other provisions of this Code or ordinances of the city, the general principles of parliamentary procedure shall govern. 
(Code 1965, § 2-20)  
Sec. 2-43. - Decorum and order. 
(a)  The presiding officer shall preserve decorum and shall decide all questions of public order, subject to appeal to the council. 
(b)  Any person addressing the council shall confine himself to comments germane to the action under debate, avoid reference to personalities, and refrain from vulgarity or other breach of respect. For any failure to so conform, he shall be declared out of order by the presiding officer and shall forthwith yield the floor. 
(c)  The chief of police or a line officer of the police division designated by him shall act as sergeant-at-arms at all city council meetings. He shall, under the direction of the presiding officer, have charge of the council chamber and shall prevent disorder or interruption of the business of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1758, 1-11-88)  
Secs. 2-44—2-53. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CLERK[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— City clerk to be clerk of council, § 3.08. 
Cross reference— Review and evaluation of clerk, § 2-89. 
 
Sec. 2-54. - Performance of clerical duties. 
The clerk of the council shall perform such clerical duties on behalf of the council and its members as the council may, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe. 
(Code 1965, § 2-21)  
Sec. 2-55. - Attendance at meetings. 
The clerk of the council shall attend all regular and special meetings of the council, as well as the meetings of any special committee of the council, if required. 
(Code 1965, § 2-22)  
Sec. 2-56. - Record of proceedings; indexing of minute book. 
The clerk of the council shall keep a record of the proceedings of council meetings which, when transcribed and signed by the mayor and the clerk, shall be placed in the minute book as the official record. The clerk shall properly index the minute book. 
(Code 1965, § 2-23)  
Sec. 2-57. - Calendar and docket of business before council. 
The clerk of the council shall keep a calendar so arranged as to show the condition or progress of the business of the council. The clerk shall also keep a docket of the business to come before the regular meetings of the council and, in order that the members of the council may be familiar in advance with matters to be presented for consideration and action, the clerk's docket shall be closed at 5:00 p.m. on Wednesday of the week preceding each meeting and a copy of such docket shall be dispatched to the mayor and each member of the council not later than 5:00 p.m. on the Friday preceding each regular meeting. In the case of a bona fide emergency, there may be an add-on agenda item for any ordinance or resolution that pertains to that emergency, sponsored by a member of council, that could not be placed on the agenda prior to the closing of the clerk's docket. Such ordinance or resolution may only be considered upon an affirmative two-thirds vote of the council. 
(Code 1965, § 2-24; Ord. No. 2036, 2-12-91)  
Sec. 2-58. - Furnishing transcripts of minutes, etc. 
The clerk of the council shall, as soon as practicable after the close of each session of the council, make available to each member thereof, a transcript of the minutes and any ordinance, resolution or order and act of a legislative character passed at such session. He shall, in like manner, make available to the director of finance and city treasurer a transcript of all ordinances or resolutions appropriating money or authorizing the payment of money or the issuance of bonds or notes. 
(Code 1965, § 2-25)  
Sec. 2-59. - Publication of reports and ordinances. 
The clerk of the council shall publish such reports and ordinances as are required by law to be published and such other reports and ordinances as the council may direct. 
(Code 1965, § 2-26)  
Sec. 2-60. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3105, adopted October 27, 2009, repealed § 2-60, which pertained to preparation of records for microfilming and derived from Ord. 1265, 4-5-82.  
Secs. 2-61—2-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Resisting or obstructing city officer in discharge of duty, § 23-7. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-71. - Establishment, composition and function of department of human resources. 
(a)  There is hereby created a department of human resources, which shall consist of a director of human resources, who shall be the head of the department, and such other officers and employees as may be prescribed by the council or by orders of the city manager or director consistent therewith. 
(b)  The department of human resources shall be responsible for formulating recommendations to the city manager for proposed personnel policies and procedures. The department of human resources shall also be responsible for the provision of such other services as may be directed by the council or city manager. 
(c)  No formal personnel policy or procedure shall be effective until approved by the city manager. All proposed policies shall be subject to approval as to legal form by the city attorney. 
(d)  The department of human resources shall be responsible for daily administration and application of city personnel policies and procedures. 
(e)  Whenever the terms "department of personnel" and "director of personnel" are used in the City Code, personnel policies, procedures, rules and regulations, or in any other city publication, such terms shall be deemed to be the "department of human resources" and the "director of human resources," respectively. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2-26.01, 2-26.02; Ord. No. 1384, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 2067, 6-4-91) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create departments, §§ 3.05(b), 7.01.  
Sec. 2-72. - Personnel board—Established; composition; appointment, terms and compensation of members; etc. 
(a)  There is hereby established a personnel board consisting of five (5) qualified voters appointed by the council for a term of three (3) years. Members shall serve until a successor has been appointed. Vacancies shall be filled by the council by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. One (1) member of the board shall always be a member of the merit service, as defined in section 2-76 and shall be employed at a level below that of a division manager. The board shall choose one (1) of its members to be the chairperson, one (1) member to be the vice-chairperson, and one (1) member to be the second vice-chairperson for a term of one (1) year. The personnel board shall abide by the personnel board hearings procedure. 
(b)  The director of human resources or a designated alternate staff member shall serve as secretary to the personnel board and shall attend all meetings with no voting privileges. 
(c)  A majority of the members of the personnel board shall constitute a quorum. Members of the board shall serve on a volunteer basis. 
(d)  The city council may appoint not more than four (4) alternates to the board. Two (2) alternates shall be members of the merit service, as defined in section 2-76, and shall be employed at a level below that of a division manager. The qualifications, terms and compensation of alternate members shall be the same as those of regular members. A regular member shall, when he knows he will be absent from a meeting, notify the chairperson of such fact. The chairperson shall select an alternate to serve in the absent member's place, and the records of the board shall so note. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.6; Ord. No. 2711, 7-2-02; Ord. No. 3159, 1-25-11; Ord. No. 3287, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 3497, 4-4-17) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create boards, § 3.05(b). 
Cross reference— Limitation on terms of numbers of boards and commissions and application for appointment of such members, § 2-3.  
Sec. 2-73. - Same—Jurisdiction; rulings and findings not to conflict with Constitution or laws. 
(a)  The jurisdiction and authority of the personnel board shall be limited to judging the employing authority's action in the administration of the city's ordinances, management rights, policies, procedures, rules and regulations. The personnel board shall have no authority to add to, delete from or amend city ordinances, management rights, policies, procedures, rules and regulations. However, it may make recommendations regarding these issues to the city manager. 
(b)  The personnel board's rulings and findings shall not be inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the United States or of this state or local laws. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.7)  
Sec. 2-74. - Same—Rules and regulations pertaining to hearing procedures. 
(a)  The personnel board is hereby empowered to adopt rules and regulations pertaining to the hearing procedures to be followed before the board. All such rules and regulations shall be adopted by majority vote of all members of the board, shall be signed by the chairman of the board and shall be lodged with the secretary of the board. Such rules and regulations shall be available in the office of the department of personnel during regular business hours. 
(b)  The personnel board is authorized to amend or rescind any previously adopted rule or regulation by a majority vote of all members of the board. 
(Ord. No. 950, 6-25-79)  
Sec. 2-75. - Service divided into nonmerit and merit services; composition of nonmerit service. 
(a)  The service of the city is divided into nonmerit service and merit service. 
(b)  The nonmerit service shall consist of: 
(1)  Members of the city council and all other elected officials or persons appointed to fill vacancies in elective offices. 
(2)  The city manager, deputy city managers, assistants to the city manager and all heads of departments or offices who are appointed by the city manager. 
(3)  Constitutional officers and their employees. 
(4)  All appointees of the city council. 
(5)  Employees of the health department. 
(6)  Employees of the school board. 
(7)  Judges and associate judges of the circuit courts, general district courts and juvenile and domestic relations district courts, and employees of such courts. 
(8)  Employees of the agriculture department compensated by the state. 
(9)  The general registrar and all assistant registrars. 
(10)  Employees of juvenile probation. 
(11)  Members of boards and commissions. 
(12)  Any individual whose relationship with the city arises from or under any express contractual agreement to which such individual is a party or whose position is created by such contract. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.3; Ord. No. 1469, 7-9-84; Ord. No. 1495, 11-5-84; Ord. No. 1526, 4-8-85; Ord. No. 1593, 4-14-86; Ord. No. 2202, 1-26-93; Ord. No. 2542, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2854, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 3200, 9-13-11)  
Sec. 2-76. - Merit service. 
The merit service shall comprise all positions not specifically recited in subsection (b) of section 2-75. The merit service shall consist of all those employees whose employment with the city is governed by the policies, procedures, rules and regulations of the city merit system as established by the city manager and executed by the director of personnel through the central personnel office, including employees of the Pendleton Project. The system of personnel administration for the city is based on merit principles, such as equitable compensation policies, open competition for employment and advancement and equal employment opportunities. Merit service employees shall be employed, promoted, demoted, transferred, disciplined, rewarded and dismissed solely on the basis of merit and fitness and without regard to age, race, color, sex, religion, national origin or because of a physical handicap which will not interfere with the adequate performance of duties. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.4; Ord. No. 1075, 8-11-80)  
Sec. 2-77. - Appointment and duties of deputies to city clerk. 
The council may appoint such deputies to the city clerk as it deems necessary to serve at the pleasure of the city clerk. A deputy city clerk shall, so far as required by the city clerk, discharge and perform any of the duties imposed upon the city clerk, and in the discharge of such duties, shall be under the direction and control of the city clerk. 
(Code 1965, § 2-138; Ord. No. 2252, 1-11-94) 
Charter reference— Appointment and duties of city clerk, § 3.08.  
Sec. 2-78. - Background investigations of applicants for public employment and volunteer positions. 
(a)  In order to determine whether, in the interest of public welfare and safety, an applicant who is offered or accepts employment or a volunteer position with the city, including applicants for employment under contract with any city agency, may be disqualified from such employment or volunteer position by reason of a criminal record, the director of human resources or his designee shall request from the Virginia Central Criminal Record Exchange a criminal record check of each applicant for city employment, each applicant employment under contract with any city agency, and each applicant for city volunteer service whose anticipated duties or responsibilities will involve (i) access to public records or to personal information as defined in Code of Virginia section 2.2-3801, (ii) accountability for public funds, (iii) access to city supplies, (iv) entry into secured areas outside of working hours, (v) right of entry onto private property, (vi) child care or assistance to the elderly or disabled, or (vii) service with either the police department, fire department or emergency medical services department. 
(b)  In addition, under the provisions of Code of Virginia sections 19.2-389 and 15.2-1503.1 and in the interest of public welfare and safety, the director of human resources or his designee who shall be located in a government entity shall require any applicant who is offered or accepts employment with the city or who is offered or accepts a volunteer position with either the police department, fire department or emergency medical services department to submit to fingerprinting and to provide personal descriptive information to be forwarded along with the applicant's fingerprints through the Central Criminal Record Exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining criminal history information regarding such applicant. Where authorized under the provisions of Code of Virginia section 15.2-1503.1, the city may require such applicants to pay for the cost of fingerprinting or a criminal records check, or both. 
(c)  Criminal history information considered in accordance with this section shall include outstanding warrants, pending criminal charges and records of conviction. Records of dispositions which occurred while an applicant was considered a juvenile shall not be referenced unless authorized by court order, federal regulation or state statute authorizing such dissemination. 
(d)  Any applicant who is denied employment or rejected as a volunteer on the basis of an investigation summary obtained in accordance with this section may inspect that summary for the purpose of clarifying, explaining or denying the information therein. 
(e)  The criminal history information provided in accordance with this section shall be used solely to assess eligibility for public employment or service, and shall not be disseminated to any person not involved in the assessment process. 
(Code 1965, § 2-56.5; Ord. No. 2341, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 2777, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 2783, 9-2-03)  
Sec. 2-79. - Bonds. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance requiring or otherwise relating to the bonds of city employees and officers or of members or employees of city boards or commissions and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(b)  The city manager shall place all fidelity bonds, for which the city pays the premium, required of any and all officers of the city, whether appointed or elected, as well as such bonds as may be required of city employees. The surety on all such bonds shall be satisfactory to and approved by the city manager, and the forms thereof shall be acceptable to the city attorney. 
(Code 1965, § 2-27) 
Charter reference— Authority of council as to bonds of officers and employees, § 3.05(e).  
Sec. 2-80. - Public disclosure of interest in land to be zoned. 
(a)  In any zoning case which is pending before the planning commission or the council, either or both, in which a member of the planning commission or other paid official, officer, commissioner or employee of the city owns, or has an interest in, the land to be zoned, such member, official, officer, commissioner or employee shall, prior to any hearing on the matter or at such hearing, make a full public disclosure of the exact nature of his interest. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, "owning" or "having an interest in" means ownership by such member, official, officer, commissioner or employee or any member of his immediate household or ownership by way of partnership or as holder of stock in a corporation owning such land, directly or indirectly, by such member, official, officer, commissioner or employee or member of his immediate household, or that such member, official, officer, commissioner or employee or any such member of his immediate household may earn a commission, fee, profit or other compensation from, or as a result of, a contract of sale or transfer of the land which is subject to or conditioned upon the zoning case. 
(c)  To facilitate compliance with this section, the application for a zoning case shall contain a question: "Does an official or employee of the City of Virginia Beach have an interest in the subject land? If the answer is yes, please indicate the name of the official or employee and the nature of the interest." 
(Code 1965, § 2-28) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, App. A. 
State Law reference— Virginia Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-347 et seq.  
Sec. 2-81. - Mandatory retirement age. 
Unless otherwise provided by state or federal statute, no firefighter or law enforcement officer, as defined by the Federal Age Discrimination in Employment Amendments of 1986, including sworn members of the Sheriff's Office, shall be employed after the end of the month in which he or she attains age sixty-five (65). Sworn members of the Sheriff's Office who are age sixty-three (63) or older shall have three years from the effective date of this ordinance or until the end of the month in which he or she attains the age of seventy (70) whichever comes first to retire. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.9; Ord. No. 1384, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 1387, 8-1-83; Ord. No. 1697, 5-11-87; Ord. No. 3400, 4-7-15; Ord. No. 3597, 8-6-19) 
Cross reference— Deferred compensation plan, § 2-121; department of fire protection, § 12-21 et seq.; police, Ch. 27.  
Sec. 2-82. - Social Security. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect Ordinance No. 16, enacted January 1, 1963, authorizing and directing the city manager to execute an agreement that will secure coverage of eligible employees of the city under the Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance System, as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, and such ordinance is hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
State Law reference— Social Security for city employees, Code of Virginia, § 51-111.1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-83. - Holidays. 
(a)  The following days are designated as full-paid "holidays" and shall be so observed by the city. All permanent and probational merit employees shall be covered by the provisions of this section. 
(1)  The first day of January (New Year's Day). 
(2)  The third Monday in January (Martin Luther King Day). 
(3)  The last Monday of May (Memorial Day). 
(4)  The fourth day of July (Independence Day). 
(5)  The first Monday of September (Labor Day). 
(6)  The eleventh day of November (Veterans Day). 
(7)  The fourth Thursday of November (Thanksgiving Day). 
(8)  The day after the fourth Thursday of November (the day after Thanksgiving Day). 
(9)  The twenty-fourth day of December (Christmas Eve). 
(10)  The twenty-fifth day of December (Christmas Day). 
(11)  One-half of a regular workday on the twenty-fourth day of December (Christmas Eve), except when Christmas Eve falls on a Friday, Saturday or Sunday. 
(12)  Three (3) flexible personal holidays (to be taken as a personal, national, religious or other holiday the city does not observe). Part-time employees shall not be eligible for these holidays. 
If any holiday enumerated in subsections (1) through (10) above falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the city manager shall determine when the holiday will be observed and shall so notify affected employees and the public at least thirty (30) days prior to the holiday. If no such notice is provided by the city manager, then when any holiday enumerated in subsections (1) through (10) above falls on a Saturday, the Friday next preceding such a day shall be a holiday, and when any holiday enumerated in subsections (1) through (10) above falls on a Sunday, the Monday next following such day shall be a holiday. 
(b)  In addition to the holidays prescribed in subsection (a) above, any other day so declared by the mayor shall be a holiday. 
(c)  Part-time employees shall receive time off with pay for the proportionate part of the day which would have normally been worked. 
(d)  Employees who have been in a nonpay status for more than fourteen (14) days prior to any holiday shall not be eligible for compensation for holidays subsections (1) through (11) listed in paragraph (a) above. 
(Code 1965, § 2-1; Ord. No. 1384, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 1567, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 1593, 4-14-86; Ord. No. 2446, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 2532, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2694, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 2870, 5-10-05; Ord. No. 3558, § 1, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18; Ord. No. 3559, § 1, 5-15-18, eff. 1-1-19)  
Sec. 2-83.1. - Court leave. 
All full-time merit employees of the city shall be eligible to receive paid court leave when summoned to serve as witnesses in nonpersonal litigation. Any fees received by such persons for service as witnesses shall be paid to the city, or an equal amount shall be deducted from the employee's pay. 
(Ord. No. 1384, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 1593, 4-14-86; Ord. No. 2852, 11-9-04)  
Sec. 2-83.2. - Bereavement leave. 
(a)  All full-time merit employees of the city shall be eligible to receive leave with pay upon the death of a member of such employee's immediate family not to exceed forty (40) hours for all full-time employees except firefighters assigned to fifty-six (56) hour work weeks who shall be eligible to receive leave not to exceed fifty-six (56) hours. Such leave cannot be saved and used at a later date. 
(b)  All part-time employees shall be granted time off with pay for the portion of their regular weekly work schedule which they normally would work, not to exceed forty (40) hours. 
(Ord. No. 3491, 3-21-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3491, adopted March 21, 2017, amended section 2-83.2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former section 2-83.2, pertained to funeral leave. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 2-83.3. - Jury leave. 
All full-time merit employees of the city shall be eligible to receive paid jury leave when summoned to serve as jurors. The conditions upon which the city requires payment received by such employees for jury service will be provided in an administrative policy promulgated by the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 1593, 4-14-86; Ord. No. 2852, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 3386, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 2-84. - Annual and personal leave—Schedule of earning. 
All full-time City of Virginia Beach employees hired before January 1, 2014 who have not opted to participate in the hybrid retirement plan, all employees eligible to receive enhanced retirement benefits in hazardous duty positions all employees hired on or after January 1, 2014 with Virginia Retirement System creditable service, and all part-time employees hired prior to July 1, 1996, shall earn annual leave and, with supervisory approval, may utilize annual leave upon accrual as follows: 
(1)  All full-time employees or appointees who work forty (40) or more hours per workweek, excluding firefighters assigned to fifty-six (56) hours per workweek positions, shall be credited with: 
(a)  Eight (8) hours per month for each month of employment for employees having accrued the equivalent of less than five (5) years of full-time employment. 
(b)  Ten (10) hours per month for each month of employment for employees having accrued the equivalent of five (5) or more years, but less than ten (10) years, of full-time employment. 
(c)  Twelve (12) hours per month for each month of employment for employees having accrued the equivalent of ten (10) or more years, but less than fifteen (15) years, of full-time employment. 
(d)  Fourteen (14) hours per month for each month of employment for employees having accrued the equivalent of fifteen (15) or more years, but less than twenty (20) years, of full-time employment. 
(e)  Sixteen (16) hours per month for each month of employment for employees having accrued the equivalent of twenty (20) or more years of full-time employment. 
(2)  All firefighters assigned to 56-hour-per-workweek positions shall be credited with: 
(a)  Eleven and two-tenths (11.2) hours per month for each month of employment for employees having accrued the equivalent of less than five (5) years of full-time employment. 
(b)  Fourteen (14) hours per month for each month of employment for employees having accrued the equivalent of five (5) or more years, but less than ten (10) years, of full-time employment. 
(c)  Sixteen and eight-tenths (16.8) hours per month for each month of employment for employees having accrued the equivalent of ten (10) or more years, but less than fifteen (15) years, of full-time employment. 
(d)  Nineteen and six-tenths (19.6) hours per month for each month of employment for employees having accrued the equivalent of fifteen (15) or more years, but less than twenty (20) years, of full-time employment. 
(e)  Twenty-two and four-tenths (22.4) hours per month for each month of employment for employees having accrued the equivalent of twenty (20) years or more of full-time employment. 
(3)  Part-time employees employed prior to July 1, 1996, shall continue to be credited with annual leave on a basis proportionate to that awarded full-time employees as set forth in subsection (1) above. Part-time employees employed on or after July 1, 1996, will accrue a maximum of eight (8) hours of personal leave per month prorated based on the number of hours worked; provided, however, that the provisions of subsection (1) above shall not be applicable to part-time employees. Part-time employees who have worked the equivalent of six (6) calendar months may utilize accrued personal leave, with supervisory approval. 
(4)  Records shall be kept within each department of the annual leave accumulated and taken by each employee within such department; and at the end of each calendar month, a leave report shall be submitted to the department of human resources. 
(5)  Under no circumstances shall annual leave be granted in advance of its accrual or paid in lump sum except upon termination of employment. 
(6)  When an employee is in a nonpay status for portions of a calendar month, then annual leave accrual for such month shall be reduced accordingly by the director of human resources to reflect the employee's nonpay status. 
(7)  All full-time City of Virginia Beach employees hired on or after January 1, 2014, with the exception of employees eligible for enhanced retirement benefits in hazardous duty positions and employees hired with Virginia Retirement Service creditable service, and employees hired before January 1, 2014 who have opted to participate in the hybrid retirement plan, shall receive paid time off in lieu of annual leave as set forth in the applicable City of Virginia Beach Human Resources policy. Any and all future changes to paid time off shall be subject to City Council approval. 
(Code 1965, § 2-29; Ord. No. 1014, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1248, 1-18-82; Ord. No. 1384, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 1593, 4-14-86; Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2389, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 2432, 12-3-96; Ord. No. 3307, 10-22-13)  
Sec. 2-85. - Same—Taking not required; limitations on accumulation. 
(a)  No employee shall be required to take annual leave. No employee shall be paid for unused annual leave except upon termination of employment. Upon termination, employees shall be paid straight time for accrued annual leave, and payment shall be processed as expeditiously as possible. No employee shall be allowed to carry more than four hundred (400) hours of accumulated annual leave from one calendar year to the next if the employee works a forty-hour workweek, or five hundred sixty (560) hours of accumulated annual leave from one calendar year to the next if the employee works a fifty-six-hour workweek, nor shall any employee who terminates employment with the city receive pay for more than four hundred (400) hours of accumulated annual leave if the employee works a forty-hour workweek, or five hundred sixty (560) hours of accumulated annual leave if the employee works a fifty-six-hour workweek. 
(b)  Part-time employees hired on or after July 1, 1996, shall not be allowed to carry more than fifty-four (54) hours of accumulated personal leave from one calendar year to the next, nor shall part-time employees receive any monetary payout upon termination of employment for their accumulated personal leave. 
(Code 1965, § 2-30; Ord. No. 1014, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1248, 1-18-82; Ord. No. 2076, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 2389, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 2784, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 3635, 8-18-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2857, adopted Dec. 14, 2004, provides as follows: 
"That the application of City Code Section 2-85 shall hereby be modified during calendar year 2004 to allow Sheriff's Office appointees who are ranked at the level of Major and below and who have accrued, as of December 31, 2004, annual leave in excess of four hundred hours to request and receive payment in lieu of annual leave for those annual leave hours accrued in excess of four hundred hours, at the appointee's regular rate of pay. No appointee shall be required to request payment in lieu of requesting leave. The Sheriff is only authorized to expend funds for these payments from his current appropriations and without additional funds from the City of Virginia Beach."  
Sec. 2-86. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1384, adopted July 11, 1983, repealed § 2-86, concerning the granting, scheduling, and reporting of leave; said section derived from Code 1965, §§ 2-31 and 2-32 and from Ord. No. 1014, adopted Dec. 7, 1979, and Ord. No. 1248, adopted Jan. 18, 1982.  
Sec. 2-87. - Salaries; pay and classification plans generally. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance prescribing salaries of city officers and employees or establishing or relating to compensation or pay plans or classification plans for such officers or employees; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 2-87.1. - Elimination, suspension or reduction of merit increases and/or promotions by city council. 
Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to prohibit city council (i) from adopting ordinances eliminating or suspending the award of merit increases and/or promotions, or reducing the level of salary increase associated with merit increases and/or promotions, or (ii) from authorizing the city manager to eliminate or suspend the award of merit increases and/or promotions, or to reduce the level of salary increase associated with merit increases and/or promotions, at any time and for such period of time as may be specifically set forth by the terms of such ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1247, 1-11-82; Ord. No. 2216, 5-11-93)  
Sec. 2-88. - Changing classification plan; use of classification plan titles required. 
Changes in the classification plan heretofore adopted may hereafter be recommended from time to time by the director of personnel and shall take effect when approved by the city manager. When the specifications of any job are changed or new positions are created, the personnel director shall recommend to the city manager the necessary changes in the classification plan. The class title set forth in the classification plan shall be used to designate such positions in all official records, documents, vouchers and communications, and no person shall be appointed to or employed in a position in the merit service under any class title which has not been recommended by the director of personnel and approved by the city manager as appropriate to the duties to be performed. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.5)  
Sec. 2-89. - Annual review of direct appointees. 
(a)  Between May 15 and July 1 of each year, each member of city council may submit a report to the mayor or the mayor's designee evaluating the performance of city council's direct appointees, namely, the city manager, city attorney, clerk of council, and city real estate assessor, in a form or manner selected by the individual council member. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the direct appointees of council mentioned in subsection (a) above shall have their salaries and benefits determined annually by action of city council. The effective date of such salaries and benefits shall be determined by the council. 
(Ord. No. 1234, 11-9-81; Ord. No. 1266, §§ 1—4, 4-19-82; Ord. No. 1382, 7-5-82; Ord. No. 1589, 2-18-86; Ord. No. 2405, 7-2-96) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1234, adopted Nov. 9, 1981, amended Ch. 2 but did not specify a section number; hence, inclusion as § 2-89 has been at the editor's discretion. Subsequently, also at the editor's discretion, Ord. No. 1266 was treated as amendatory of § 2-89. 
Cross reference— Clerk of council, §§ 2-54—2-60; city manager, §§ 2-151—2-154; city attorney, §§ 2-166—2-171.  
Sec. 2-90. - Restrictions on certain political activities by city employees. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all members of the merit service of the city (as defined by chapter 2, article III, division 1, section 2-76 of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach), the city manager and all department heads and employees appointed by him, officers appointed by the city council, and all staff assistants in those departments (including the city clerk, city attorney, real estate assessor, but excluding members of boards and commissions). 
(b)  The restrictions of this section are designed to protect every employee's right to vote and to keep this right free from interference, solicitation or dictation by any fellow employee, supervisor, official, or candidate. Every employee is encouraged to exercise his or her right to vote and cast his or her ballot in every appropriate election and shall be free to express his or her opinion as to candidates or issues at any time except during working hours or when officially representing the City of Virginia Beach. 
(c)  No person to whom this section applies shall use the status or prestige of his or her position with the city on behalf of or in opposition to any candidate for elective office. 
(d)  No person to whom this section applies shall use any city funds, supplies, or equipment for political purposes, nor shall any such person wear his or her city uniform while participating in any manner in political activities. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall be enforced in concert with applicable city and departmental policies and procedures. 
(f)  Violation of this section shall constitute a cause for dismissal from employment. 
(Ord. No. 1987, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 2798, 1-27-04)  
Sec. 2-91. - Restrictions on post-employment activities of former officers and employees. 
For one (1) year after their terms of office have ended or employment has ceased, city officers and employees may not provide personal and substantial assistance for remuneration of any kind to any party, in connection with any proceeding, application, case, contract, or other particular matter involving the city or an agency thereof, if that matter is one in which the former officer or employee participated personally and substantially as a city officer or employee through decision, approval or recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 2779, 7-8-03)  
Secs. 2-92—2-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION OF BASIC PAY PLAN 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, unless otherwise indicated, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Class: A grouping of jobs having similar duties and responsibilities, requiring similar knowledge, skills and abilities, and demanding similar qualifications so that the jobs may be appropriately titled and described, and the employees performing such jobs may be equally compensated. 
Full-time employee: A city employee who is scheduled to actually work forty (40) hours or more per consecutive workweek. 
Part-time employee: A city employee who is scheduled to actually work less than forty (40) hours per consecutive work week, or a city employee who is scheduled to actually work forty (40) hours per consecutive work week for less than fifty-two (52) consecutive weeks. 
Permanent employee: A full-time city employee who has completed the required probation period as provided in section 2-108. 
Probation employee: A full-time city employee who is has not completed the required probation period as provided in section 2-108. 
Range: The minimum through maximum salary levels assigned to a class. 
(Code 1965, § 2-33; Ord. No. 977, 8-13-79; Ord. No. 1092, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 1384, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 1560, 10-7-85; Ord. No. 1568, 12-9-85; Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2389, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 2748, 5-13-03)  
Sec. 2-102. - General responsibility of director of human resources. 
The director of human resources shall be responsible for administering the application of the city's compensation plans and promulgating rules and regulations to carry out their purposes. Such rules and regulations shall be subject to approval as to legal form by the city attorney and shall be subject to final approval by the city manager. 
(Code 1965, § 2-42; Ord. No. 1092, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-94)  
Sec. 2-103. - Review and amendment of plan; schedule adopted. 
The director of human resources shall regularly review assigned employee pay ranges, and when appropriate, make recommendations for changes to the city manager. The ranges of pay for each class of positions may be adjusted by the city manager upon recommendation by the director of human resources, provided existing budgetary funds are available for any recommended increase. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43; Ord. No. 1092, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 1568, 12-9-85; Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-94)  
Sec. 2-104. - Original employment. 
(a)  Original employment shall be defined as an employee's initial period of continuous employment with the city. The effective date of original employment shall usually be the date on which the employee actually begins work and shall constitute the first day of the probation period. In cases when a city-recognized holiday, weekend, or city manager-designated inclement weather period prohibits the employee from reporting to work on the first day of a pay period, the effective date of original employment shall be appropriately established by the director of human resources. 
(b)  An individual beginning employment for the first time shall be placed at the minimum salary of the pay range established for the class in which employed, or at the lowest salary received by any incumbent(s) in such class, whichever is lower; provided, however, that based on a new employee's prior experience, proficiency, or related criteria, placement may be accelerated up to twenty (20) percent above the minimum salary of the assigned pay range upon written recommendation by the employing authority and approval of the director of human resources. Further acceleration within the assigned pay range may be authorized upon written recommendation by the employing authority, and approval by the director of human resources and the city manager. 
(Code 1965, § 2-34; Ord. No. 1092, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 1568, 12-9-85; Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2389, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 2691, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 2747, 5-13-03)  
Sec. 2-105. - Re-employment. 
(a)  Re-employment shall be defined as the employment of a former permanent or probation city employee following a separation from city employment of more than twelve (12) consecutive months, or the employment of a former part-time city employee, hired on or after July 1, 1996, following a separation from city employment of any length of time. All other conditions of section 2-104 shall apply. 
(b)  All time served in previous employment with the city shall not be counted towards the probation period, annual leave, service awards, or other longevity-based employment conditions or benefits with the exception of: (1) the Virginia Retirement System benefit that is determined in accordance with state law: and (2) determining eligibility for the employer's contribution toward retiree healthcare premiums. Eligible veterans returning to the city should refer to the Military Leave Policy and Procedure. 
(Code 1965, § 2-34; Ord. No. 1092, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 1568, § 12-9-85; Ord. No. 1808, 8-29-88; Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2389, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 3368, 9-16-14)  
Sec. 2-106. - Reinstatement. 
(a)  Reinstatement shall be defined as the employment of a former full-time permanent or probation employee within twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of the employee's separation from the city service. To be eligible for reinstatement the employee must have been in good standing at the time of separation from the city service. Part-time employees separated from city employment for any length of time will follow the reemployment procedure set forth in section 2-105. Furthermore, the appointing department head must be in agreement and a vacancy must exist. The director of human resources shall determine the appropriate anniversary date of the reinstated employee. The department head shall determine the position of the reinstated employee and the director of human resources shall determine the appropriate salary within the range of the position for the reinstated employee. Should the employee return in a lower position, the employee's salary may not exceed the maximum salary of the new position. All time that a former employee is employed with the city prior to separation shall be credited toward the probation period, annual leave, service awards, or other longevity-based employment conditions or benefits subject to necessary adjustments to account for the number of months of separation. Sick leave accrued prior to separation shall be restored to employees who are reinstated to the extent that it is not transferred and used during interim employment with another participating employer. 
(b)  An employee who has been retired because of a job-related disability, although separated more than twelve (12) consecutive months, may be reinstated provided the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The injury or disability which resulted in retirement was incurred in the line of duty; 
(2)  The employee is certified by the city physician or a city-approved physician as being physically able to perform the duties of the position into which the employee is reinstated; 
(3)  The employee meets all other requirements for the position into which he is reinstated; and 
(4)  An opening for employment is available without the establishment of a new position or the reassignment of personnel to accommodate the employee. 
(Code 1965, § 2-34; Ord. No. 1092, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 1549, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 1807, 8-29-88; Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2389, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 2-107. - Conversion from part-time to full-time probation or permanent status for employees hired prior to July 1, 1996. 
(a)  Conversion shall be defined as the change, upon the request of the employing authority, from part-time status to probation or permanent status. Upon such conversion, the director of human resources shall credit towards probation, annual leave, service awards and merit increases, all prior time worked in a part-time status to those employees converted to probation or permanent status. Conversion status will be awarded only to those employees who have rendered acceptable service during their part-time employment. The director of human resources shall not approve any conversion unless there is an established permanent budgeted position. 
(b)  Employees (excluding category employees) converted from full-time temporary or seasonal status to full-time probational or permanent status shall have all prior time worked in a full-time temporary or full-time seasonal status credited towards a variable merit pay increase on the effective date of conversion. Conversion status shall be awarded only to those employees who have rendered acceptable service during their temporary employment. 
(c)  Employees converted from full-time status to part-time status or from part-time status to full-time status shall have prior time worked credited towards probation and annual leave on the effective date of conversion. 
(Ord. No. 1012, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 1527, 4-15-85; Ord. No. 1568, 12-9-85; Ord. No. 1593, 4-14-86; Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2389, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 2-108. - Probation period of employment. 
The probation period for employees other than sworn, non-certified police and fire personnel shall be defined as the initial twelve (12) calendar months of employment following an original employment or re-employment. The probation period for sworn, non-certified police and fire personnel shall be fifteen (15) calendar months of employment following an original employment or re-employment. However, the probation period for all probation employees shall be extended one (1) pay period for every fifteen (15) consecutive calendar days a probation employee is on injury leave, suspension, leave without pay, or sick leave status, or performing transitional work due to a temporary limited duty status resulting from injury or illness. Any salary change which may occur upon completion of the probation period shall not become effective until the first day of the pay period following such completion. 
(Code 1965, § 2-35; Ord. No. 1092, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 1384, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 1718, 7-13-87; Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2389, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 2852, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 2894, 8-2-05; Ord. No. 3205, 9-27-11; Ord. No. 3268, 4-9-13)  
Sec. 2-109. - Changes in pay generally. 
(a)  Administrative increase. An administrative increase shall be defined as an increase within a class that is awarded to an employee based on criteria established by administrative directive. Employees may be recommended for an administrative increase upon submission of a letter of justification by the respective department head to the director of human resources, subject to the approval of the city manager. An administrative increase does not affect the employee's merit date. 
(b)  Merit increase. A merit increase shall be defined as a salary increase within the pay range of the class to which the employee is assigned that is awarded based on job performance in accordance with the city's performance appraisal program. A formal performance appraisal shall be conducted for each employee on the employee's respective merit date and each succeeding merit date thereafter. Merit increases shall become effective on the employee's merit date as provided in section 2-116 and shall only be awarded to full-time permanent employees. Merit increases shall be prorated if a promotion, career progression, or a change in job duties occurs prior to the merit date. The amount of the merit increase shall be prorated based on the length of time assigned to the classification during the appraisal period. 
(c)  Administrative decrease. An administrative decrease shall be defined as a salary reduction within a class as disciplinary action resulting from unsatisfactory job performance or misconduct as defined by the applicable administrative directive. An administrative decrease may be recommended at any time and requires a letter of justification submitted by the appropriate department head. This action is subject to approval by the director of human resources and the city manager. Merit dates are not affected by an administrative decrease. The effective date of all administrative decreases will be the first day of the pay period. 
(d)  Market adjustment. A market adjustment shall be defined as a percentage increase to pay ranges on the city's compensation plans that may be provided to employees whose job classification is assigned to an affected pay range. A market adjustment shall be recommended by the city manager and approved by the city council. Market adjustments are not dependent on an employee's individual performance within a job class. 
(e)  Shift differential. A shift differential shall be authorized whenever an employee compensated in a classification which is not designated by the director of human resources to require shift work is permanently assigned to work a shift which commences on or between the hours of 3:00 p.m. to 3:00 a.m. Such employee shall receive the equivalent of a five (5) percent increase in his or her normal salary rate for all hours worked during such time period only. Employees assigned to regularly scheduled rotating shift as designated by the director of human resources and the city manager, and employees designated by the director of human resources as "exempt" under the Fair Labor Standards Act, work shall be ineligible under the provisions of this subsection. 
(f)  [Bonuses.] The city manager is authorized to establish bonus programs to address a variety of needs, including recruitment, retention, and performance. Bonuses may be provided to employees in accordance with applicable administrative directives and guidelines. A "bonus" shall be defined as a lump-sum payment to an employee that is not part of the base salary. 
(Code 1965, 32-36; Ord. No. 1092, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 1568, 12-9-85; Ord. No. 1569, 12-9-85; Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2389, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 2691, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 2747, 5-13-03)  
Sec. 2-109.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2961, adopted May 14, 2002, repealed § 2-109.1 of the Code, which pertained to merit 
increases and derived from Ord. No. 2075, adopted June 25, 1991; Ord. No. 2128, adopted May 12, 1992; and Ord. No. 2389, adopted May 14, 1996.  
Sec. 2-110. - Promotion. 
(a)  A promotion shall be defined as an advancement by an employee to a classification assigned a higher pay range with more complex job duties and responsibilities. Unless the city manager shall determine otherwise and notifies city council of that determination for a non-competitive promotion in advance of promotion, no employee may be promoted unless there is a position vacancy and the employee is selected pursuant to a competitive selection process that is either restricted to current employees or open to the general public. 
(b)  When an employee is promoted, his or her salary will be increased as follows: For a promotion of one (1) pay range, the employee will receive a salary increase of five (5) percent or the minimum salary of the pay range whichever results in the higher salary; for a promotion of two (2) or more pay ranges, the employee will receive a salary increase of ten (10) percent, or the minimum salary of the pay range , whichever results in the higher salary. The city manager has discretion to adjust the pay increase, or to deny a pay increase, to the incumbent's salary based on the organizational structure, compression factors, level of supervisory responsibilities, position in pay range, internal equity, or other factors impacting the administration of the pay system. The city manager shall not delegate this authority and shall exercise it only on a limited basis. 
(c)  The effective date of all promotions will be the first day of a pay period. An employee who is promoted on his or her merit date and is eligible for a merit increase shall also receive the merit increase based on his or her performance appraisal in addition to the pay increase received for the promotion. 
(Code 1965, § 2-37; Ord. No. 1024, 2-25-80; Ord. No. 1092, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 1568, 12-9-85; Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2389, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 3494, 4-4-17)  
Sec. 2-111. - Demotion. 
(a)  A disciplinary demotion shall be defined as an assignment to a new classification with an assigned pay range lower than the assigned pay range of an employee's present classification as a result of disciplinary action. In cases of disciplinary demotion, the employee's assigned salary will be determined by the director of human resources and the anniversary date will be adjusted to one (1) year from the effective date of the disciplinary demotion. 
(b)  A voluntary demotion shall be defined as an assignment to a new classification with an assigned pay range lower than the assigned pay range of an employee's present classification that is initiated with the concurrence of the employee. In cases of voluntary demotion, the employee's assigned salary will be determined by the director of human resources and the anniversary date will not be adjusted. 
(Code 1965, § 2-37; Ord. No. 1024, 2-25-80; Ord No. 1054, 6-23-80; Ord. No. 1092, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 1384, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 1568, 12-9-85; Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-94)  
Sec. 2-112. - Reclassification. 
(a)  A reclassification shall be defined as a reassignment of the appropriate job title and pay range of an employee whose job responsibilities have been determined by the director of human resources to have evolved to a degree that the present job classification does not accurately reflect the actual duties performed. When such position cannot accurately be described or compensated by assignment to an existing class, the director of human resources shall establish a new class with appropriate range and title, subject to the approval of the city manager. When a position is reclassified, and reassigned to a higher pay range, the incumbent's salary shall be adjusted in the same manner as set forth in section 2-110(b). In cases where an incumbent's salary is below the minimum salary assigned to the new range, the incumbent will be assigned the minimum salary of the new range. 
(b)  Whenever any employment position with the city is reclassified to a different class having a lower pay range, all employees in the reclassified position at the time of reclassification shall, continue to be compensated at the salary received at that time. 
(c)  Compensation to reclassified employees, which is made pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, and which may exceed the highest step of the reclassified range for such employee, shall not be deemed a promotion. 
(Code 1965, § 2-37; Ord. No. 1024, 2-25-80; Ord. No. 1092, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 1384, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 1568, 12-9-85; Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-94)  
Sec. 2-113. - Transfers. 
(a)  A transfer of an employee from one departmental bureau code to another within the same department shall be considered a transfer within the department. If a transfer within the department involves a promotion or demotion, the rules of the appropriate action shall apply. Otherwise, when employees transfer within the department, no change of status or anniversary date shall occur. 
(b)  A transfer of an employee from one departmental bureau code to another shall be considered a transfer between departments. If a transfer between departments involves a promotion or demotion, the rules of the appropriate action shall apply. Otherwise, when employees transfer between departments, no change of status or anniversary date shall occur. 
(Code 1965, § 2-38; Ord. No. 1092, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 1568, 12-9-85)  
Sec. 2-114. - Terminations. 
(a)  Resignation shall be a voluntary separation from employment through written notification to the employing authority initiated by the employee. 
(b)  Completion of temporary employment shall be the separation from employment of a temporary employee who has worked through the last work day the temporary position is available. Employees separating prior to the last work day shall be governed by the appropriate separation action. 
(c)  Retirement shall be the separation of a full-time employee who is scheduled to begin receiving retirement benefits from state and/or federal agencies. 
(d)  Dismissal shall be an involuntary separation from employment initiated by the employing authority as a result of the employee's unsatisfactory work performance or misconduct. 
(e)  Failure to appear shall be a failure by an employee to report to work during the first scheduled work day following employment without previous notification to the employing authority. 
(f)  Administrative termination shall be a nondisciplinary separation from employment initiated by the director of personnel on the basis of an employee's inability to continue to meet the minimum qualifications for the employee's position or separation due to budgetary considerations. 
(g)  Completion of seasonal employment shall be the separation from employment of a seasonal employee who has worked through the last day the seasonal position is available. Employees separating prior to the last work day shall be governed by the appropriate separation action. 
(Code 1965, § 2-39; Ord. No. 1092, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 1384, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 1593, 4-14-86; Ord. No. 3001, 10-2-07)  
Sec. 2-115. - Effective date of actions. 
In all cases except separation, the effective date of action shall be considered the commencement of the employee's regularly scheduled work period on the calendar day indicated. In all cases of separation, the effective date of action shall be considered the end of the employee's regularly scheduled work period, unless specified on the calendar day indicated. 
(Code 1965, § 2-40; Ord. No. 1092, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 2-116. - Merit date. 
The merit date shall be defined as the date on which an employee becomes eligible for a merit increase. The merit date for all probation employees will be adjusted one (1) pay period for every fifteen (15) consecutive calendar days of sick leave, injury leave, suspension, or leave without pay status. The employee's first merit date shall be twelve (12) months from the date assigned to his or her present job class. Thereafter, the merit date shall be one (1) year from the date of the last promotion, career progression, change of job duties, disciplinary demotion, or award or denial of a merit increase. However, where a voluntary demotion is involved, the employee's present merit date will remain unchanged. 
(Code 1965, § 32-41; Ord. No. 1092, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1229, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 1384, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 1568, 12-9-81; Ord. No. 22-72, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2389, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 2-117. - Career progression. 
(a)  A career progression shall be defined as an advancement by an employee to a higher pay within a defined classification series. A career progression does not require a position vacancy. 
(b)  When a career progression action occurs to an employee, the employee's salary will be increased as follows: For a career progression of one (1) pay range, the employee will receive a salary increase of five (5) percent or the minimum salary of the pay range, whichever results in the higher salary; for a career progression of two (2) or more pay ranges, the employee will receive a salary increase of ten (10) percent or the minimum salary of the pay range, whichever results in the higher salary. The city manager has discretion to adjust the pay increase, or to deny a pay increase, to the incumbent's salary based on the organizational structure, compression factors, level of supervisory responsibilities, position in pay range, internal equity, or other factors impacting the administration of the pay system. The city manager shall not delegate this authority and shall exercise it only on a limited basis. 
(c)  The effective date of all career progressions will be the first day of the pay period. An employee who receives a career progression on his or her merit date and is eligible for a merit increase may also receive the merit increase based on the employee's performance appraisal in addition to the pay increase received for the career progression. 
(Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-95; Ord. No. 2389, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 3498, 4-4-17)  
Sec. 2-117.1. - Change in pay range for class. 
A change in pay range for class shall be defined as a reassignment upward or downward of the appropriate pay range assigned to a job classification as recommended by the director of human resources and approved by the city manager. When the pay range of a job classification is raised, all incumbent employees shall have their annual salary adjusted in the same manner as set forth in section 2-110(b). When the pay range of a job classification is lowered, all incumbent employees shall continue to be compensated at the salary received at that time. 
(Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-94)  
Sec. 2-117.2. - Vacancies. 
Filling of a vacancy shall be defined as the selection of an applicant for an authorized position. The filling of a vacancy may be achieved through an original employment, reemployment, reinstatement, transfer, promotion, demotion, or in accordance with the provisions of the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA). The process of the filling of vacancies shall be based on merit principles such as equitable compensation, internal or open competition, and equal employment opportunity. 
(Ord. No. 2272, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 3001, 10-2-07)  
Sec. 2-118. - Educational incentive pay. 
Educational incentive pay is additional compensation paid to sworn permanent police and fire full-time merit employees who have received advanced training which enhances the ability of such personnel to better perform their duties as public safety employees. The city manager is hereby authorized to establish a policy for the award of such additional compensation up to the sum of one thousand eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00) per employee per year; provided, however, that any policy so established shall be subject to appropriation of funds and approved thereof by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1384, 7-11-83)  
Sec. 2-119. - Sick leave. 
(a)  Sick leave shall be defined as leave with pay granted to an employee during periods of personal illness, temporary disability (including maternity), medically required confinement, and medical and dental office appointments. 
(b)  All full-time City of Virginia Beach employees and appointees hired prior to January 1, 2014 who have not opted to participate in the hybrid retirement plan, all employees eligible to receive enhanced retirement benefits in hazardous duty positions, and employees hired on or after January 1, 2014 who have Virginia Retirement System creditable service shall be eligible to receive sick leave based on the following provisions: 
(1)  Sick leave shall be credited at the rate of eight (8) hours per month of employment with the city. A proportionate number of hours shall be awarded for a partial month's work. Employees shall be allowed to accrue an unlimited number of sick leave hours. 
(2)  The department head may at any time require the employee to provide written medical documentation of his illness. 
(3)  All employees eligible to accrue sick leave who were employed prior to the effective date of this section shall begin the sick leave system with a "beginning balance" of available sick leave hours. 
(4)  An employee's "beginning balance" shall be determined by subtracting the hours of sick leave used by such employee prior to the effective date of this section from those hours which would have been earned under the provisions of this section had it been in effect since January 1, 1963. In the event that records which are necessary to compute an employee's "beginning balance" are unavailable, it shall be assumed that each employee earned four (4) hours of sick leave for every month that said record are unavailable. 
(5)  The "beginning balance" of sick leave hours available for use by an employee as of the effective date hereof shall be noted in the employee's personnel file. However, those employees with a negative "beginning balance" shall begin with a balance of zero sick leave hours. 
(6)  Firefighters assigned to fifty-six (56) hour per workweek positions shall be credited with sick leave at a rate of eleven and two-tenths (11.2) hours per month. 
(7)  An employee's sick leave balance shall revert to a zero balance upon the change in number of hours from full-time status to part-time status. 
(8)  Employees in an approved extended sick leave status (more than five (5) working days) on January 1, 1986, shall remain under the provisions of the city's current sick leave policy until their return to work. Upon the employee's return to work, his or her beginning sick leave balance would be calculated as specified in paragraph (4) above. 
(c)  Part-time employees shall not be eligible to receive sick leave. 
(d)  All City of Virginia Beach full-time employees hired on or after January 1, 2014 with the exception of employees eligible for enhanced retirement benefits in hazardous duty positions and who are hired with Virginia Retirement System creditable service, and all full-time employees hired after January 1, 2014, and full-time employees hired before January 1, 2014 who have opted to participate in the hybrid retirement plan, shall not be eligible to receive sick leave and shall receive paid time off in lieu of sick leave as set forth in the applicable City of Virginia Beach Human Resources policy. Any and all future changes to paid time off shall be subject to city council approval. 
(Ord. No. 1524, 4-8-85; Ord. No. 1572, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 1593, 4-14-86; Ord. No. 2432, 12-3-96; Ord. No. 3307, 10-22-13)  
Sec. 2-120. - Sick leave donation program. 
(a)  The City Manager is authorized to establish a sick leave donation program to meet the needs of employees who have insufficient sick and annual leave or Paid Time-Off (PTO) to cover a serious personal or family medical illness or injury that qualifies for and is designated as Family Medical Leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act. Donations of leave may be provided to employees in accordance with established policies and guidelines. 
(b)  A "donation" shall be defined as the voluntary reduction of an employee's sick leave, annual leave or PTO balance to provide another employee with paid leave. 
(Ord. No. 3534, 3-6-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3534, adopted March 6, 2018, amended § 2-120 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 2-120, pertained to extended sick leave. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
DIVISION 2.5. - DEFERRED COMPENSATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1156, §§ 1—3, adopted March 23, 1981, did not expressly amend this Code; hence, inclusion as Div. 2.5, §§ 2-121—2-123, has been at the editor's discretion. The plan itself is not set out herein, but is on file in city offices. 
Cross reference— Mandatory retirement, § 2-81; social security, § 2-82. 
 
Sec. 2-121. - Plan established. 
Pursuant to the Government Employees Deferred Compensation Plan Act, section 51.1-600 et seq. of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, the city hereby adopts and establishes a plan of deferred compensation for its employees dated the twenty-third day of March, 1981. The purpose of the plan shall be to provide for the deferral of compensation to the participants. The plan shall exist in addition to all other retirement, pension or other benefit systems available to the participants, and shall not supersede, make inoperative or reduce any benefits provided by any other retirement, pension or benefit program established by law. 
On behalf of the employer, the city manager is hereby authorized and directed to execute and deliver the plan to the plan administrator. The plan shall contain such terms and amendments as the city council may from time to time approve. 
Those employees participating in the hybrid retirement plan authorized by Code of Virginia § 51.1-169 shall be directed to the Deferred Compensation Plan of the Commonwealth of Virginia in lieu of the plan established above. 
The city council hereby authorizes the adoption of the Commonwealth of Virginia 457 Plan, managed by the Virginia Retirement System, as the City's Deferred Compensation Plan subject to the periodic oversight and direction of the deferred compensation board. 
(Ord. No. 1156, § 1, 3-23-81; Ord. No. 2904, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3001, 10-2-07; Ord. No. 3318, § 1, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3532, 2-6-18)  
Sec. 2-122. - Board—Established. 
There is hereby created a deferred compensation board, consisting of city employees. The city council hereby appoints the director of finance, the director of human resources, the employee relations manager, and the payroll administrator to the board. The city council will appoint one (1) councilmember and one (1) member from the sheriff's office and three (3) members from schools, one of which shall be the schools chief financial officer and one of which shall be a school board member. The city manager may appoint up to three (3) additional board members from the deferred compensation plan participants. The board members appointed by the city manager shall serve terms of three (3) years from the date of appointment. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, all members of the deferred compensation board shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The terms of the members of the deferred compensation board shall not be limited by the restrictions of City Code section 2-3. 
(Ord. No. 1156, § 2, 3-23-81; Ord. No. 2904, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3209, § 1, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 2-123. - Same—Powers. 
The deferred compensation board is hereby granted the power to do all things by way of supervision, administration and implementation of a plan of deferred compensation, including but not limited to the power to contract with private corporations or institutions for service in connection therewith; however, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to authorize the deferred compensation board to act beyond the limits of the plan. Because the city council has authorized the participation in the Commonwealth of Virginia 457 Plan, the supervision of such plan by the board shall be the regular review of the Commonwealth of Virginia 457 Plan to evaluate whether such plan serves the interests of the plan participants. 
The deferred compensation board shall serve as the local finance board for purposes of Other Post-Employment Benefits ("OPEB") for the city. With the consent of the school board, as evidenced by its adopted resolution on November 1, 2011, the deferred compensation board shall serve as the local finance board for OPEB on behalf of schools. In its capacity as local finance board, the deferred compensation board shall administer the OPEB trust or other related investments in accordance with prudent fiduciary standards. 
(Ord. No. 1156, § 3, 3-23-81; Ord. No. 2904, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3209, § 1, 11-22-11; Ord. No. 3532, 2-6-18)  
Secs. 2-124—2-127. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EMPLOYEE GRIEVANCES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Duty of city to establish employee grievance procedure, Code of Virginia, § 15.1.7.1. 
 
Sec. 2-128. - Legislative intent. 
This division is enacted to establish open communications between supervisors and their employees. It is the intent of the city council that the provisions of this division shall provide a method of open communication between supervisor and employee for the resolution of grievances arising from employees' concerns with their working environment. It shall be the objective of the grievance procedure provided for in this division to obtain a complete understanding of employee concerns and to have them settled as soon as possible at the lowest supervisory level commensurate with an equitable settlement. However, there should be no hesitancy in carrying the concern to the highest level of management should the employee feel it is justified. Concerns, even of a minor nature, should be settled. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.1)  
Sec. 2-129. - "Grievance" defined; determination of grievability. 
(a)  A "grievance" shall be defined as a complaint or dispute by an employee relating to his or her employment, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following, and excluding matters listed in subsection (b) below and in section 2-139: 
(1)  Disciplinary actions, including, but not limited to, dismissals, demotions and suspensions; 
(2)  The application of personnel policies, procedures, rules and regulations, including the application of policies, procedures, rules or regulations involving matters referred to in subsection (b)(3) below, where it can be shown that a particular policy, procedure, rule or regulation was misinterpreted or applied inconsistently and that such misinterpretation or inconsistent application affected the employee filing the complaint; 
(3)  Discrimination on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, political affiliation, age, disability, national origin, sex, marital status, pregnancy, childbirth or related medical conditions, sexual orientation, gender identity, or status as a veteran; and 
(4)  Acts of retaliation because the employee has (i) used or otherwise participated in the grievance procedure; (ii) complied with any law of the United States or the Commonwealth of Virginia; (iii) reported any violation of law to a governmental authority; (iv) sought any change in law before the Congress of the United States or the General Assembly; or (v) reported an incidence of fraud, abuse or gross mismanagement. 
(b)  Management retains the exclusive right to manage the affairs and operations of city government. Accordingly, the following complaints are not grievable: 
(1)  The establishment and revision of wages or salaries, position classifications or general benefits; 
(2)  Work activity that (i) is accepted by the employee as a condition of employment; (ii) is part of the job description; or (iii) may be reasonably expected to be a part of the job content; 
(3)  The contents of ordinances, statutes or established personnel policies, procedures, rules and regulations; 
(4)  Failure to promote, except where the employee can show that established promotional policies or procedures were not followed or applied fairly; 
(5)  The methods, means and personnel by which work activities are to be carried on; 
(6)  Termination, layoff, demotion or suspension from duty because of lack of work, reduction in work force or job abolition, except where such action affects an employee who has been reinstated within the previous six (6) months as a result of the final determination of a grievance. Such action shall be upheld upon a showing that: (i) there was a valid business reason for the action and (ii) the employee was notified of such reason in writing prior to the effective date of the action; 
(7)  Administrative termination as defined in section 2-114(f); 
(8)  A non-disciplinary oral counseling; provided the oral counseling has not been reduced to writing and included in the employee's official personnel file maintained by the department of human resources; 
(9)  The measurement and assessment of work activity through a performance feedback/evaluation; except where the employee can show that the feedback/evaluation was arbitrary or capricious; 
(10)  The hiring, promotion, transfer, assignment, and retention of employees within the city; 
(11)  The relief of employees from their duties in the case of an emergency; and 
(12)  Management's rights as outlined in section 2-139. 
(c)  If there is a question of grievability, either the grievant or management must contact the director of human resources immediately, in writing, to request a determination of grievability. The question of grievability may only be raised after the grievance has been placed in writing (step 2) but before a personnel board hearing has been convened. A decision regarding whether or not a matter is grievable shall be made by the city manager or the director of human resources within ten (10) consecutive calendar days of receipt of the request in writing. The decision of the city manager or the director of human resources as to grievability may be appealed to the circuit court pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1507(9), as amended, for a hearing by filing a notice of appeal with the director of human resources within ten (10) consecutive calendar days of the grievant's receipt of the decision. Within ten (10) consecutive calendar days of the filing of the notice of appeal, the city shall transmit to the clerk of the court and the grievant a copy of the decision, a copy of the notice of appeal and the exhibits. A list of any evidence furnished to the court shall also be furnished to the grievant. Failure of the city to transmit the record to the circuit court will not prejudice the grievant's right of appeal. Within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of such records by the clerk, the circuit court, sitting without a jury, will hear the appeal on the record transmitted and the circuit court may accept additional evidence as may be needed to resolve any controversy as to the correctness of the record. The circuit court, in its discretion, may receive such other evidence as the ends of justice require. The court may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the city. The decision of the court, which will be rendered no later than fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of conclusion of the hearing, is final and not appealable. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.1; Ord. No. 1489, 10-8-84; Ord. No. 1615, 7-14-86; Ord. No. 1708, 6-22-87; Ord. No. 2071, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 2598, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 3628, 7-7-20)  
Sec. 2-130. - Time limits. 
The various consecutive calendar day periods referred to in this division shall include all leave, holidays, and unauthorized absence time, as well as normal work days and weekend days for all employees. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.1; Ord. No. 1489, 10-8-84; Ord. No. 2598, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 2-131. - Types of grievances. 
Grievances pertaining to dismissal, demotion and suspension for more than forty (40) consecutive working hours shall be defined as Type A grievances. All other grievances shall be defined as Type B. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.1; Ord. No. 1489, 10-8-84)  
Sec. 2-132. - Eligibility to utilize grievance procedure. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), all city employees who are members of the merit service, as defined in section 2-76, and all employees of the constitutional offices (excluding elected officials) by written consent of the elected official, shall be eligible to utilize all phases of the grievance procedure set forth herein. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), employees (excluding elected officials) who are employed on a temporary, probational, or seasonal basis shall be eligible to utilize such procedure only up to and including step 3 (department director); provided, however, that at no time shall an employee employed on a temporary, probational, or seasonal basis be allowed to appeal a dismissal. For the purpose of this subsection, a probational employee shall be defined as provided in section 2-108. 
(c)  All permanent police officers shall be given written notification of the right to proceed under either this grievance procedure or the Law-Enforcement Officer's Procedural Guarantees set forth in Code of Virginia, § 9.1-500 et seq., as amended, but not both. 
(d)  In addition to the provisions of the grievance procedure, all permanent firefighters and emergency medical technicians subjected to an interrogation which could lead to dismissal, demotion or suspension for punitive reasons shall be governed by the Firefighter's and Emergency Medical Technician's Procedural Guarantees, set forth in Code of Virginia, § 9.1-300 et seq., as amended. 
(Code 1965, § 2.43.1; Ord. No. 1489, 10-8-84; Ord. No. 1593, 4-14-86; Ord. No. 1615, 7-14-86; Ord. No. 1708, 6-22-87; Ord. No. 2071, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 2598, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 2852, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 3001, 10-2-07)  
Sec. 2-133. - General grievance procedure—Type A grievances. 
Type A grievances may be appealed directly to the personnel board at the discretion of the grievant. If an employee does not appeal a Type A grievance directly to the personnel board, the procedure for Type B grievances, which is set forth in section 2-134, shall be followed. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.2; Ord. No. 1489, 10-8-84; Ord. No. 1615, 7-14-86; Ord. No. 2071, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 2598, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 2-134. - Same—Type B grievances. 
(a)  The procedure for Type B grievances includes the following steps: 
(1)  Step 1. The grievant shall discuss the grievance with his or her immediate supervisor in person within twenty (20) consecutive calendar days from the date of its occurrence or knowledge of its occurrence. The immediate supervisor must verbally reply to the grievant within ten (10) consecutive calendar days of the date of this discussion. 
(2)  Step 2. If the grievance is not settled in step 1, the grievant may, within ten (10) consecutive calendar days of the immediate supervisor's verbal reply, submit the grievance in writing to the same supervisor attached to the "employee grievance form" available from the department of human resources or any city-owned or leased information bulletin board and on the city intranet. The immediate supervisor must reply in writing to the grievant and attach the response to the "employee grievance form" within ten (10) consecutive calendar days of receipt of the written grievance. 
(3)  Step 3. If the grievance is not settled in step 2, the grievant may appeal the immediate supervisor's decision by forwarding the "employee grievance form" to the department director within ten (10) consecutive calendar days of the immediate supervisor's response. The department director or his or her designee must meet with the grievant to discuss the grievance with the employee and must reply in writing to the grievant and attach the response to the "employee grievance form" within ten (10) consecutive calendar days of the receipt of the written grievance. If the immediate supervisor is the department director, steps 2 and 3 are consolidated into a single step. 
(4)  Step 4. 
(i)  If the grievance is not settled in step 3, the grievant may appeal the decision to the personnel board. The decisions of the personnel board shall be final and binding and shall be consistent with law and written policy. The original "employee grievance form," and all original documents attached to the form must be sent to the department of human resources/employee relations within ten (10) consecutive calendar days of the department director's response. Upon notification of the grievant's intent to appeal, the director of human resources must arrange the time and place of the hearing and notify all affected parties of such time and place within fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days. The personnel board hearing shall be scheduled, if possible, within thirty (30) consecutive calendar days from the end of the aforementioned fourteen-consecutive-day period. Either the grievant or management may petition the circuit court for an order requiring implementation of the decision of the personnel board. 
(ii)  A member of the personnel board shall be disqualified from hearing a grievance if (i) he or she has direct involvement with the grievance being heard or with the complaint or dispute giving rise to the grievance; (ii) he or she is in a direct line of supervision of the grievant or is one of the following relatives of a participant in the grievance process or of a participant's spouse: spouse, parent, child, descendants of a child, sibling, niece, nephew or first cousin; or, (iii) he or she is an attorney having direct involvement with the subject matter of the grievance, or is a partner, associate, employee or co-employee of such an attorney. 
(b)  With the exception of step 3, the only persons who may normally be present in the management steps of the procedure are the grievant, the appropriate management representative at the level of which the grievance is being heard, and appropriate witnesses for each side. Witnesses shall only be present while actually providing testimony. At step 3, the grievant, at his or her option, may have a representative of his or her choice. If the grievant is represented by legal counsel, the city may also be represented by legal counsel. 
(c)  The time frames set forth herein may be extended by mutual agreement of the city and the grievant. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, "immediate supervisor" shall mean the person who was responsible for providing immediate supervision to the employee at the time the discipline or other action being grieved was imposed. 
(e)  If, at any step of the grievance procedure, a reduction in the level of discipline originally imposed is offered to, but rejected by, the grievant, the grievance shall proceed to the next step of the procedure with the original level of discipline in place. Any offer to reduce the discipline or otherwise reach a resolution shall not be considered at the next step of appeal. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.2; Ord. No. 1489, 10-8-84; Ord. No. 1615, 7-14-86; Ord. No. 2071, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 2598, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 3201, 9-13-11)  
Sec. 2-135. - Assistance for employees who cannot read or write, and for disabled employees. 
Any employee who is not able to read or write, or who has a disability and needs a reasonable accommodation in order to utilize the grievance procedure, shall be referred by his or her immediate supervisor to the department of human resources for assistance. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.2; Ord. No. 2598, 7-11-2000)  
Sec. 2-136. - Legal representation. 
The grievant may, at any step beyond step 2 of this procedure, be accompanied or represented by a third party who may be legal counsel. Representation of the grievant shall be at the expense of the grievant. Management may likewise be represented by legal counsel at any step beyond step 2 of this procedure; provided, however, that management may not be represented by legal counsel at (i) step 3 of this procedure unless the grievant is also represented by legal counsel, or (ii) step 4 of this procedure unless the grievant is represented by a third party. The city attorney or a designated alternate attorney may not simultaneously provide counsel to the personnel board while serving management on the same grievance. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.2; Ord. No. 1489, 10-8-84; Ord. No. 1615, 7-14-86; Ord. No. 2071, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 2598, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 2623, 3-13-01)  
Sec. 2-137. - Failure to meet time limits; waiving steps in grievance procedure; mandatory election between open door policy and grievance procedure. 
(a)  Should there be extenuating circumstances, the director of human resources may alter the time limits set forth herein. After the initial filing of a written grievance, failure of either party to comply with all substantial procedural requirements of the procedure set forth in this division without just cause will result in a decision in favor of the other party on any grievable issue, provided the party not in compliance fails to correct the noncompliance within five (5) consecutive working days of receipt of written notification from the director of human resources of the compliance violation. The initial written notification of noncompliance by the grievant or the department shall be made to the director of human resources, who shall notify the other party. Failure of either party without just cause to comply with all substantial procedural requirements at the personnel board hearing shall result in a decision in favor of the other party. 
(b)  Compliance determinations shall be subject to judicial review by filing a petition with the circuit court within thirty (30) days of the date of such a determination. 
(c)  The waiving of steps within the grievance procedure is prohibited. Should a case of grievability be appealed to the circuit court for review, a determination of grievability by the court does not allow the waiving of the remaining steps in the grievance procedure. 
(d)  A grievant may not pursue both the open door policy and grievance procedure on the same issue; he or she must elect which of the two procedures he or she will use. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.2; Ord. No. 1489, 10-8-84; Ord. No. 2071, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 2598, 7-11-2000)  
Sec. 2-138. - Freedom from reprisal. 
An employee filing a grievance or participating in another employee's grievance shall have the right to follow all the steps of the grievance procedure with complete freedom from reprisal. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.2; Ord. No. 1489, 10-9-84)  
Sec. 2-139. - Management rights. 
Nothing in this division is intended to circumscribe or modify the existing management rights to do the following: 
(1)  Direct the work of its employees. 
(2)  Hire, promote, transfer, assign and retain employees' positions within the agency (provided such action is not taken for disciplinary purposes). 
(3)  Maintain the efficiency of governmental operations. 
(4)  Relieve employees from duties because of lack of work. 
(5)  Take actions as may be necessary to carry out the duties of the agency in emergencies. 
(6)  Determine the methods, means and personnel by which operations are to be carried out. 
(Code 1965, § 2-43.2; Ord. No. 1489, 10-8-84; Ord. No. 1615, 7-14-86)  
Sec. 2-140. - Mediation. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, at any time during this procedure, a grievance may, at the request of either the grievant or the grievant's department director, and with the concurrence of the other party, be referred to mediation. 
(b)  If a grievance referred to mediation is resolved to the satisfaction of both the grievant and his or her department director, such resolution shall be binding on both parties, and the grievant must sign a statement agreeing to waive his or her right to further pursue this procedure. 
(c)  If a grievance referred to mediation is not resolved to the satisfaction of both the grievant and his or her department director, the grievance shall be returned to this procedure at whatever step it had reached at the time it was referred to mediation. 
(d)  This procedure may be held in abeyance for up to ninety (90) days from the date a grievance is referred to mediation. 
(Ord. No. 2598, 7-11-2000)  
Secs. 2-141—2-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CITY MANAGER[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— City manager, Ch. 4. 
Cross reference— Review of city attorney, § 2-89. 
 
Sec. 2-151. - Office of the city manager. 
There shall be in the office of the city manager four deputy city managers, assistants to the city manager, and support staff, whose duties shall be such as may be prescribed by the city manager. 
The deputy city managers and assistants to the city manager shall be appointed by the city manager and may be removed by the city manager at any time. 
(Code 1965, § 2-123; Ord. No. 2065, 6-4-91; Ord. No. 2543, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 3485, 2-21-17)  
Sec. 2-151.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2065, adopted June 4, 1991, deleted former § 2-151.1, relative to the deputy city manager and assistant city managers, which derived from Ord. No. 1495, adopted Nov. 5, 1984.  
Sec. 2-152. - Acting manager. 
The city manager shall establish a chain of command which may be amended from time to time. In the absence or temporary incapacity of the city manager, individuals identified in the chain of command shall be empowered, authorized and directed to act in his stead and any such act shall have the same force and effect as if performed by the city manager. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2-123.1, 2-124; Ord. No. 1493, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 2065, 6-4-91)  
Sec. 2-153. - Authority as to reproduction of city records and documents and destruction of originals. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to provide, upon written request of the head of any city department, for the photographing or microphotographing or recording by any other process which accurately reproduces or forms a durable medium for reproducing the original of all or any part of the papers, records, documents or other material kept by or in charge of any department, agency or institution of the city. 
(b)  Whenever photographs or micro- photographs have been made and put in conveniently accessible files, and provision has been made by the department, agency or institution of the city for preserving, examining and using same, the city manager may notify the state or city librarian that the city intends to destroy the records and papers so photographed or microphotographed, or any part thereof. If, within sixty (60) days, the state or city librarian has not notified the city manager that the original of such records should be retained, the city manager may order them destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 982, 8-20-79) 
State Law reference— Virginia Public Records Act, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-76 et seq.  
Sec. 2-154. - Execution of contracts. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, Charter or ordinance, the city manager or his duly authorized designee shall be authorized to make and execute, during the ordinary course of business, within the limitations of the appropriation ordinance for any year, all contracts on behalf of the city and such other contracts as may be authorized by the city council. Such contracts shall be approved as to availability of funds by the director of finance and as to form by the city attorney and, where necessary, attested by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2065, 6-4-91)  
Secs. 2-155—2-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CITY ATTORNEY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Department of law created, § 7.01; city attorney, Ch. 9. 
Cross reference— Review of city attorney, § 2-89. 
 
Sec. 2-166. - Deputies and assistants; special counsel. 
The city council may, from time to time, upon recommendation of the city attorney, appoint such deputy and assistant city attorneys as it may deem necessary to serve at the pleasure of the city attorney. The city attorney shall be authorized to appoint a legal office administrator who shall serve at the pleasure of the city attorney. The deputy and assistant city attorneys shall, so far as required by the city attorney, discharge and perform any of the duties of the city attorney and, in the discharge of such duties, shall be under the direction and control of the city attorney. They shall give the whole of their time to the discharge of their duties as deputy and assistant city attorneys. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the salaries and benefits of the individual deputy city attorneys shall be determined annually by the council by adoption of the budget; provided, however, that such salaries and benefits may be subsequently adjusted at any time upon recommendation of the city attorney and approval of council. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the city attorney shall, after consultation with city council, have sole discretion and control over all aspects of the administration of the basic pay plan and classification of the assistant city attorneys. The city attorney may also, from time to time, appoint special counsel who shall perform such legal duties as may be required, and at such compensation as may be agreed upon. 
(Code 1965, § 2-47; Ord. No. 1526, 4-8-85) 
Cross reference— Appointment of special assistants to city attorney for enforcement of liens for real estate taxes, § 35-38.  
Sec. 2-167. - General powers and duties. 
The city attorney shall have the management, charge and control of all law business of the city and, when required, shall furnish written or verbal opinions upon any subject involving questions of law submitted to him by the council, city manager or any department, board, committee or agency of the city. He shall perform such other duties as are or may be required of him by any ordinance or resolution of the council. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2-44, 2-46) 
Charter reference— City attorney as head of department of law, § 9.02.  
Sec. 2-168. - Duty to draft legal instruments. 
It shall be the duty of the city attorney to draft all bonds, deeds, obligations, contracts, leases, conveyances, agreements or other legal instruments of whatever nature which may be required of him by any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city or order of the council or any committee thereof, or which may be required by any person contracting with the city in its corporate capacity and which, by law, usage or agreement, the drawing of which is to be at the city's expense. 
(Code 1965, § 2-45)  
Sec. 2-169. - Duties with respect to litigation and prosecution of ordinance violations. 
It shall be the duty of the city attorney to commence and prosecute all actions and suits to be brought by the city that he deems necessary or proper to protect the interests of the city before any tribunal in the city or state, whether in law or in equity; to appear and defend and advocate the rights and interests of the city, or any of the officers thereof, in any suit or prosecution for any act in the discharge of their official duties, wherein any estate, right, privilege, ordinance or act of the city government may be brought in question; and to prosecute violations of the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-46)  
Sec. 2-170. - Authority to settle litigation. 
The city attorney is authorized to settle litigation against the city, its governing body, or any member thereof, its appointees and employees, when such proceeding is initiated against it or them by virtue of any actions in furtherance of their official duties. Any settlement, cost or expense of such proceeding or judgment awarded against the city, its governing body, or any member thereof, its appointees or employees, shall be taken from the self-insurance fund and other funds as provided by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1112, 10-27-80)  
Sec. 2-171. - Settlement of city claims for property damage or loss. 
The city attorney is hereby authorized to settle, in such manner as he may deem proper, any claims referred to him by the director of finance that the city may have, from time to time, for property damage or other loss, where such damage or loss does not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). The director of finance shall credit any sums so received by the city to the proper account. 
(Code 1965, § 2-47.1).  
Secs. 2-172—2-185. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference— Financial administration, Ch. 8. 
Cross reference— License Code, Ch. 18; taxation, Ch. 35. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-186. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of July and end on the thirtieth day of June of each year. 
(Code 1965, § 2-103) 
Charter reference— Fiscal year, § 5.01. 
State Law reference— Uniform fiscal year for cities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-13-2.  
Sec. 2-186.1. - Preparation of budget. 
In the preparation of the city's annual budget, the city manager shall prepare a "base budget" using, among other sources of revenue, estimated real estate tax revenues, which shall be no more than the previous fiscal year's real estate tax levies, plus real estate revenues resulting from new development. The base budget shall then be supplemented by adding any statutory requirements which must be funded. The city manager should then propose prioritized, incremental optional items that reflect increased costs of existing services, higher levels of programs and services, or new initiatives; provided, however, that each adjustment, service level, or new initiative shall clearly delineate the additional programs or services to be provided, the associated cost, recommended funding source and the required increased incremental real estate tax rate, if required, to fund each item. 
(Ord. No. 2865, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 2898, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 2-187. - Passage of ordinances or resolutions appropriating money, imposing taxes or authorizing borrowing of money. 
No ordinance or resolution appropriating money exceeding the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), imposing taxes or authorizing the borrowing of money shall be passed, except by a recorded affirmative vote of a majority of all members elected to the council. 
(Code 1965, § 2-104; Ord. No. 2101, 9-3-91) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1—812, 15.1-819.  
Sec. 2-187.1. - Budget amendment procedures. 
(a)  The city council may amend the budget from time to time to increase the aggregate amount to be appropriated during the current fiscal year as shown in the currently adopted budget; provided, however, that any such amendment which exceeds one (1) percent of the total revenue shown in the currently adopted budget must be accomplished by publishing a notice of a meeting and a public hearing once in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting date. 
(b)  The notice shall state the city's intent to amend the budget and include a brief synopsis of the proposed budget amendment. Any such amendment may be adopted at the advertised meeting, after first providing a public hearing during such meeting on the proposed budget amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1389, 8-1-83; Ord. No. 2324, 5-9-95) 
Cross reference— Call and notice of special meetings, § 2-21; council procedures generally, § 2-31 et seq.  
Sec. 2-188. - Appropriation prerequisite to withdrawal of money or incurring obligation for expenditure. 
No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation ordinance or legally enacted supplement thereto or subsequent resolution enacted by the council. 
(Code 1965, § 2-105)  
Sec. 2-189. - Execution of warrants; conversion of warrant into negotiable check. 
The director of finance shall countersign each warrant drawn on the city treasury for the expenditure of public money, excepting warrants drawn on school funds, and his countersignature shall constitute a certificate that such warrant has been issued in accordance with the applicable requirements of this article. The warrant may be converted into a negotiable check when the name of the bank upon which the funds stated in the warrant are drawn, or by which the check is to be paid, is designated upon its face and is signed by the treasurer of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-106)  
Sec. 2-190. - Deduction of taxes and licenses due when paying warrant. 
In the payment of any warrants lawfully drawn on the account of allowances made against the city, upon written notification from the treasurer or commissioner of revenue, the director of finance shall, in paying such warrants, first deduct all such taxes and licenses due by the party in whose favor the warrant is drawn. If such warrant is insufficient to pay the entire amount due, then the treasurer shall credit the tax or license bill by the amount of the warrant. 
(Code 1965, § 2-106) 
Cross reference— License code, Ch. 18; taxation, Ch. 35.  
Sec. 2-191. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3051, adopted September 9, 2008, repealed § 2-191, which pertained to issuance of duplicate checks and derived from § 2-106.1 of the 1965 Code.  
Sec. 2-192. - Use of mechanical check signer. 
Checks of the city for the withdrawal of funds may be executed in its name and on its behalf by affixing to such checks the signatures of the treasurer of the city and the director of finance by means of a mechanical check signer. Any bank designated as a city depository is hereby authorized and directed to honor such checks in the same manner as if the same were signed on behalf of the city by such officers in the usual way. 
(Code 1965, § 2-107)  
Sec. 2-193. - Funds received under Title I of Housing and Community Development Act of 1974. 
(a)  The director of finance shall credit and the city treasurer shall deposit any federal funds received by the city for loan and grant purposes under Title I (Community Development) of the United States Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, in a special fund in a depository which shall be established separate and apart from any other funds, general or special. 
(b)  The director of finance and the city treasurer are authorized to execute warrants to disburse the funds referred to in subsection (a) above for necessary purposes. 
(c)  The funds referred to in subsection (a) above are deemed federal funds pursuant to section 15.2-956 of the Code of Virginia, and shall not be construed as part of the revenue of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-107.1; Ord. No. 3069, 3-10-09)  
Sec. 2-194. - Petty cash and change fund advances. 
The finance director is authorized and directed to issue petty cash and change fund advances not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to the city treasurer and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per petty cash or change fund to other departments and agencies for use in making change and purchasing goods and services that are in urgent need. The finance director may approve petty cash or change funds greater than these amounts as required by business needs in accordance with prudent financial practices. Each person receiving or administering any such fund shall make an accounting thereof through either periodic audit or submission to the finance director of reimbursement vouchers containing receipts. The finance director is directed to develop policies and procedures regarding the administration of petty cash and change funds in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(Ord. No. 1586, 2-10-86; Ord. No. 2893, 8-2-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1586, adopted Feb. 10, 1986, added a section to Ch. 2 which the editor has numbered as § 2-194.  
Sec. 2-195. - Preparation of capital improvement program. 
Each department, board, commission, office or agency supported in whole or in part by funding by the city shall file at such a time and in such a manner as the city manager may prescribe estimates of revenues and expenditures for the capital improvement program. The city manager shall prepare and submit to the city council at least ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of each budget year, a capital improvement program, which shall include the city manager's recommendations, and estimates of the cost of proposed capital improvements and the means of financing them to be undertaken in a period not to exceed six (6) years. 
(Ord. No. 1852, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 2255, 1-25-94)  
Sec. 2-196. - Introduction of capital budget. 
At the same time that the city manager submits the capital improvement program, the city manager shall introduce and recommend to the council an appropriation ordinance, based upon the first fiscal year of the capital improvement program, which shall be the capital budget. The city manager shall also introduce at that same time any ordinance levying a new tax or altering the rate on an existing tax and introduce any ordinance for the authorization of bonds or any other ordinances required for balancing the capital budget. In no event shall the expenditures recommended by the city manager in the capital budget exceed the receipts estimated. 
(Ord. No. 1852, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 2255, 1-25-94) 
Cross reference— Compilation of budget estimates, § 2-207.  
Sec. 2-197. - Capital improvement program and capital budget—Public hearing. 
The council shall hold a public hearing on the capital improvement program and the capital budget as submitted, at which time any citizen of the city shall have the right to attend and state his views thereon. The hearing shall be held at least seven (7) days prior to the approval of the capital budget and capital improvement program. 
The council shall cause a brief synopsis of the capital improvement program and a descriptive notice of the proposed capital budget to be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least seven (7) days prior to the date set for such hearing. 
The publication shall include a statement that a copy of the full text of the capital improvement program and capital budget are on file and available for public inspection at the city clerk's office and the city manager's office. 
The publication and notice shall be for informative and fiscal planning purposes only. The council may recess or adjourn from day to day or time to time during such hearing or hearings. After the public hearing, the council may make such changes in the capital improvement program and capital budget as it may determine. 
(Ord. No. 1852, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 2255, 1-25-94)  
Sec. 2-198. - Same—Adoption. 
(a)  The capital improvement program and capital budget shall be adopted by the vote of at least a majority of all of the members of the council no later than thirty (30) days prior to the end of the current fiscal year. In no event shall the council adopt a capital budget in which the estimated expenditures exceed receipts, unless at the same time it adopts measures to provide additional revenue estimated to be sufficient to make up the difference. 
(b)  The capital improvement program and capital budget shall become effective upon the first day of the fiscal year. However, in no case shall preparation, publication and approval of the capital improvement program be deemed to be an appropriation. 
(Ord. No. 1852, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 2255, 1-25-94)  
Sec. 2-199. - Same—Amendments. 
(a)  The city council may amend the capital improvement program and capital budget appropriation ordinance from time to time to increase the aggregate amounts thereof, provide for supplemental appropriations from available revenue, add or delete projects and transfer funds between projects. 
(b)  Supplemental appropriations to the capital budget shall be adopted by the vote of at least a majority of all of the members of council. However, any such supplemental appropriation which exceeds one (1) percent of the total revenue shown in the approved capital budget may only be accomplished after providing a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Notice shall be given by publishing a notice of a meeting and public hearing once in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least seven (7) days prior to such public hearing and meeting. The notice shall state the council's intent to amend and include a brief synopsis of the proposed amendment. 
(c)  Subject to any applicable restrictions of law or restrictions of any bonds or bond issue, amendments which do not require supplemental appropriations, but which involve additions or deletions of projects or in the case of the capital improvement program an increase in the aggregate amount thereof, may be made without requirement of a public hearing by a majority of all of the members of city council at the same meeting at which such amendment is introduced. 
(Ord. No. 1852, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 2255, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 2324, 5-9-95)  
Secs. 2-200—2-205. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference— Director of finance, § 8.02. 
 
Sec. 2-206. - General powers and duties. 
The director of finance shall be the administrative head of the department of finance and as such shall have charge of the financial affairs of the city, including such powers and duties as may be assigned to the director of finance, or department of finance, by order or resolution of the council or orders of the city manager not inconsistent with the Constitution and general laws of the state. 
(Code 1965, § 2-108) 
Charter reference— Department of finance created, § 7.01; composition of department of finance, § 8.01.  
Sec. 2-207. - Compilation of budget estimates. 
The director of finance shall cooperate with the city manager in compiling estimates for the current expense and capital budgets. 
(Code 1965, § 2-109) 
Charter reference— Budget, Ch. 5.  
Sec. 2-208. - Approval and supervision of disbursement of expenditures. 
(a)  The director of finance shall approve all proposed expenditures and, unless he shall certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriated and available funds, no expenditures shall be made. 
(b)  The director of finance shall supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded. 
(c)  The director of finance shall not expend any funds for the construction of, or additions to capital facilities without the project having been authorized by ordinance of the city council. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2-110, 2-114; Ord. No. 1246, 1-11-82; 1337, 10-25-82; Ord. No. 1340, 11-8-82)  
Sec. 2-208.1. - Reasonable charges for the reissuance of paperwork and checks. 
(a)  The director of finance or designee shall impose the following fees for additional services to recover the reasonable administrated costs associated with each activity: 
(1)  Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the reissuance of a check that was lost and requires reissuance not due to the fault of the city; 
(2)  Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the holding of a check for pick-up in lieu of mailing; 
(3)  Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the reissuance of an IRS Form 1099 that was lost and requires reissuance not due to the fault of the city. 
(b)  The charges provided in subsection (a) shall not apply to the reissuance or pick-up of checks issued as part of the city's employee payroll activities. 
(c)  The director of finance is hereby authorized to waive the charge imposed by this section, provided such waiver shall be pursuant to a written policy approved by the director of finance and made available on the city's website. 
(Ord. No. 3177, 5-10-11; Ord. No. 3383, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 2-209. - Accounts and accounting. 
The director of finance shall maintain a general accounting system in conformity with accepted principles of governmental accounting for the city government and each of its offices, departments and agencies; keep books for, and exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department and agency; and keep separate accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the appropriation ordinance, each of which accounts shall show the amount of appropriation, the amounts paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance. Additional accounts for classification of expenditures shall be maintained to provide adequate information for budgetary purposes. 
(Code 1965, § 2-111)  
Sec. 2-210. - Periodic financial statements. 
The director of finance shall submit to the city manager and the council, at least monthly, or more frequently if required, financial statements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-112)  
Sec. 2-211. - Annual financial statement and report. 
The director of finance shall prepare for the city manager, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial statement and report. 
(Code 1965, § 2-113) 
Charter reference— Annual audit, § 8.06.  
Sec. 2-212. - Audit of claims for goods or services. 
The director of finance shall audit all claims against the city for goods or services for the purpose of ascertaining that such claims are in accordance with the purchase orders or contracts of employment from which the same arise. 
(Code 1965, § 2-115)  
Sec. 2-213. - Responsibility as to insurance and risk management programs; investigation; settlement and adjustment of claims against city. 
(a)  The director of finance shall be responsible for the development, administration and operation of the city's corporate insurance, self-insurance and risk management programs. 
(b)  The director of finance or his duly authorized representative shall have the authority to investigate, adjust, compromise and settle claims and to authorize the investigation, adjustment, compromise and settlement of claims against the city. Any payment for investigation, adjustment, compromise and/or settlement of claims against the city shall be taken from the self-insurance fund and other funds provided by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1112, 10-27-80; Ord. No. 1716, 7-13-87) 
Charter reference— Notice of claims for damages against city, § 9.04.  
DIVISION 2.5. - PROCUREMENT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1353, adopted Jan. 3, 1983, amended former Div. 2.5, §§ 2-214—2-220 to read as set out herein. Said ordinance enacted §§ 1-1—1-3, 2-1—2-17 and 3-1—3-9, which the editor has numbered §§ 2-214—2-224, to preserve Code format. Former Div. 2.5 derived from Ord. No. 1252, enacted Feb. 1, 1982, and was entitled "Purchases and Sales Generally." 
 Ord. No. 2480, adopted April 7, 1998, amended and reordained Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 2.5 to read as set out herein. As a part of this amendment, Ord. No. 2480 deleted §§ 2-215.1, 2-215.3, 2-2-16.2, 2-217.1, 2-217.2, 2-217.4, 2-218—2-218.2, 2-219—2-219.2, 2-220, 2-220.2, 2-221—2-221.2, 2-223, 2-224, and 2-224.2, derived from the following: 
Ord. No. 	Date 	Ord. No. 	Date 
1353 	 1- 3-83 	1721 	 8- 3-87 
1388 	 8- 1-83 	2201 	 1-12-93 
1407 	10-17-83 	2309 	 2-28-95 
1462 	 7- 2-84 		
 
No attempt for analysis of the specific subject matter of these sections has been made by the editor; users wishing more information concerning these section should contact the city clerk's office. 
 
Sec. 2-214. - Establishment and composition of division of purchasing. 
There is hereby established, within the department of finance, a division of purchasing, which shall consist of the purchasing agent and such other officers and employees as may be provided by ordinance or by orders or directives consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 1353, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 2-214.1. - Purchasing authority. 
(a)  The purchasing division of the department of finance shall be responsible for the purchase or lease of all goods, and the purchase of all services and construction, for all city departments and agencies exclusive of the city school system. In addition, the division shall be responsible for centralized control and disposal of excess, obsolete and salvageable materials and equipment. In the event that a surplus vehicle is sold and the original title transferred had been lost not due to the fault of the city, the director of finance or designee shall impose a fee for additional services to recover the administrative costs associated with the reissuance of the vehicle(s) title in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per reissued title. 
(b)  No officer or employee of the city government has the authority to contract for the procurement of materials, supplies, equipment or services except the city purchasing agent or such other employee as may be designated by the city manager or city council. 
(Ord. No. 1353, 1-3-83; Ord. No. 2480, 4-7-98; Ord. No. 3176, § 1, 5-10-11)  
Sec. 2-214.2. - Duties, powers, and responsibilities of purchasing agent. 
(a)  The purchasing agent shall be the head of the purchasing division and under the supervision of the director of finance. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall have the power and it shall be his duty to: 
(1)  Endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible and practicable on all purchases and sales through competitive sealed bidding, or through any other method of procurement authorized by this division of chapter 2; 
(2)  Except where established by ordinance or resolution of council, establish such rules, regulations and policies as he/she deems necessary for the internal management and operation of the purchasing division; and 
(3)  Delegate to individual departments, as he or she deems appropriate, the authority to directly purchase goods or services as provided for and limited by Code of Virginia § 2.2-4303(G) and (H), including future amendments thereto; provided the department uses competition wherever practicable and complies with all applicable rules, regulations, policies, procedures and administrative directives pertaining to procurement. 
(c)  All formal rules, regulations, policies, procedures and administrative directives pertaining to procurement shall be subject to the approval of the city manager and the purchasing agent, and shall be approved by the city attorney as to form and legality. 
(d)  Subject to compliance with all applicable policies, procedures, and city code provisions pertaining to contract execution, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to award contracts within the purview of this division. 
(e)  It shall be the responsibility of the purchasing division to obtain as full and open competition as possible and practical on all purchases and sales through competitive sealed bidding, or through any other method of procurement authorized by this or other sections. 
(Ord. No. 1353, 1-3-83; Ord. No. 2480, 4-7-98; Ord. No. 2716, 8-6-02)  
Sec. 2-214.3. - Adoption of designated sections of Virginia Public Procurement Act. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 2.2-4302 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, the following sections of the Virginia Public Procurement Act [Code of Virginia, title 2.2, chapter 43], and any future amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into this code: 2.2-4301, 2.2-4343(B), 2.2-4304(A), 2.2-4303, 2.2-4305, 2.2-4308, 2.2-4319, 2.2-4331, 2.2-4310(A), 2.2-4320, 2.2-4344(A)(1), 2.2-4309(B), 2.2-4344(A)(2), 2.2-4344(B), 2.2-4345(A)(14), 2.2-4345(A)(13) and 2.2-4344(C), 2.2-4317, 2.2-4332, 2.2-4324, 2.2-4328, 2.2-4315 through 2.2-4350(B), 2.2-4353, 2.2-4349, 2.2-4354 through 2.2-4377. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, whenever any provision of the Virginia Public Procurement Act which has been adopted and incorporated by reference herein is modified or amended by any other section of this code, or by any rule, regulation, policy, procedure or administrative directive, such provision shall be interpreted and implemented as modified or amended. 
(Ord. No. 2480, 4-7-98; Ord. No. 2716, 8-6-02)  
Sec. 2-215. - Submission of bids and proposals. 
(a)  Bids and proposals shall be submitted to the purchasing division in a sealed envelope, shall be clearly marked or identified as specified in the invitation to bid or request for proposals, and shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the invitation to bid or request for proposals. 
(b)  Every bid and proposal shall contain an anticollusion statement which shall be sworn to by each bidder or offeror. 
(Ord. No. 1353, 1-3-83; Ord. No. 1462, 7-2-84; Ord. No. 1721, 8-3-87; Ord. No. 2201, 1-12-93; Ord. No. 2480, 4-7-98)  
Sec. 2-215.1. - Reserved. 
Note— See the second paragraph of the editor's note to Div. 2.5.  
Sec. 2-215.2. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)  An emergency shall be defined as a situation in which (i) an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare is involved, or (ii) immediate action is required to protect or preserve public properties. 
(b)  In case of an emergency during normal working hours which requires immediate purchase of supplies or contractual services, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to secure, by the open market procedure, at the lowest obtainable price, any supplies or contractual services, regardless of the amount of the expenditure. A full report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase so made shall be filed by the purchasing agent. 
(c)  In case of an emergency, not within normal working hours, the purchasing agent may authorize the head of any city department to purchase directly any supplies, the immediate procurement of which is essential to prevent delays in the work of the department which may vitally affect the public health, safety or welfare, or to protect or preserve public properties without delay. The head of such department shall send to the purchasing agent a requisition and a copy of the delivery record, together with a full written report of the circumstances of the emergency. The report shall be filed by the purchasing agent. 
(d)  In all cases of emergency purchases, the using agency shall submit a written report to the purchasing agent, signed by the department head, detailing the aspects of the emergency. The written report shall be accompanied by a requisition form. Upon receipt of such written report, the purchasing agent shall solicit pricing in a manner consistent with the emergency situation and shall issue a confirming purchase order. 
(Ord. No. 1353, 1-3-83; Ord. No. 1462, 7-2-84; Ord. No. 2201, 1-12-93; Ord. No. 2480, 4-7-98)  
Sec. 2-215.3. - Reserved. 
Note— See the second paragraph of the editor's note to Div. 2.5.  
Sec. 2-216. - Bidder's list. 
The purchasing agent shall maintain a bidder's list containing the names of all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested suppliers who have requested their names to be included on such lists. The purchasing agent, where deemed necessary, can require these requests to be made in writing and may require any additional literature or references as he may feel pertinent. 
(Ord. No. 1353, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 2-216.1. - Debarment. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 2.2-4321 of the Code of Virginia, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to debar any prospective contractor from contracting for particular types of goods, services, insurance or construction for a specified period of time, and to remove any such contractor from the bidders' lists when the public interest will be best served thereby. This may be caused by any contractor's unsatisfactory performance, including defaulting on its quotations or contracts, or by any other behavior on the part of a contractor which is deemed by the purchasing agent to be unethical, harmful to the city, or in any other way not to the best interest of the city. 
(b)  Reasons for such debarment and removal shall be outlined in writing by the purchasing agent and sent by certified or registered mail to the contractor so debarred and removed at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for receipt of bids or proposals. 
(Ord. No. 1353, 1-3-83; Ord. No. 2480, 4-7-98; Ord. No. 2716, 8-6-02)  
Sec. 2-216.2. - Reserved. 
Note— See the second paragraph of the editor's note to Div. 2.5.  
Sec. 2-217. - Specifications for purchases. 
(a)  Where at all possible, detailed, definite specifications will be used for purchases. However, in instances in which trade names and model numbers are used to designate the quality of the merchandise desired, it is always specified that an alternate of equal or better quality may be proposed. The decision of approval of all alternates shall be between the purchasing division and the using department. The burden of proving that an alternate is equal shall rest with the vendor. 
(b)  Written comments from prospective bidders (vendors) concerning specifications or alternatives may be accepted by the purchasing agent for consideration if submitted at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for receipt of bids. 
(Ord. No. 1353, 1-3-83)  
Secs. 2-217.1, 2-217.2. - Reserved. 
Note— See the second paragraph of the editor's note to Div. 2.5.  
Sec. 2-217.3. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-217.4. - Reserved. 
Note— See the second paragraph of the editor's note to Div. 2.5.  
Secs. 2-218—2-218.2. - Reserved. 
Note— See the second paragraph of the editor's note to Div. 2.5.  
Secs. 2-219—2-219.2. - Reserved. 
Note— See the second paragraph of the editor's note to Div. 2.5.  
Sec. 2-220. - Reserved. 
Note— See the second paragraph of the editor's note to Div. 2.5.  
Sec. 2-220.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2309, adopted Feb. 28, 1995, deleted § 2-220.1, which prohibited employment by contracts and which derived from Ord. No. 1353, adopted Jan. 13, 1983.  
Sec. 2-220.2. - Reserved. 
Note— See the second paragraph of the editor's note to Div. 2.5.  
Secs. 2-221—2-221.2. - Reserved. 
Note— See the second paragraph of the editor's note to Div. 2.5.  
Secs. 2-222—2-222.2. - Reserved. 
Note— See the second paragraph of the editor's note to Div. 2.5.  
Secs. 2-223, 2-224. - Reserved. 
Note— See the second paragraph of the editor's note to Div. 2.5.  
Sec. 2-224.1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this subsection, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Good-faith participation efforts: The sum total of efforts by a particular bidder to provide for the equitable participation of SWaM-certified small business subcontractors in response to a city procurement. 
Minority, service disabled veteran and woman contractors bid list: A list of contractors who have completed and filed with the purchasing agent the city's bidder application indicating that their firm is a minority-owned, service disabled veteran or woman-owned business. The purchasing agent shall maintain the list and shall organize the list by category of business. Such list shall be provided, upon request, in its entirety or by relevant category, to any interested party. The list shall not be deemed to constitute an endorsement of the qualifications of any business included on the list. 
Minority-owned business: A business or other entity that is at least fifty-one (51) percent owned and controlled by one (1) or more socially and economically disadvantaged person(s). For purposes of this definition, the term "control" shall mean exercising the power to make policy decisions and being actively involved in day-to-day management. Such disadvantage may arise from cultural, racial, chronic economic circumstance or background, or other similar cause. Such persons include, but are not limited to, Black Americans, Hispanic Americans, Asian Americans, Eskimos, and Aleuts. 
Prime contractor workforce composition form means a document providing the following information: The composition of the contractor's workforce, specifically indicating the percentage of woman, service disabled veteran and minority employees in their company; the percentage of woman, service disabled veteran and minorities in management positions, supervisory positions, professional positions, and nonprofessional positions 
Service disabled veteran: means a veteran who (i) served on active duty in the United States military ground, naval, or air service, (ii) was discharged or released under conditions other than dishonorable, and (iii) has a service-connected disability rating fixed by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs. 
Service disabled veteran business: means a business concern that is at least fifty-one (51) percent owned by one or more service disabled veterans or, in the case of a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company or other entity, at least fifty-one (51) percent of the equity ownership interest in the corporation, partnership, or limited liability company or other entity is owned by one or more individuals who are service disabled veterans and both the management and daily business operations are controlled by one or more individuals who are service disabled veterans. 
Small business means a business, independently owned and controlled by one or more individuals who are U.S. citizens or legal resident aliens, and together with affiliates, has two hundred fifty (250) or fewer employees, or annual gross receipts of ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00) or less averaged over the previous three (3) years. One or more of the individual owners shall control both the management and daily business operations of the small business. 
SWaM-certified small business means a small business that has been certified by the Virginia Department of Small Business and Supplier Diversity or a successor department of the Commonwealth. SWaM-certified small business may also mean a business that has been certified by the City's small business office. 
SWaM-certified small business subcontracting participation plan: A plan detailing, at a minimum: Whether the contractor intends to utilize any subcontractors; what, if any, SWaM-certified small business subcontractors the contractor intends to utilize; the work to be performed by each SWaM-certified small business subcontractor; and the anticipated amount or percentage to be paid to each SWaM-certified small business. SWaM-certified small businesses include small businesses that are SWaM-certified as being minority owned, woman owned, or disabled veteran owned. Prime contractors are strongly encouraged to utilize minority contractors as part of their overall small business subcontracting plan. The city council has established a goal of ten (10) percent minority-owned business participation in city contracts. 
Specificity means sufficient information necessary to enable the City staff to substantiate or confirm the matter asserted. For example, "specificity" in the context of a quote requires at a minimum, the following information: the firm providing the quote: the contract person or representative for the quote; the date the quote was provided; and the scope of work attributed to such quote. 
Woman-owned business: A business or other entity that is at least fifty-one (51) percent owned and controlled by a woman or women. For purposes of this definition, the term "control" shall mean exercising the power to make policy decisions and being actively involved in day-to-day management. 
(Ord. No. 2309, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 2935, 4-4-06; Ord. No. 3088, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 3203, § 3, 9-27-11; Ord. No. 3344, 4-22-14; Ord. No. 3627, § 2, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 2-224.2. - Process to determine sufficiency of good faith efforts. 
When a subcontracting participation plan does not provide the fifty (50) percent SWaM-certified participation requirement set forth in 2-224.6(b)(i) and a responsiveness determination is required pursuant to 2-224.6(b)(ii), the determination of whether the materials submitted with the bid satisfy the "good-faith" requirement is a question of fact to be rendered by the purchasing agent. The following factors are relevant to such determination: 
(1)  What steps the bidder has taken to solicit and negotiate subcontracting bids from SWaM-certified small businesses; 
(2)  Whether the bidder utilized the city outreach list, if applicable; 
(3)  Whether the bidder debundled or right-sized project components to allow for meaningful small business participation; 
(4)  Whether the bidder provided assistance in bonding, insurance, equipment, supplies, or other assistance or services; 
(5)  Whether the bidder has taken other steps to identify and engage small businesses that would be willing and able to perform the subcontracted work; and 
(6)  Whether the efforts undertaken by the bidder appear to be reasonably calculated to lead to the maximization of SWaM-certified small business participation. 
The review of the above factors should identify the reasons why the fifty (50) percent SWaM-certified small business subcontracting requirement was not met. If the purchasing agent is satisfied that the documentation submitted with the bid evidences the bidder made a good faith effort to provide for the equitable participation of SWaM-certified small business in the procurement, the purchasing agent shall memorialize such determination in the bid file. If the purchasing agent is unable to make such determination, the rationale for such determination shall be communicated to the bidder at the time of posting intent to award. 
(Ord. No. 3344, 4-22-14)  
Sec. 2-224.3. - SWaM-certified small business, including woman and minority-owned business opportunities—Construction contracts; bid requirements. 
(a)  Notice of every invitation to bid on city construction contracts in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be provided to all SWaM-certified small businesses in the relevant industry sector located within fifty (50) miles of the city. In addition, the purchasing agent shall also forward such notices, upon request, to any minority organization or other interested party. 
(b)  If a pre-bid meeting is held, the purchasing agent or designee shall provide prospective contractors with direction regarding the resources for locating SWaM-certified small businesses offered by the Virginia Department of Minority Business Enterprises or successor department. 
(c)  Every bid submitted in response to an invitation to bid on a city construction contract in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be required to contain a proposed SWaM-certified small business subcontracting participation plan. 
(d)  The purchasing agent shall provide, upon request, to all prospective prime construction contractors, a list of all businesses included in the relevant categories of the minority, service disabled veteran and woman contractors bid list; provided, however, that the list shall not be deemed to include all available minority-owned or woman-owned subcontractors, nor shall it be deemed to constitute an endorsement of the qualifications of any subcontractor included on the list. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, "bid" shall include a request for proposals ("RFP") for construction, where permitted, design-build proposals, construction manager at risk contracts, and PPEA proposals (Detail Phase) for construction. 
(f)  Prior to contract execution and provided the bidder meets the requirements of this section and section 2-224.6, the bidder shall be afforded the opportunity to update or validate the subcontracting plan in the ten (10) days after the posting of notice of intent to award. This update or validation will not be accepted if it substantially decreases the utilization, either by dollar amount or percentage, of subcontracted work to SWaM-certified small business subcontractors. The final SWaM-certified small business subcontracting participation plan shall become a part of the contract with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2309, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 2935, 4-4-06; Ord. No. 3088, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 3203, § 3, 9-27-11; Ord. No. 3344, 4-22-14)  
Sec. 2-224.4. - Same—Contracts for provision of goods and services. 
Solicitations for goods and services contracts of more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall include at least three (3) SWaM-certified small businesses, including minority-owned businesses, service disabled veteran-owned businesses or woman-owned businesses that are included on the list maintained pursuant to section 2-224.1 and are in the business of supplying goods or services of the kind to be procured, unless the list of available SWaM-certified vendors contains less than three (3) such businesses. In addition, the purchasing agent shall forward such solicitations, upon request, to any minority organization or other interested party. 
(Ord. No. 2309, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 2935, 4-4-06; Ord. No. 3088, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 3203, § 3, 9-27-11; Ord. No. 3344, 4-22-14)  
Sec. 2-224.5. - Same—Procurement of professional and other than professional services by competitive negotiation. 
(a)  Notice of every request for proposals ("RFP") for professional services shall be provided to all SWaM-certified small businesses in the relevant industry sector located within fifty (50) miles of the city. In addition, the purchasing agent shall also forward such notices, upon request, to any minority organization or other interested party. 
(b)  If a pre-bid meeting is held, the purchasing agent or designee shall provide prospective contractors with direction regarding the resources for locating SWaM-certified small businesses offered by the Virginia Department of Minority Business Enterprises or successor department. 
(c)  To the extent practicable, the submitted proposal should provide possible subconsultants and subcontractors that the offeror intends to utilize in the execution of the services and whether such firms are SWaM-certified. 
(Ord. No. 2309, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 2935, 4-4-06; Ord. No. 3088, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 3203, § 3, 9-27-11; Ord. No. 3344, 4-22-14)  
Sec. 2-224.6. - Responsible and responsive bidder; qualified offeror. 
(a)  The provisions of this subdivision shall be used as criteria in determining whether a bidder is deemed to be responsible and responsive and no contract shall be awarded to a bidder who has not complied with the provisions herein. Failure to submit a proposed SWaM-certified small business subcontracting participation plan or sufficient documentation of good-faith participation efforts with a bid shall result in the bid being declared nonresponsive. 
(b)  For construction contracts with a value exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) where the contractor intends to utilize subcontractors, the SWaM-certified small business subcontracting participation plan required by this article must either: (i) provide for at least fifty (50) percent of the value of the subcontracted work to be provided by one or more SWaM-certified small businesses; or (ii) provide documentation showing, with specificity, the good-faith participation efforts undertaken by the prospective contractor to attempt to meet the fifty (50) percent usage requirement. In fulfilling the fifty percent SWaM-certified small business subcontracting requirement, prime contractors are strongly encouraged to utilize minority-owned businesses as subcontractors. 
(c)  If a subcontracting plan does not meet the requirements of subsection (b), the entire bid or proposal shall be declared nonresponsive to the solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 2309, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 2935, 4-4-06; Ord. No. 3088, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 3203, § 3, 9-27-11; Ord. 3344, 4-22-14)  
Sec. 2-224.7. - Public inspection of records. 
In accordance with the Virginia Freedom of Information Act, a bidder's or contractor's Woman, Service Disabled Veteran and Minority Participation Plan shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2309, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 2935, 4-4-06; Ord. No. 3088, 6-23-09)  
Sec. 2-224.8. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any bidder or contractor that intentionally makes a material misrepresentation in connection with any of the information required by subdivision shall be debarred from contracting with the city for a period of two (2) years from the date of notification of such debarment. 
(b)  Prior to final payment, each contractor shall submit a report documenting its efforts undertaken in compliance with its final SWaM-certified small business subcontracting participation plan. The report shall include, at a minimum: A statement of whether any SWaM-certified small business subcontractors were utilized; a list of any SWaM-certified small businesses; a brief description of the work performed by each SWaM-certified small business; the amount paid to each SWaM-certified small business; and any additional good-faith minority-owned, service disabled veteran-owned and woman-owned business participation efforts the contractor made in connection with the contract. A contractor will not receive final payment under a contract until he submits the documentation required by this subsection. 
(c)  If actual woman, service disabled veteran and minority participation substantially deviates below the levels outlined in the final SWaM-certified small business subcontracting participation plan, the contractor shall provide an explanation for the deviation within ten (10) days of a request by the city for such explanation. If the explanation for the deviation lacks reasonable justification that rises to the level of dishonesty or in the event the contractor refuses to submit an explanation for the deviation, the contractor may be debarred from contracting with the city for a period of up to two (2) years from the date of notification of such debarment. 
(d)  The debarment of any bidder or contractor pursuant to this subdivision shall be deemed to include the debarment of any successor corporation, partnership, firm or other entity controlled or managed by any officer, director, partner or controlling shareholder of the debarred bidder or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2309, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 2935, 4-4-06; Ord. No. 3088, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 3203, § 3, 9-27-11; Ord. No. 3344, 4-22-14)  
Sec. 2-224.9. - Minority business council composition; appointment and terms of members, etc. 
(a)  The City of Virginia Beach Minority Business Council shall consist of at least nine (9) but not more than eleven (11) members. 
(b)  The members of the minority business council shall be appointed by the city council for terms of two (2) years; provided, however, that the initial terms of several members may be for one year in order to allow for staggered expirations of the terms of members. Of those members appointed, one member may be a member of city council. 
(c)  The meeting in June of each year shall be the annual organizational meeting at which the minority business council shall elect, from among its members, a chair and vice-chair. The chair and vice-chair shall each serve for a term of one year, or until his or her respective successor has been elected. Both the chair and the vice-chair may be re-elected; provided, however, that no member shall serve more than four (4) consecutive one-year terms in the same office. 
(d)  Attendance records shall be kept at each meeting of the minority business council, and an annual report of attendance shall be submitted to city council through the city clerk's office. No member shall accumulate an annual total of (i) more than three (3) absences or (ii) absences exceeding one-fourth of the number of meetings held, whichever is lesser, for reasons other than personal illness, death or other unusual circumstances. If this limitation is exceeded, the chairperson shall report to the city clerk the name of the minority business council member whose unexcused absences exceed the number set forth herein. The city clerk shall then notify such member in writing, with copies to the city council, that, due to absences in excess of the number allowed herein, his or her membership is terminated. Thereafter, the city clerk shall forward the vacancy to the city council for appointment of a new minority business council member to serve for the remainder of such terminated member's term. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b) and (d) of this section, all members of the minority business council shall serve at the pleasure of city council. 
(Ord. No. 2310, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 2478, 3-10-98; Ord. No. 2841, 10-5-04; Ord. No. 3126, 4-27-10)  
Sec. 2-224.10. - Staff assistance; recordation of minutes. 
The city's purchasing agent shall serve in an advisory capacity to the minority business council and, among other duties, shall assist the chairperson of the minority business council in the preparation of meeting agendas. 
(Ord. No. 2310, 2-28-95)  
Sec. 2-224.11. - Duties, powers and functions. 
The minority business council shall serve as an advisory agency to the city manager and the city council with respect to the city's procurement policies and procedures and shall be vested with the following duties, powers and functions: 
(1)  To advise the city manager and the city council on policy and procedural issues involved in: 
a.  The city's established policy of equal opportunity and nondiscrimination in procurement; 
b.  The city's continuing efforts to encourage the participation of minority-owned businesses, small businesses, businesses owned by women, and businesses owned by service disabled veterans in city contracts; and 
c.  The city's assurance that its procurement opportunities are made available to all persons, regardless of race, religion, color, sex, national origin or handicap. 
(2)  To institute, conduct, and engage in educational and training programs to promote the involvement of minority-owned businesses, small businesses, businesses owned by women, and businesses owned by service disabled veterans in the public procurement process. 
(3)  To serve as a forum for the discussion and development of the awareness of minority-owned businesses, small businesses, businesses owned by women, and businesses owned by service disabled veterans of the procurement process. 
(4)  To provide city council and the city manager with an annual written report of the minority business council's activities on or before December thirty-first of each year. 
(5)  To adopt rules and procedures for the conduct of its affairs. 
The minority business council shall not be empowered or authorized to provide advice or assistance with respect to, or otherwise become involved in, individual procurement solicitations, evaluations, awards, disputes or protests. 
(Ord. No. 2309, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 2935, 4-4-06; Ord. No. 3088, 6-23-09)  
Sec. 2-224.12. - Sheltered bidding—Construction. 
(a)  For a solicitation to purchase construction services with an expected value of not more than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) nor less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), the purchasing agent shall review the anticipated scope of work to make a determination as to whether there are at least three (3) SWaM-certified small businesses willing and able to participate in the procurement solicitation. If the purchasing agent finds there are at least three (3) SWaM-certified small businesses willing and able, the purchasing agent shall document this finding in writing in the bid file. 
(b)  If the finding described in subsection (a) has been made, the invitation to bid shall limit the bidding to SWaM-certified small businesses. In addition to the customary notification methods, the invitation to bid shall be sent to the list of SWaM-certified small businesses maintained by the purchasing division for the relevant contracting classification or trade group. If such invitation to bid results in less than two (2) responsive bids, the purchasing agent shall cancel the invitation to bid and repeat the bidding process without the SWaM-certified small business limitation. 
(c)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to emergency procurements. 
(Ord. No. 3617, § 2, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 2-224.13. - Sheltered bidding—Goods and services. 
(a)  For a solicitation to purchase of goods or nonprofessional services with an expected value of not more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) nor less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), the purchasing agent shall review the anticipated scope of work to make a determination as to whether there are at least three (3) SWaM-certified small businesses willing and able to participate in the procurement solicitation. If the purchasing agent finds there are at least three (3) SWaM-certified small businesses willing and able, the purchasing agent shall document this finding in writing in the bid file. 
(b)  If the finding described in subsection (a) has been made, the invitation to bid or request for proposals shall limit the bidding to SWaM-certified small businesses. In addition to the customary notification methods, the invitation to bid shall be sent to the list of SWaM-certified small businesses maintained by the purchasing division for the relevant vendor type. If such invitation to bid or request for proposals results in less than two (2) responsive bids, the purchasing agent shall cancel the invitation to bid or request for proposals and repeat the bidding process without the SWaM-certified small business limitation. 
(c)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to emergency procurements or cooperative procurements. 
(Ord. No. 3617, § 2, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 2-224.14. - Project goals—Construction. 
(a)  For a solicitation to purchase construction services with an estimated value of more than five million dollars ($5,000,000.00), the purchasing agent or designee shall review the anticipated scope of work to make a determination as to whether there are sufficient subcontracting opportunities for meaningful minority-owned business project goals. In the setting of a project goal, the term "minority-owned business" shall mean only businesses owned by Asian Americans, Black Americans, and Hispanic Americans. In the development of the solicitation, the purchasing agent or designee in consultation with the city's SWaM Business Office shall use the same or substantially similar goal-setting methodology as is utilized in the federal Urban Construction Initiative. 
(b)  The project goal for the solicitation shall be a requirement for a responsive bid. Alternatively, a bidder may seek a waiver from the project goal requirement by submission of good faith efforts. The review of the request for a waiver shall use the same factors as set forth in section 2-224.2. Any determination of good faith efforts as a waiver shall be reduced to writing and made a part of the procurement record. 
(c)  For purposes of classification as a minority-owned business for purposes of this section, the city shall allow certification through the Virginia Department of Small Business and Supplier Diversity or certification through the city's SWaM Business Office. 
(d)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to emergency procurements nor projects that include federal disadvantaged business enterprise requirements or similar requirements. 
(e)  The purchasing agent shall provide quarterly reports to the city council of all construction bids in excess of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00), the project goal for each solicitation, and the results of the bids for such contracts, including the proposed minority-owned business subcontracting. 
(Ord. No. 3625, § 2, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 2-224.15. - Enhanced subcontracting—Construction and goods and services contracts. 
(a)  The purchasing agent or designee, in consultation with the city's staff that have been trained to assist in the implementation of the city's SWaM program, shall review all proposed construction and goods and services solicitations to seek opportunities for enhanced subcontracting. For those selected contracts, the solicitation shall include a statement designating the contract for enhanced subcontracting and including the requirements of this section. 
(b)  A contract selected for enhanced subcontracting shall require, as a matter of responsiveness, that a bidder or offeror subcontract a minimum of fifty (50) percent, by dollar amount of the bid or proposal total. 
(c)  The review of good faith efforts described in sections 2-224.2 and 2-224.6 shall apply. All other requirements in section 2-224.3 for construction contracts and section 2-224.4 for goods and services contracts shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 3626, § 2, 6-16-20)  
DIVISION 3. - CITY TREASURER[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference— City treasurer, § 8.03. 
 
Sec. 2-225. - Bond. 
The city treasurer shall furnish a bond, with a surety company authorized to do business in the state, in a sum of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) or more than one million two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($1,250,000.00) for the faithful discharge, by the city treasurer, of the official duties of his office as city treasurer and such other official duties as are, or may be, imposed upon the city treasurer by law and by the Charter and the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. The surety company shall be approved and be satisfactory to the city manager. The form of the bond shall be approved by the city attorney. 
(Code 1965, § 2-116) 
Charter reference— Authority to require bond, § 3.05(e).  
Sec. 2-226. - City depositories generally. 
(a)  The city treasurer is authorized to deposit or cause to be deposited all funds of the city in any of the following listed banks or savings and loan associations: 
(1)  Bank of the Commonwealth; 
(2)  First Union; 
(3)  Wachovia; 
(4)  BB&T; 
(5)  Centura; 
(6)  First Virginia Bank of Tidewater; 
(7)  Bank of America; 
(8)  Crestar Bank; 
(9)  Cenit Bank for Savings, SFB; 
(10)  Bank of Tidewater; 
(11)  Bank of Hampton Roads; 
(12)  Resource Bank; 
(13)  Community Bank; 
(14)  TowneBank. 
(b)  No money shall be deposited in any bank or savings and loan association referred to in this section until the bank or savings and loan association has complied with the Virginia Security for Public Deposits Act, as amended, and other provisions of state law. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2-121, 2-122; Ord. No. 1049, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 1439, 3-5-84; Ord. No. 1503, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 1813, 10-24-88; Ord. No. 1997, 8-7-90; Ord. No. 2259, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 2510, 10-6-98; Ord. No. 2568, 12-7-99) 
State Law reference— Virginia Security for Public Deposits Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-359 et seq.  
Sec. 2-227. - Safe deposit boxes for securities and other papers of various funds. 
The securities and other papers of the various funds of the city, under the control of the city treasurer, shall be deposited in safe deposit boxes in banks located in the city. The opening of such safe deposit boxes and the checking and examination of the contents thereof, shall be only upon the demand and control of, and in the presence of, the city treasurer. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2-117, 2-118)  
Sec. 2-228. - Paid and redeemed bonds—Custodian. 
The city treasurer is hereby designated the custodian of bonds and coupons comprising the bonded debt of the city, when such bonds and coupons have been paid or otherwise redeemed. 
(Code 1965, § 2-119) 
Charter reference— Issuance of bonds and notes, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 2-229. - Same—Cancellation and destruction. 
The city treasurer shall cause the paid or redeemed bonds and coupons referred to in section 2-228 to be canceled and destroyed and shall retain a permanent record of such cancellation and destruction in accordance with sound accounting practices and the laws of the state. When the paid bonds and coupons have been destroyed, a certificate of such destruction, containing an itemized list of the bonds and coupons destroyed, shall be filed with the director of finance and one such certificate shall be retained by the treasurer. 
(Code 1965, § 2-120)  
Sec. 2-230. - Treasurer authorized to impose penalty charge for bad checks. 
The city treasurer is hereby authorized and required to impose a penalty charge of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for any bad checks submitted for payment of any taxes, levies or fees due to the city. A "bad check" is any check or draft returned for insufficient funds or because there is no account or the account has been closed. 
(Ord. No. 1321, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 1625, 10-6-86; Ord. No. 2512, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2958, 7-11-06) 
State Law reference— Authority for section, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.4.  
Sec. 2-231. - Satellite offices. 
The city treasurer shall operate satellite offices in locations other than the municipal complex as designated by city council for the purpose of providing services for the convenience of citizens. 
(Ord. No. 1374, 6-6-83) 
Charter reference— Authority of city council to assign duties to treasurer not inconsistent with state law, § 8.03.  
Sec. 2-232. - Penalty and interest on past due accounts. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 15.2-105 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, any person who fails to pay the city treasurer the amount due on any city account on or before its due date shall incur a penalty thereon of ten (10) percent of the amount due or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater, which shall be added to the amount of the account due from such person; provided, however, that in no case shall the penalty exceed the amount of the account that is past due. No penalty shall be imposed for failure to pay any account if such failure was not in any way the fault of the debtor. 
(b)  Interest at a rate not to exceed ten (10) percent annually from the first day following the day such account is due may be collected upon the principal and penalty of all such accounts. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the "due date" of a city account shall mean the last day of the month immediately following the month in which the city's initial bill is mailed. 
(d)  This section shall not be applicable to taxes, or to any account the late payment of which is subject to penalty and interest pursuant to other provisions of the law. 
(Ord. No. 2353, 10-24-95; Ord. No. 3069, 3-10-09)  
Secs. 2-233, 2-234. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PAYMENTS TO PERSONS DISPLACED BY CITY ROAD PROJECTS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 33. 
 
Sec. 2-235. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words and terms shall take the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Business means any lawful activity, excepting a farm operation, conducted primarily: 
(1)  For the purchase, sale, lease and rental of personal and real property and for the manufacture, processing or marketing of products, commodities or any other personal property. 
(2)  For the sale of services of the public. 
(3)  By a nonprofit organization. 
City agency means any department of the city. 
Displaced person means any person who, on or after July 1, 1980, moves from any real property or moves his personal property from real property, as a result of the acquisition of such real property, in whole or in part, or as a result of the written order of an acquiring city agency to vacate real property, for any road program or project undertaken by a city agency. 
Farm operation means any activity conducted solely or primarily for the production of one or more agricultural products or commodities, including timber, for sale or home use and customarily producing such products or commodities in sufficient quantity to be capable of contributing materially to the operator's support. The term "contributing materially," as used in this definition, means the farm operation must contribute at least one-third of the operator's income. 
Initiation of negotiation for a parcel means the date the city agency makes the first personal contact with the owner of a parcel or property to be acquired, or his designated representative, to give him a written offer for the property to be acquired. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation or association. 
(Ord. No. 1103, 10-13-80)  
Sec. 2-236. - Purpose of and necessity for division. 
(a)  This division is enacted to establish a uniform policy for treatment of persons displaced as a result of road programs or projects involving the acquisition of real property therefor. 
(b)  In order to acquire the rights-of-way necessary for the construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of the public roads of the city, it often becomes necessary for individuals, businesses, farms and nonprofit organizations to be displaced. To insure to the maximum extent possible the equitable treatment of these displacees, it is necessary for a uniform policy to be established for making moving cost payments, replacement housing cost payments and other expense payments, so that these individuals will not suffer disproportionate injuries as a result of the road improvement programs which are necessary or desirable to secure and promote the general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(c)  The main objective of this division is to provide payments to be made to those who are required to relocate, in whole or in part, for costs incurred for moving, replacement housing and certain other expenses because of city road programs and projects. 
(Ord. No. 1103, 10-13-80)  
Sec. 2-237. - Applicability of division. 
(a)  The provisions of this division are applicable to any person who is displaced by any city road project on which state or federal funds are not used or for which state or federal funds do not become available before or after the city road project is approved and funded. 
(b)  This division shall not apply to acquisitions by a city agency which are voluntarily initiated or negotiated by the seller under no threat of condemnation, where property is dedicated pursuant to the provisions of chapter 11 (section 15.2-2200 et seq.) of title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, or where property is voluntarily dedicated or donated for no consideration; provided, however, that the provisions of this division relating to relocation payments shall apply for the benefit of persons, other than the owner, who are actually and lawfully occupying the real property to be acquired and who have been occupants thereof for at least ninety (90) days prior to the initiation of negotiations for acquisition. 
(Ord. No. 1103, 10-13-80; Ord. No. 3069, 3-10-09)  
Sec. 2-238. - Funds for carrying out provisions of division. 
Funds appropriated or otherwise available to any city agency for the acquisition of real property or any interest therein for a road program or project shall be available also for obligation add expenditure to carry out the provisions of this division, as applied to that program or project. 
(Ord. No. 1103, 10-13-80)  
Sec. 2-239. - Payments for moving expenses. 
Whenever the acquisition of real property for a road program or project by a city agency will result in the displacement of any person, such agency shall make fair and equitable relocation payments to such displaced person for actual, reasonable expenses in moving himself, his family, business, farm operation or other personal property. Such payment shall not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(Ord. No. 1103, 10-13-80; Ord. No. 1942, 2-5-90)  
Sec. 2-240. - Payment for loss of earnings from business or farm operation. 
(a)  Any displaced person eligible for payments under section 2-239 who is displaced from his place of business or from his farm operation, and who elects to accept the payment authorized by this section, in lieu of the payment authorized by section 2-239, may receive a fixed payment in the amount equal to the average annual net earnings of the business or farm operation; provided that, such payment shall not be less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) nor more than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). 
(b)  In the case of a business, no payment shall be made under this section, unless the city agency is satisfied that the business: 
(1)  Cannot be relocated without a substantial loss of its existing patronage; and 
(2)  Is not a part of a commercial enterprise having at least one other establishment not being acquired by the city agency, which is engaged in the same or similar business. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, the term "average net earnings" means one-half of any net earnings of the business or farm operation, before federal and state income taxes, during the two (2) taxable years immediately preceding the taxable year in which such business or farm operation moves from the real property acquired for such project, or during such other period as such agency determines to be more equitable for establishing such earnings, including any compensation paid by the business or farm operation to the owner, his spouse or his dependents during such period. 
(Ord. No. 1103, 10-13-80; Ord. No. 1942, 2-5-90)  
Sec. 2-241. - Payment for purchase of replacement dwelling. 
(a)  In addition to payments otherwise authorized by this division, the city agency shall make additional payments, not in excess of twenty-two thousand five hundred dollars ($22,500.00) to any displaced person who is displaced from a dwelling actually owned and occupied by such displaced person for not less than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the initiation of negotiations for the acquisition of the property. Such additional payment shall include the following elements: 
(1)  The amount, if any, which when added to the acquisition cost of the dwelling acquired, equals the reasonable cost of a comparable replacement dwelling. 
(2)  Reasonable expenses incurred by such displaced person for evidence of title, recording fees and other closing costs incident to the purchase of the replacement dwelling, but not including prepaid expenses. 
(b)  The additional payment authorized by this section shall be made only to such displayed person who purchases and occupies a replacement dwelling not later than the end of the one-year period beginning on the date on which he receives final payment of all costs of the acquired dwelling, or on the date on which he moves from the acquired dwelling, whichever is the later date. 
(Ord. No. 1103, 10-13-80; Ord. No. 1942, 2-5-90)  
Sec. 2-242. - Payment for lease or rental of dwelling by persons not eligible for payment under section 2-241. 
In addition to amounts otherwise authorized by this division a city agency shall make payment to or for any displaced person who is not eligible to receive payment under section 2-241, but who is displaced from any dwelling that was actually and lawfully occupied by such displaced person not less than ninety (90) days prior to initiations for acquisition of such dwelling. Such payment shall be the amount necessary to enable such displaced person to lease or rent, for a period not to exceed one year, a dwelling adequate to accommodate such person, but not to exceed five thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($5,250.00). 
(Ord. No. 1103, 10-13-80; Ord. No. 1942, 2-5-90)  
Secs. 2-243—2-245. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT SERVICES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to its repeal and reenactment by Ord. No. 2129, adopted May 12, 1992, this article related to the department of permits and inspections, consisted of §§ 2-246—2-251, and was derived from Code 1965, §§ 2-71, 2-72, and Ord. Nos. 1640, 1920, and 1955. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2272, adopted May 14, 2013, effective July 1, 2013, amended the title of Art. VII to read as herein set out. Formerly sai article was entitled Department of Management Services. 
 
Sec. 2-246. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby created a department to be designated the department of budget and management services, which shall consist of a director of the department, and such other employees as may be prescribed by the Charter, or by ordinance, or by the city manager or the director consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2129, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 2326, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 3272, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create departments, §§ 3.05(b), 7.01.  
Sec. 2-247. - Functions. 
The department of budget and management services shall be responsible for resource management, review and allocation, for budget and capital program policy development, and for the following general duties, including any other duties which may be required, assigned, or prescribed by the council or the city manager: 
(1)  Plan, prepare, and develop the annual operating budget, including estimates of appropriations and revenues for support of the operating budget, consistent with the provisions of chapter 5 of the Charter, and carry out the same duties for all amendments thereto. 
(2)  Plan, prepare, and develop the capital improvements program and capital budget in accordance with section 2-195 and carry out the same duties for all amendments thereto. 
(3)  Be responsible for short-term and multi-year financial forecasts of both expenditures and revenues and annually prepare a five-year forecast of expenditures and revenues. 
(4)  Be responsible for economic and fiscal impact analysis, policy and fiscal analysis, and program evaluation services regarding city programs, agencies, business processes and projects, and for provision of management assistance services to teams, agencies and programs to improve cost management, business processes and operations. 
(5)  Coordinate or carry out city-wide surveys, strategic and fiscal planning, and provide staff support for special studies and projects. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2129, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 2326, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2824, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 3256, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 3272, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13)  
Secs. 2-248—2-265. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 
 
Sec. 2-266. - Created; general duties of director. 
A department of public works is hereby created, the head of which shall be the director of public works, whose duties shall be such as are prescribed by the Charter or ordinance or by order of the city manager. 
(Code 1965, § 2-85) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create departments, §§ 3.05(b), 7.01.  
Sec. 2-267. - Divisions established. 
There shall be, within the department of public works, the following divisions: 
(1)  Engineering division. 
(2)  Highway division. 
(3)  Waste management division. 
(4)  Office of real estate. 
(5)  Building maintenance division. 
(6)  Automotive services division. 
(Code 1965, § 2-85.1; Ord. No. 1199, 7-6-81; Ord. No. 2129, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 2159, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2401, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 2533, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2824, 5-25-04)  
Sec. 2-268. - Composition, functions, etc., of engineering division. 
(a)  The engineering division of the department of public works, subject to the supervision and control of the director of public works, shall be headed by the city engineer, who shall be a civil engineer, shall have a thorough knowledge of municipal engineering and shall be charged with maintaining official technical records of all streets, highways and other public properties; providing engineering plans, drawings, specifications and supervision for all construction and maintenance work where required; providing or reviewing all technical information for contracts submitted for public works operations or construction; and providing engineering services and supervision to the city as may be prescribed. 
(b)  The city surveyor shall serve within the engineering division of the department of public works and shall be subject to the supervision and control of the city engineer, and shall be charged with the ascertainment, fixing and marking of lines of streets, alleys and the boundaries of lots, the regulation of party walls and partition fences and matters related thereto and such other duties as may be required, assigned or prescribed. 
(c)  Police powers are hereby conferred upon the city engineer or designated deputies, assistants or inspectors while engaged in performing their duties, and they are each hereby granted the authority to issue stop-work orders, to serve written notices of violation, to order the abatement of such violation and to issue a summons to the general district court to any person in the city who shall fail to obey a lawful order contained in such stop-work order or notice of violation. 
(Code 1965, § 2-85.1; Ord. No. 2401, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 3182, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 2-269. - Composition and duties of highway division. 
The highway division of the department of public works, subject to the supervision and control of the director of public works, shall be headed by the highway engineer, who shall be charged with responsibility for the construction, improvement, repair and use of streets, alleys, lanes, bridges, viaducts and other public highways, and matters relating thereto and such other duties as may be required or prescribed. 
(Code 1965, § 2-85.1) 
Cross reference— Streets, Ch. 33.  
Sec. 2-270. - Composition, powers and duties of solid waste division. 
(a)  The solid waste division of the department of public works, subject to the supervision and control of the director of public works, shall be headed by the solid waste administrator, who shall be charged with responsibility for the cleaning of streets and public places, including beaches, and the collection and disposal of garbage and waste, public and private conformance with the sanitation regulations of the city and such other duties as may be required, assigned or prescribed. 
(b)  Police powers are hereby conferred upon the solid waste administrator, or designated deputies or assistants while engaged in the performance of their duties, and they shall exercise all powers and authority of police officers in performing such duties. The names of the deputies or assistants so designated shall be submitted to the city manager for approval. 
(Code 1965, § 2-85.1; Ord. No. 1200, 7-6-81) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, Ch. 31.  
Sec. 2-271. - Composition and duties of traffic division. 
The traffic division of the department of public works, subject to the supervision of the director of public works, shall be headed by the traffic engineer, who shall be charged with responsibility for the movement of traffic on the city streets and such other duties as may be required, assigned or prescribed. 
(Code 1965, § 2-85.1) 
Cross reference— Traffic, Ch. 21.  
Sec. 2-272. - Composition and duties of office of real estate. 
The office of real estate, within the department of public works, subject to the supervision and control of the director of public works, shall be headed by the real estate agent, who shall be responsible for all matters related to such office and which may be required, assigned or prescribed. 
(Code 1965, § 2-85.1)  
Sec. 2-273. - Composition and duties of building maintenance division. 
The building maintenance division of the department of public works, subject to the supervision and control of the director of public works, shall be responsible for the maintenance of the buildings within the city government and matters relating thereto and such other duties as may be required or prescribed. 
(Ord. No. 2824, 5-25-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2401, adopted June 25, 1996, repealed §§ 2-273 and 2-274, which provided for the composition of the permits and inspections division and the police powers of building official and deputies; and the composition of weights and measures division, its function, and police powers, and which derived from Ord. No. 2129, adopted May 12, 1992. Ord. No. 2824, adopted May 25, 2004, added new provisions to the Code as § 2-273 as herein set out.  
Sec. 2-274. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note following § 2-273.  
Sec. 2-275. - Issuance of stop-work orders. 
(a)  Upon notice from the director of public works, any division head subject to the supervision and control of the director of public works or any of their designated deputies, assistants or inspectors that work is being performed contrary to the provisions of this Code, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state specific violation or violations for which the order was issued and the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any work or have his agent continue any work in or about the site after a stop-work order has been issued, except such work as he is directed to perform by the city official issuing the stop-work order to correct a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person who is performing work in accordance with a land disturbance permit and who shall continue to have his agent continue to work in or about the site after a stop-work order has been issued, except such work as he is directed to perform by the city official issuing the stop-work order to correct a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to a civil penalty ordered by the Circuit Court not to exceed thirty-two thousand five hundred dollars ($32,500.00) for each violation. Each day of violation of each requirement shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1965, § 2-85.2; Ord. No. 2129, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 2401, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 3338, 4-22-14) 
Note— Formerly, § 2-273.  
Secs. 2-276—2-284. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII.5. - RESERVED[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3142, adopted June 22, 2010, repealed article VIII.5, which pertained to duties and powers of the consumer protection division of the commonwealth attorney's office and derived from Ord. No. 1955, 5-7-90. 
 
Sec. 2-285. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC UTILITIES 
 
Sec. 2-286. - Created. 
There is hereby created a department of public utilities in and for the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-142) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create departments, §§ 3.05(b), 7.01.  
Sec. 2-287. - Composition. 
The department of public utilities shall consist of the director of public utilities and such officers, engineers and employees in such bureaus, divisions and other units as may be provided by this Code or other ordinances of the city or the orders of the director of public utilities consistent therewith. 
(Code 1965, § 2-142)  
Sec. 2-288. - Issuance of stop-work orders. 
(a)  Upon notice from the director of public utilities or his designees that work is being performed contrary to the provisions of any code, regulation or standard applicable to the performance of such work, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stopwork order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved or his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue or allow to be continued any work in or about the site after a stop-work order has been issued shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, unless such work is at the direction of the city official issuing the stop-work order and is performed to correct a violation or unsafe condition. 
(c)  Any person who is performing work in accordance with a land disturbance permit and who shall continue to have his agent continue to work in or about the site after a stop-work order has been issued, except such work as he is directed to perform by the city official issuing the stop-work order to correct a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to a civil penalty ordered by the Circuit Court not to exceed thirty-two thousand five hundred dollars ($32,500.00) for each violation. Each day of violation of each requirement shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1250, 1-25-82; Ord. No. 3338, 4-22-14)  
Secs. 2-289—2-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Charter reference— Department of public health, Ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 2-301. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby created a department of public health, which shall consist of the director of public health, and such other officers and employees as may be provided by the council or by the orders of the city manager or the director consistent therewith. 
(Code 1965, § 2-128) 
Charter reference— Department of public health created, § 7.01; composition of department, § 13.01.  
Sec. 2-302. - Functions. 
The department of public health shall be responsible for the exercise of all health functions imposed on municipalities by general law and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the council. 
(Code 1965, § 2-128.1) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 13.02.  
Sec. 2-303. - Qualifications and general powers and duties of director. 
The head of the department of public health shall be the director of public health. He shall be a physician licensed to practice medicine in the state. He shall have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department. He shall have all the powers and duties, with respect to the preservation of the public health, which are conferred or imposed on municipal boards of health and health officers by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1965, § 2-128.2) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 13.03.  
Sec. 2-304. - Police powers of personnel. 
The director of public health, the sanitarian supervisors and the sanitarian aide for rabies control of the department of public health are hereby vested with such powers as have the police officers of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-128.3)  
Secs. 2-305—2-315. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2854, adopted Dec. 7, 2004, amended Art. XI of this chapter in its entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Art. XI, §§ 2-316—2-318, of this chapter pertained to the department of mental health, mental retardation and substance abuse services and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 2-150—2-152; and Ord. No. 2498, adopted July 7, 1998. 
State Law reference— Community mental health and mental retardation services, Code of Virginia, § 37.1-194 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-316. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby created a department of human services, which shall consist of a director and such other officers and employees as may be provided by the council or by the orders of the city manager or director consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2854, 12-7-04) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create departments, §§ 3.05(b), 7.01.  
Sec. 2-317. - Appointment, powers and duties of director. 
The director of the department of human services shall be the executive director of the community services board, who shall be appointed in accordance with section 37.1-197(B)(6) of the Code of Virginia. The director shall have general management and control of the several divisions, bureaus and other units of the department, including the juvenile detention center, and shall have all the powers and duties that are conferred by the community services board. 
(Ord. No. 2854, 12-7-04)  
Sec. 2-318. - Establishment and responsibilities of division of social services. 
There is hereby established, within the department of human services, the division of social services, which shall consist of such officers and employees as may be provided by ordinance or by orders or directives consistent therewith. This division shall be responsible for the exercise of all social services functions imposed on municipalities by general law. 
(Ord. No. 2854, 12-7-04)  
Sec. 2-319. - Establishment and responsibilities of division of behavioral health and developmental services. 
There is hereby established, within the department of human services, the division of behavioral health and developmental services, which shall consist of such officers and employees as may be provided by ordinance or by orders or directives consistent therewith. This division shall be responsible for the exercise of all behavioral health, developmental and substance abuse services functions imposed on municipalities by general law and provide such services in coordination with the advice from the community services board. 
(Ord. No. 2854, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 3488, 2-21-17)  
Sec. 2-320. - Designation and duties of local board of public welfare. 
Pursuant to section 63.2-304 of the Code of Virginia, the director of human services is hereby designated as and shall constitute the local board of public welfare. The director shall discharge the duties and functions of such boards as imposed by title 63.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 2854, 12-7-04)  
Sec. 2-321. - Creation of social services advisory board; general function; powers and duties. 
(a)  There is hereby created a social services advisory board for the city, which shall consist of nine (9) members appointed by the city council. The director of human services shall be an ex officio member, without any voting privileges. 
(b)  The board shall act in an advisory capacity to the director of human services with respect to the duties and functions imposed by title 63.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  The powers and duties of the board shall be as enumerated in section 63.2-305 of the Code of Virginia. 
(d)  As required by section 63.2-305 of the Code of Virginia, and notwithstanding the provisions of City Code section 2-3(b), no voting member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive four-year terms. 
(Ord. No. 2854, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 3075, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 3296, 6-25-13)  
Secs. 2-322—2-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - RESERVED[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2824, adopted May 25, 2004, repealed Art. XII, §§ 2-231, 2-232, of this chapter. Former Art. XII, §§ 2-231, 2-232, pertained to the department of general services and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 2-146, 2-147. 
 
Secs. 2-331—2-338. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2129, adopted May 12, 1992, changed the name of the department of data processing to the department of information technology. 
 
Sec. 2-339. - Created. 
There is hereby created the department of information technology in and for the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-143; Ord. No. 2129, 5-12-92) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create departments, §§ 3.05(b), 7.01.  
Sec. 2-340. - Composition. 
The department of information technology shall consist of the director of information technology and such other employees as may be provided by the Charter or ordinance or by the direction of the city manager consistent therewith. 
(Code 1965, § 2-143; Ord. No. 2129, 5-12-92)  
ARTICLE XIII.5. - PUBLIC RECORDS MANAGEMENT[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Cross reference— Concealing, destroying, etc., city records, § 23-42. 
State Law reference— Virginia Public Records Act, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-76 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-341. - Definition. 
As used in this article, "city records" shall mean all written books, papers, letters, documents, photographs, tapes, microfiche, microfilm, photostats, sound recordings, maps, other documentary materials or information in any recording medium, regardless of physical form or characteristics, including data processing devices and computers, made or received in pursuance of law or in connection with the transaction of public business by any office or department of the government of the City of Virginia Beach. "City records" shall not be deemed to include any such items made or received by individual members of the city council. 
Nonrecord materials, which shall include reference books and exhibit materials made or acquired and preserved solely for reference use or exhibition purposes, extra copies of documents preserved only for convenience or reference, and stocks of publications, shall not be included within the definition of "city records" as used in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1818, 11-21-88)  
Sec. 2-342. - City records declared public property. 
(a)  All city records shall be, and are hereby declared to be, the property of the City of Virginia Beach. No city officer or employee shall have, by virtue of his position as an officer or employee of the city, any personal or property right in or to any such records. 
(b)  Any custodian of any city record or records shall, upon the expiration of his tenure of office, appointment or employment, deliver to his successor, or if there be none, to the city records manager, all books, writings, letters, documents and other city records and information in his custody. 
(Ord. No. 1818, 11-21-88)  
Sec. 2-343. - Custody and preservation of records of the city council. 
(a)  The city clerk shall retain the records of the city council. 
(b)  The city clerk shall retain an original of the minutes of the meetings of the city council. In addition, a copy of such minutes shall be scanned and stored in an optical image database. 
(Ord. No. 1818, 11-21-88; Ord. No. 2332, 6-6-95)  
Sec. 2-344. - Records management program established. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to develop a comprehensive program for the management of city records, including the establishment of procedures for the management of such records from their creation to their ultimate disposition and for the efficient and economical creation, distribution, maintenance, use, preservation and disposition of city records. 
(Ord. No. 1818, 11-21-88)  
Sec. 2-345. - Records manager; duties. 
The public records coordinator is hereby designated as records manager, who shall be responsible for the implementation of the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 1818, 11-21-88; Ord. No. 3326, 2-11-14)  
Sec. 2-346. - Duties of department heads; records officers. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the department directors to cooperate with the city manager in implementing the records management program; provided, that nothing in this article shall be construed to require the removal of city records from the custody of a department director when such records are deemed necessary in or for the performance of the duties imposed upon such director by statute or ordinance. 
(b)  Each department director shall designate an employee of his department to act as records representative, who shall report directly to the director of his department and shall be responsible for coordinating the records management program of his department, for cooperating with the records manager in ensuring compliance with the records management program, and for monitoring compliance with records retention and disposition schedules for the records of his department. 
(Ord. No. 1818, 11-21-88; Ord. No. 3326, 2-11-14)  
Sec. 2-347. - Confidentiality. 
Any records made confidential by law shall be so treated. Records which by law are required to be closed to the public shall not be deemed to be made open to the public under the provisions of this article, and no provision of this article shall be construed to authorize or require the opening of any records ordered by a court to be sealed. 
(Ord. No. 1818, 11-21-88)  
Sec. 2-347.1. - Records retention. 
In accordance with the Code of Virginia § 58.1-3129 (A), the city treasurer may destroy all paid personal property tax tickets at any time after five (5) years from the end of the fiscal year during which taxes represented by such tickets were paid, provided that such destruction shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia Public Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 3066, 2-24-09)  
ARTICLE XIV. - DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Charter reference— Department of agriculture, Ch. 15. 
 
Sec. 2-348. - Created; supervision; composition. 
There is hereby created a department of agriculture, which shall be under the supervision of the director of agriculture. There shall be such other officers and employees as shall be directed by ordinance or order of the city manager. 
(Code 1965, § 2-96; Ord. No. 2129, 5-12-92) 
Charter reference— Department of agriculture created, § 7.01; composition of department, § 15.01; director of department, § 15.03.  
Sec. 2-349. - Functions. 
It shall be the responsibility of the department of agriculture to help preserve, protect and increase the production of agriculture in the city; to maintain, operate and supervise the farmers' market of the city; to be responsible for the administration of environmental and agricultural resources of the city; and to perform such other duties and functions as may be prescribed by the council or by orders of the city manager or the director consistent therewith. 
(Code 1965, § 2-97; Ord. No. 2129, 5-12-92) 
Charter reference— Functions of department of agriculture, § 15.02. 
Cross reference— Farmer's market, Ch. 11.  
Secs. 2-350—2-360. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1776, adopted May 9, 1988, amended Art. XV by amending § 2-363, repealing §§ 2-364—2-366 and 2-369, and renumbering §§ 2-367 and 2-368 as §§ 2-364 and 2-365. Said repealed sections pertained to the duties of the tourist development division, the industrial development division and the convention promotion division, and the citizens advisory committee, and were derived from Code 1965, §§ 2-134, 2-135, 2-137; and Ord. No. 958, adopted July 2, 1979. 
 
Sec. 2-361. - Created. 
There is hereby created a department of economic development in and for the city. 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create departments, §§ 3.05(b), 7.01.  
Sec. 2-362. - Office of director created; general duties of director. 
There shall be a director of economic development, who shall be the head of the department of economic development and whose duties shall be such as may be prescribed by the Charter or ordinance or by order of the city manager. 
(Code 1965, § 2-133)  
Sec. 2-363. - General duties of the department of economic development. 
The department of economic development shall be responsible for the following general duties, including any other duties which may be required, assigned, or prescribed: 
(1)  Business retention and expansion on a city wide basis, including, but not limited to, industrial and commercial solicitations and locations, development and coordination of advertising programs, coordination and development of industrial parks and facilities in conjunction with the Virginia Beach Development Authority, and promotion of port, inlet, and airport facilities; 
(2)  Agricultural economic coordination, including, but not limited to, liaison duties between the departments of economic development and agriculture to ensure and improve agriculture's posture in the city's economic mix. 
(Code 1965, § 2-134; Ord. No. 958, 7-2-79; Ord. No. 1776, 5-9-88; Ord. No. 1792, 7-11-88)  
Sec. 2-364. - Assistance to development authority. 
The director of economic development and his staff shall provide assistance to the development authority in its business development activities. 
(Code 1965, § 2-135; Ord. No. 9358, 7-2-79; Ord. No. 1776, 5-9-88)  
Sec. 2-365. - Advertising program. 
The department of economic development, under the direction of the city manager and the director of economic development, with necessary staff assistance, shall develop an advertising program and shall have authority to expend, for advertising and publicizing the city and its resources and facilities, such funds as the city may appropriate for this purpose and to receive and expend for advertising purposes, any funds received from other organizations for such advertising purposes. 
(Code 1965, § 2-136; Ord. No. 1776, 5-9-88) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to make expenditures for advertising its resources and advantages, § 2.02.  
Secs. 2-366—2-380. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING 
 
Sec. 2-381. - Created. 
There is hereby created a department of planning in and for the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-131) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create departments, §§ 3.05(b), 7.01.  
Sec. 2-382. - Composition. 
The department of planning shall consist of a director appointed by the city manager and such assistants as may be provided. The department of planning shall also include a permits and inspections division and a zoning administrator, who shall possess all powers and authority granted to such officers by statute, ordinance or charter. 
(Ord. No. 2401, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 2994, 7-10-07) 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A.  
Sec. 2-383. - General duties. 
The department of planning shall assist the planning commission in the performance of its duties and shall perform such other tasks as may be assigned by the city council or by the city manager. 
(Code 1965, § 2-131)  
Sec. 2-384. - Duties of director with respect to street names. 
It is the responsibility of the director of planning to review the names of proposed new streets to ensure that no conflict exists with existing or previously approved street names. The names of existing streets shall be as they have been or from time to time may be changed by the director of planning after notice has been given to the adjacent property owners. Appeals shall be directed to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of notification. 
(Code 1965, § 2-132) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 33.  
Sec. 2-385. - Duties and powers of zoning administrator. 
The zoning administrator and his designated deputies and assistants shall be responsible for the enforcement of all zoning ordinances of the city. Police powers are hereby conferred upon the zoning administrator and his designated deputies and assistants while engaged in performing their duties, and they shall exercise all powers and authority of police officers in performing such duties. 
(Ord. No. 2129, 5-12-92) 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A.  
Sec. 2-386. - Composition of permits and inspections division; police powers of building official, deputies and division inspectors. 
(a)  The permits and inspections division of the department of planning shall be responsible for all matters pertaining to, and the enforcement of, the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code ("USBC") and all model building codes which have been adopted and incorporated by reference into the Code of the City of Virginia Beach under article II of chapter 8 hereof, fire and health inspections for new construction, including the ordering, in writing, of the remedying of any condition found in violation of such codes or any ordinance, and the bringing of legal action to ensure compliance therewith, including injunction, abatement and any other appropriate action or proceedings. Such division shall perform such other duties as may be required, assigned or prescribed. 
(b)  There shall be, within the permits and inspections division, a building code administrator who shall perform all of the functions and have all of the powers of the code official as set forth in the USBC for new construction. Police powers are hereby conferred upon the building code administrator and designated deputies or inspectors assigned to the permits and inspections division while engaged in performing their duties, and they are each hereby granted the authority to issue stop-work orders, to serve written notices of violation, to order the abatement of such violation and to issue a summons to the general district court to any person in the city who shall fail to obey a lawful order contained in such stop-work order or notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2401, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 2470, 2-10-98)  
Sec. 2-387. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2994, adopted July 10, 2007, repealed § 2-387, which pertained to composition of weights and measures bureau, function; police powers and derived from Ord. No. 2401, 6-25-96.  
Sec. 2-388. - Issuance of stop-work orders. 
(a)  Upon notice from the director of planning, any division head subject to the supervision and control of the director of planning or any of their designated deputies, assistants or inspectors that work is being performed contrary to the provisions of this Code, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state specific violation or violations for which the order was issued and the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any work or have his agent continue any work in or about the site after a stop-work order has been issued, except such work as he is directed to perform by the city official issuing the stop-work order to correct a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person who is performing work in accordance with a land disturbance permit and who shall continue to have his agent continue to work in or about the site after a stop-work order has been issued, except such work as he is directed to perform by the city official issuing the stop-work order to correct a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to a civil penalty ordered by the Circuit Court not to exceed thirty-two thousand five hundred dollars ($32,500.00) for each violation. Each day of violation of each requirement shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2401, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 3338, 4-22-14)  
Secs. 2-389—2-395. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - PLANNING COMMISSION[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Charter reference— Planning commission, §§ 19.01, 19.02. 
Cross reference— Planning commission action on application for sign permit, § 3-25. 
State Law reference— Local planning commissions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-427.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-396. - Composition; organization; appointment and qualifications of members. 
The planning commission of the city shall consist of eleven (11) members. One member shall be appointed from among the residents of each of the seven (7) residence districts of the city, and the four (4) additional members shall be appointed from the city at large; provided, however, that at least one (1) of the at-large members shall be appointed from among the residents of the former Pungo or Blackwater Borough. The commission shall be organized as provided by general law. All members of the commission shall be appointed by the council and shall be residents of the city, qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions on community growth and development; provided that at least six (6) of the members so appointed shall be owners of real property located in the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-129; Ord. No. 1544, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 2464, 12-16-97) 
Charter reference— Planning commission created, § 19.01. 
State Law reference— Duty to create local planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-427.1; provisions similar to above section, § 15.1-437.  
Sec. 2-397. - Terms of members. 
Members of the planning commission shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years. 
(Code 1965, § 2-129) 
Cross reference— Limitation on terms of members of boards and commissions and application for appointment of such members, § 2-3. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-437.  
Sec. 2-398. - Removal of members. 
In addition to the grounds for removal from office of any member of the planning commission set forth in section 15.2-2212 of the Code of Virginia, a failure to attend three (3) consecutive meetings, called or regular, of the planning commission shall constitute cause for removal. 
(Code 1965, § 2-130; Ord. No. 2558, 8-10-99)  
Secs. 2-399—2-410. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT OFFICE[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
State Law reference— Virginia Emergency Services and Disaster Law, Code of Virginia, § 44-146.13 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-411. - Created; director; coordinator. 
In accordance with section 44-146.19 of the Code of Virginia, an office of emergency management is hereby created for and within the city. The city manager is hereby appointed as director of emergency management. A coordinator shall be appointed by the director, with the consent of council. The Deputy City Manager for Public Safety shall be the coordinator of emergency management. 
(Code 1965, § 2-139; Ord. No. 1702, 6-1-87; Ord. No. 3481, 12-13-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 44-146.19.  
Sec. 2-412. - General powers and duties of director. 
(a)  In collaboration with other public and private agencies within the state, the director of emergency management shall develop or cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements for reciprocal assistance in case of a disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted. 
(b)  The director of emergency management shall prepare and keep current a local or interjurisdictional emergency plan for the area. This shall include, but not be limited to, responsibilities of all local agencies and shall establish a chain of command. 
(Code 1965, § 2-140; Ord. No. 1702, 6-1-87) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 44-146.19.  
Sec. 2-413. - Declaration of emergencies. 
A local emergency may be declared by the director of emergency management, with the consent of the council. In the event the council cannot convene due to the disaster, the director or any member of the council, in the absence of the director, may declare the existence of a local disaster subject to confirmation by the council at its next regularly scheduled meeting or at a special meeting within 45 days of the declaration, whichever occurs first. The council, when in its judgment all emergency actions have been taken, shall take appropriate action to end the declared emergency. 
(Code 1965, § 2-141; Ord. No. 1702, 6-1-87; Ord. No. 2981, 6-5-07; Ord. No. 3457, 8-2-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 44-146.21.  
Secs. 2-414—2-420. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIX. - DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1160, enacted April 13, 1981, amended the 1965 Code by adding Art. XXV, §§ 2-153—2-155; the editor has redesignated these provisions as Art. XIX, §§ 2-421—2-423. 
Cross reference— Emergency medical care agencies and vehicles, Ch. 10.5. 
 
Sec. 2-421. - Creation; composition. 
There is hereby created a department of emergency medical services, which shall consist of an emergency medical services chief, a medical director endorsed by the Virginia Beach Medical Society, the members of the operational volunteer rescue squads serving the city and such other committees, boards, organizations and personnel as may be ordered by the city manager, the medical director or the chief consistent herewith. Such members, committees, boards, organizations and personnel shall be under the supervision and control of the emergency medical services chief. Personnel assigned to the fire department shall be under the supervision and control of the emergency medical services chief and the fire chief whenever they are engaged in emergency medical services and rescue services activities as defined in section 2-422. The emergency medical services chief and medical director shall be appointed by the city manager. The medical director shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years and shall be eligible for reappointment. 
(Ord. No. 1160, 4-13-81; Ord. No. 1470, 7-9-84; Ord. No. 1956, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 2404, 7-2-96; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15) 
Cross reference— Volunteer rescue squads listed, § 2-4.  
Sec. 2-422. - Functions. 
The department of emergency medical services shall be responsible for controlling and supervising the provision of emergency medical services and rescue services in the city to protect and promote the health, welfare and safety of the general public. Such services shall include, but not be limited to: basic and advanced life support patient care; preventative care; patient care at accidents of any nature involving injuries and/or illnesses; mass casualty incidents; water rescues, including, boat, lifeguard and rescue dive operations services; and all other incidents involving injured or ill patients. Such services shall not include (i) rescues which involve an imminent danger or the actual occurrence of fire or explosion, or the uncontrolled release of hazardous materials which threaten life, or (ii) search and rescue operations conducted by law enforcement officers. The department shall be responsible for establishing and enforcing applicable rules, regulations, policies and protocols for the department and for other city agencies and the agencies which are defined under chapter 10.5 of the Code. The department shall have other such powers and duties as may be assigned by council or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1160, 4-13-81; Ord. No. 1470, 7-9-84; Ord. No. 1956, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 2404, 7-2-96; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 2-423. - General powers and duties of director and chief. 
(a)  The medical director shall be responsible for the establishment of medical policy dealing with the direction and coordination of patient care operations for the department, including, but not limited to, the granting of the authorization to practice to EMS personnel as defined in the Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3408, the development of medical training standards, medical care procedures and protocols, medical performance standards and general medical control. 
(b)  The emergency medical services chief shall make rules, regulations and policies concerning the general management, direction, operation and control of the department of emergency medical services, as well as the provision of emergency medical services and rescue services in the city, including, but not limited to, the certification of emergency medical services personnel to operate within the city consistent with policies promulgated by the medical director; the implementation of medical and operational policy and protocol; and the supervision of all personnel within the department, as well as any other personnel involved in the provision of emergency medical and rescue services as set forth in section 2-422 of this code. 
(c)  The rules, regulations and policies of the medical director and emergency medical services chief shall be subject to approval by the city manager and shall not be inconsistent with the laws of the commonwealth. 
(Ord. No. 1160, 4-13-81; Ord. No. 1470, 7-9-84; Ord. No. 1956, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 2404, 7-2-96; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 2-424. - Advisory boards. 
(a)  The Council of Virginia Beach Volunteer Rescue Squads, Inc. shall serve as an advisory board to the emergency medical services chief, providing recommendations on department policy matters as necessary. The advisory board may also provide recommendations to the city manager concerning the selection of the emergency medical services chief when vacancies occur in that position, and other matters pertaining to the duties, responsibilities and functions of the department of emergency medical services. 
(b)  Additional boards which may be created shall have duties as enumerated to them by the city manager, medical director or the emergency medical services chief. 
(Ord. No. 1470, 7-9-84; Ord. No. 1956, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 2404, 7-2-96; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 2-425. - Background investigations of applicants for certification; false representation of certification unlawful; impersonation. 
(a)  In order to determine if any past criminal conduct or motor vehicle driving record of any applicant for certification by the emergency medical services chief would be compatible with the nature of the position under consideration, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  Each such applicant shall furnish a classifiable set of fingerprints to the department of police. 
(2)  The chief of police and members of the department of police acting in his name and the emergency medical services chief or an investigator designated by the emergency medical services chief within the department of emergency medical services, are authorized to conduct a field investigation and directed to conduct criminal record checks on each such applicant. 
(3)  The chief of police or a member of the police department acting on his behalf, or an investigator designated by the emergency medical services chief within the department of emergency medical services, shall prepare a factual summary of the background investigation and criminal records check of each applicant and transmit such summary to the emergency medical services chief for the purpose of determining the fitness of the applicant. 
(4)  Background investigation and records checks include records of all arrests and dispositions as an adult. Records of arrests and dispositions, while an applicant was considered a juvenile, shall be transmitted only when authorized by a court order, court rule, court decision, federal regulation or state statute authorizing such dissemination. 
(5)  Criminal history records and information shall include arrest and disposition data on file in the national crime information center, the federal bureau of investigation, the department of defense, the department of motor vehicles, and all other federal, state and local law enforcement agencies. 
(6)  Any applicant who is denied certification on the basis of the investigation summary referred to in this section may inspect that summary for the purpose of clarifying, explaining or denying the accuracy of its contents. 
(7)  The chief of police and members of the police department shall make no other dissemination to the emergency medical services chief regarding the fitness of applicants, except in the official summary report referred to in this section. 
(8)  Use of criminal history record information disseminated to the emergency medical services chief shall be limited to the purpose for which it was given and may not be disseminated further. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully impersonate, with the intent to make another believe he is an emergency medical services provider. A first offense conviction is a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1588, 2-10-86; Ord. No. 1900, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 1956, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 2231, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 2709, 6-25-02; Ord. No. 3293, 6-11-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15)  
Secs. 2-426—2-430. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XX. - DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1921, adopted Oct. 2, 1989, amended Art. XX, §§ 2-431 and 2-432, to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Art. XX pertained to the department of housing and community development, as derived from Ord. No. 1452, §§ 1 and 2, adopted May 14, 1984. 
Cross reference— Housing and building maintenance code, Ch. 16; social services, Ch. 29; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 33; zoning, App. A. 
 
Sec. 2-431. - Creation. 
There is hereby created a department of housing and neighborhood preservation. 
(Ord. No. 1921, 10-2-89)  
Sec. 2-432. - Composition. 
The department of housing and neighborhood preservation shall consist of the director of housing and neighborhood preservation and such other employees as may be provided by the Charter or by ordinance or by direction of the city manager consistent therewith. In addition thereto, the department shall, by the code enforcement administrator, perform all of the functions and have all of the powers of the code official as set forth in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code for existing structures. Police powers are hereby conferred upon the code enforcement administrator and his or her designated employees while engaged in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 1921, 10-2-89; Ord. No. 2467, 1-13-98)  
Secs. 2-433—2-439. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXI. - VIRGINIA BEACH CONVENTION AND VISITORS BUREAU[27] 

Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2763, adopted June 3, 2003, changed the title of Art. XXI of this chapter from the "Department of Convention and Visitor Development" to the "Virginia Beach Convention and Visitors Bureau." 
 
Sec. 2-440. - Creation. 
There is hereby created a department that shall be known as the Virginia Beach convention and visitors bureau. 
(Ord. No. 1792, 7-11-88; Ord. No. 2763, 6-3-03)  
Sec. 2-441. - Office of director created; general duties of director. 
There shall be a director of the Virginia Beach convention and visitors bureau whose duties shall be as prescribed by the Charter or ordinance or by order of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1792, 7-11-88; Ord. No. 2763, 6-3-03)  
Sec. 2-442. - General duties of the Virginia Beach convention and visitors bureau. 
The Virginia Beach convention and visitors bureau shall be responsible for the following general duties, including any other duties which may be required, assigned or prescribed: 
(1)  Travel and tourism, including, but not limited to, the solicitation of tourist attractions, the development of and coordination of advertising programs and solicitation of activities and events appropriate for departmental facilities. All monies received from departmental event facilities and related operations during each fiscal year shall be paid into the general fund or such other funds as determined by city council. 
(2)  Convention promotion, including, but not limited to, the solicitation of conventions and the coordination of housing of convention delegates. 
(3)  The operation, maintenance and management of departmental event facilities and public parking facilities including, but not limited to, lots, on-street parking and garages, establishing and enforcing reasonable rules and regulations for the use of such facilities, as well as revenue and cost analysis, fee standards, and concession operations. 
(Ord. No. 1792, 7-11-88; Ord. No. 2533, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2763, 6-3-03)  
Sec. 2-443. - Advertising program. 
The Virginia Beach convention and visitors bureau shall develop an advertising program and shall have the authority to expend such funds as the city may appropriate to promote the increase of travel, tourism and conventions within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1792, 7-11-88; Ord. No. 2763, 6-3-03)  
Secs. 2-444—2-450. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXII. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[28] 

Footnotes: 
--- (28) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1796, adopted August 1, 1988, added Art. XXI, § 2-441, to Ch. 2. Inasmuch as Ord. No. 1792, adopted July 11, 1988, had previously added Art. XXI, §§ 2-440—2-443, the provisions added by Ord. No. 1796 have been redesignated Art. XXII, § 2-451, herein, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-451. - Definition of boards, commissions and committees. 
Boards shall be defined as those advisory council-appointive agencies which are prescribed by the Virginia State Code as "boards," as well as locally established bodies, the duty of which pertains to or is governed by federal and state codes or local ordinances. Terms shall be specified and limited in accordance with the applicable federal or state codes or local ordinances or resolutions. Those currently established are as follows: 
Board of building code appeals 
Board of zoning appeals 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Board 
Community services board 
Community policy and management team—CSA at-risk youth and families 
Development authority 
Director of the office of volunteer resources 
Eastern Virginia Medical School 
Hampton Roads Economic Development Alliance 
Health services advisory board 
Historical review board 
Housing advisory board 
Minority business council 
North Landing Scenic River Advisory Board 
Pendleton Project Management Board 
Personnel board 
The planning council 
Public library board 
Senior Services of Southeastern Virginia 
Social services board 
Southeastern Public Service Authority (SPSA) 
Southeastern Tidewater Opportunity Project, Inc. (STOP) 
Tidewater Community College Board 
Towing advisory board 
Virginia Beach Community Development Corporation 
Wetlands board 
Commissions shall be defined as those advisory council-appointive agencies which are prescribed by the Virginia State Code as "commissions," plus those locally established for a specific purpose with budgetary responsibility and a structured organization with an annual report to city council. Terms shall be specified and limited in accordance with applicable state statutes or city ordinances or resolutions. Those currently established are as follows: 
Agricultural advisory commission 
Arts and humanities commission 
Bayfront Advisory Commission 
Beaches and waterways commission 
Hampton Roads Planning District Commission - HRPDC 
Historic preservation commission 
Human rights commission 
Parks and recreation commission 
Planning commission 
Resort advisory commission 
Southeastern Virginia Planning District Commission 
Tidewater Transportation District Commission 
Tidewater Youth Services Commission 
Committees shall be defined as those short-term advisory agencies appointed by city council for specific studies with regular reporting periods to the governing body and which shall be automatically abolished when their mission is accomplished and the final report filed with the city clerk for distribution to city council. Those currently established are as follows: 
Advertising advisory selection committee 
Audit committee 
Bikeways and trails advisory committee 
Employee benefits review task force 
Military economic development advisory committee 
Oceana Land Use Conformity Committee 
Open space advisory committee 
Review and allocation committee 
(Ord. No. 1796, 8-1-88; Ord. No. 2548, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 2734, 1-14-03; Ord. No. 3106, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 3216, 2-14-12; Ord. No. 3391, 1-6-15; Ord. No. 3503, 5-16-17)  
Sec. 2-451.1. - Restrictions on post-employment activities of certain appointees. 
For one (1) year after their terms of office have ended, appointees of council who received monetary compensation for service on any agency, board, commission, authority, committee, or task force may not provide personal and substantial assistance for remuneration of any kind to any party, in connection with any proceeding, application, case, contract, or other particular matter involving the city or an agency thereof, if that matter is one in which the former appointee participated personally and substantially as a council appointee through decision, approval or recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 2779, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 2-452. - Establishment of military liaison commission. 
A military liaison commission is hereby established. The mayor, the vice-mayor and city manager shall serve for the tenure of their offices or appointments, with the mayor to chair the commission. The school superintendent and chairman of the school board shall be requested to serve for the tenure of their appointments; and, the following officers, by virtue of their command posts, comprise the military representation and that they shall be requested to serve for the tenure of their respective commands: 
Commander-in-chief, U.S. Atlantic Fleet 
Commander, U.S. Naval Air Force, Atlantic Fleet 
Commander, U.S. Naval Surface Force, Atlantic Fleet 
Commander, U.S. Submarine Force, Atlantic Fleet 
Commander, Fighter Medium Attack Airborne Early Warning Wings—Atlantic/Commander, Naval Supply Center 
Commander, Fifth Coast Guard District. 
Commander, U.S. Naval Base (Norfolk) 
Deputy commander, U.S. Naval Base (Norfolk) 
Commanding officer, U.S. Naval Amphibious Base (Little Creek) 
Commanding officer, U.S. Naval Air Station (Oceana) 
Commanding officer, U.S. Fleet Combat Training Center—Atlantic (Dam Neck) 
Commanding officer, Headquarters—Fort Story 
Commanding officer, Fleet Marine Force-Atlantic 
Site commander, Virginia Army National Guard 
The military liaison commission shall meet formally and/or informally on a regular semiannual basis to communicate with each governmental entity, provide good public relations, and create a better understanding of military regulations, civilian laws and community interests. 
(Ord. No. 1797, 8-1-88; Ord. No. 1800, 8-15-88; Ord. No. 1803, 8-22-88) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1797, adopted August 1, 1988, as amended by Ord. No. 1800 and Ord. No. 1803, added § 2-442 to the Code. Inasmuch as a § 2-442 had been previously added by Ord. No. 1792, adopted July 11, 1988, § 2-442 added by Ord. No. 1797 has been redesignated as § 2-452 herein, at the discretion of the editor. See also the editor's note to the title of this Art. XXII.  
Sec. 2-452.1. - Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Board. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Board, which shall have such authority as is conferred upon it by the provisions of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance. Such board shall consist of nine (9) members, who shall be appointed by the city council for terms of three (3) years; provided, however, that original appointments shall be made as follows: Three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, two (2) members for a term of two (2) years, and two (2) members for a term of one (1) year. Members may serve for no more than three (3) consecutive three-year terms in addition to an initial term, if such initial term is less than three (3) years, but a member whose term expires shall continue to serve until his successor is appointed and qualifies. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired portion of the term. Members of the board shall be appointed on a volunteer basis and shall be reimbursed for their necessary expenses in discharging their duties. 
(b)  The board shall elect from its membership a chair and vice-chair. The chair shall preside at all meetings of the board, except that the vice-chair shall preside in the absence of the chair. Members of the board shall be required to take an oath of office prior to assuming their positions. The board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedures, consistent with the ordinances of the city, including, without limitation, Sections 110 and 111 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance, and the general laws of the commonwealth. 
(c)  Pursuant to the provisions of section 2.2-3115(A) of the Code of Virginia, the members of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Board, as a condition of assuming office, shall file disclosure statements of their personal interests and other information specified on the forms set forth in Code of Virginia section 2.2-3117 and, thereafter, file such statements annually in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia section 2.2-3115(A). 
(Ord. No. 2012, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2021, 12-11-90; Ord. No. 2028, 1-8-91; Ord. No. 2301, 12-6-94; Ord. No. 2435, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 2792, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 3286, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 3364, 7-8-14; Ord. No. 3539, 4-3-18) 
Cross reference— Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance, App. F.  
Sec. 2-452.2. - Board of zoning appeals. 
(a)  The board of zoning appeals shall consist of seven (7) regular members and a maximum of three (3) alternates appointed by the city council. Members and alternates shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years, except that appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term, and members and alternates may be reappointed to succeed themselves. The qualifications, organization and procedures of the board shall be as set forth in sections 15.2-2308 through 15.2-2314 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(b)  The accumulation of more than three (3) absences of a member within a given calendar year for reasons other than personal illness, the illness or death of a relative, or other circumstances beyond such member's control shall constitute grounds for removal of such member. 
(c)  The board shall make, alter or rescind rules and guidelines for its procedures consistent with the ordinances of the city and laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(d)  On or about July 1 of each year, or as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable, the members of the board, including alternates, shall collectively meet with the city attorney in order to review the duties and responsibilities of the board and the laws and procedures pertaining to matters coming before the board. The members of the board may also, at their option, attend the Virginia Certified Boards of Zoning Appeals Program sponsored by the Virginia Cooperative Extension Service. 
(Ord. No. 2548, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 2554, 7-13-99; Ord. No. 2718, 8-6-02)  
ARTICLE XXIII. - RESERVED[29] 

Footnotes: 
--- (29) --- 
Editor's note— Article XXIII, "Development Services Department," §§ 2-453, 2-454, derived from Ord. No. 2000, adopted Aug. 14, 1990, was repealed by Ord. No. 2129, adopted May 12, 1992. 
 
Secs. 2-453, 2-454. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXIV. - DEPARTMENT OF THE VIRGINIA AQUARIUM[30] 

Footnotes: 
--- (30) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3590, adopted May 14, 2019, amended Article XXIV title to read as herein set out. Formerly, such article pertained to department of aquarium, historic houses and museums. 
 
Sec. 2-455. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby created a department to be designated the Department of the Virginia Aquarium which shall consist of a director of the department, and such other employees as may be prescribed by the Charter, or by ordinance, or by direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 3456, 8-2-16; Ord. No. 3564, 8-7-18; Ord. No. 3590, 5-14-19)  
Sec. 2-456. - Functions. 
The Department of the Virginia Aquarium shall be responsible for administering and coordinating the activities and functions of the Virginia Aquarium and Marine Science Center and other facilities owned by the city associated with the aquarium. The department shall also be responsible for the provision of such other services as may be directed by the council or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 3456, 8-2-16; Ord. No. 3564, 8-7-18; Ord. No. 3590, 5-14-19)  
ARTICLE XXV. - RESERVED[31] 

Footnotes: 
--- (31) --- 
Editor's note— Article XXV, "Department of Natural Resources and Rural Services," §§ 2-457, 2-458, derived from Ord. No. 2066, adopted June 4, 1991, was repealed by Ord. No. 2129, adopted May 12, 1992. 
 
Secs. 2-457, 2-458. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXVI. - HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-459. - Commission established; composition; appointment and terms of members; etc. 
(a)  There is hereby created the City of Virginia Beach Human Rights Commission which shall consist of nineteen (19) members. 
(b)  The members of the commission shall be appointed by the city council for a term of three (3) years, provided, however, that two (2) members shall be high school students (a junior and a senior), whose terms shall expire upon their graduation from high school. The commission shall elect, from its members, a chairperson, a vice-chairperson, and such other officers as the commission may deem appropriate. 
(c)  Attendance records shall be kept at each meeting of the commission, and an annual report of attendance shall be submitted to city council through the city clerk's office. No member shall accumulate an annual total of more than three (3) absences (not to exceed one-fourth of the total number of meetings) for reasons other than personal illness, death or other unusual circumstances. If this limitation is exceeded, the chairperson shall report to the city clerk the name of the commission member whose unexcused absences exceed the number set forth herein. The city clerk shall then notify in writing, with copies to the city council, the commission member that, due to absences in excess of the number allowed herein, their term of membership on the commission terminated. Thereafter, the city clerk shall forward the vacancy to the city council for appointment of a new commission member. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b) and (c), all members of the commission shall serve at the pleasure of city council. 
(e)  Members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but funds may be appropriated in the annual budget for reasonable and necessary expenses to be incurred by the commission in the conduct of its prescribed functions. 
(Ord. No. 2088, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 2477, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 3125, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 3355, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 3460, 8-16-16)  
Sec. 2-460. - Staff assistance; recordation of minutes. 
(a)  The director of human resources or his or her designee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the commission and among other duties, shall assist the chairman of the commission in the preparation of meeting agendas. 
(b)  The city shall provide the commission sufficient staff support to perform clerical and administrative duties for the commission, and record the minutes of commission meetings. 
(Ord. No. 2088, 8-6-91; Ord. No 2477, 3-3-98)  
Sec. 2-461. - Duties, powers and function. 
The commission shall serve as an advisory agency to the city council and shall be vested with the following duties, powers and functions: 
(a)  To institute, conduct, and engage in educational and informational programs for the promotion of mutual understanding and respect among citizens, and the fulfillment of human rights. 
(b)  To serve as a forum for the discussion of human rights issues, and to conduct studies and propose solutions for the improvement of human relations in the city. 
(c)  To provide assistance to persons who believe their rights have been violated by identifying the appropriate federal, state or local agency to address the complaint and referring such persons to that agency. 
(d)  To provide city council and the city manager an annual written report of the commission's activities on or before June 30th of each year. 
(e)  To adopt rules and procedures for the conduct of its affairs. 
(Ord. No. 2088, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 3355, 6-17-14)  
ARTICLE XXVII. - OFFICE OF THE HIGH CONSTABLE 
 
Sec. 2-462. - High constable; appointment. 
Pursuant to sections 20.11 and 20.14 of the Charter, the sheriff is hereby appointed as the high constable and is authorized to designate deputy sheriffs to act on his behalf in carrying out the duties of the high constable as set forth in section 2-463. 
(Ord. No. 2384, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 2987, 6-26-07)  
Sec. 2-463. - Duties of high constable. 
The high constable shall execute all processes, warrants, summons and notices issuing from, or returnable to, the general district court. 
(Ord. No. 2384, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 2-464. - Fees collected by high constable. 
(a)  The fees collected by the high constable shall be the same as those fees set forth in section 17.1-273 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(b)  All such fees shall be deposited into the city treasury for use in the general operation of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2384, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 2987, 6-26-07)  
ARTICLE XXVIII. - OFFICE OF THE CITY AUDITOR[32] 

Footnotes: 
--- (32) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3005, adopted December 11, 2007, repealed the former Art. XXVIII, §§ 2-465—2-468, and enacted a new Art. XXVIII as set out herein. The former Art. XXVIII pertained to department of audit services and derived from Ord. No. 2579, 5-9-2000. 
 
Sec. 2-465. - Creation; purpose; composition. 
(a)  The office of the city auditor is hereby created, with such office to be filled by the appointment of a city auditor by a majority vote of city council, who shall report to and serve as an at-will employee of the city council. The city auditor shall possess adequate professional proficiency for the job and must be a licensed certified public accountant. The city auditor's salary shall be set by the city council and reviewed annually. 
(b)  The city auditor shall have the power to appoint, employ and remove, pursuant to budget authorization, deputy and assistant auditors as deemed necessary for the efficient and effective administration of the affairs of the office and to prescribe their duties, scope of authority and qualifications. Deputy and assistant auditors employed on or after February 16, 2008 shall be appointed by the city auditor and serve at the pleasure of the city auditor. Deputy and assistant city auditors employed prior to February 16, 2008 shall retain their status as merit employees. Clerical and other support staff of the city auditor shall be merit employees. 
(Ord. No. 3005, 12-11-07)  
Sec. 2-466. - Powers and duties; scope of audits. 
The city auditor shall have authority to conduct financial and performance audits of departments, offices, boards, activities, agencies, programs and systems of the entity to independently and objectively determine, depending on the scope and type of audit, whether: 
(a)  Activities and programs being implemented have been authorized by government charter or code, state law or applicable federal law or regulations and are being conducted and funds expended in compliance with applicable laws and regulations; 
(b)  The department, office, or agency is acquiring, managing, protecting, and using its resources, including public funds, personnel, property, equipment, technology and space, economically, efficiently, and effectively and in a manner consistent with the objectives intended by the authorizing entity or enabling legislation; 
(c)  The entity, programs, activities, functions, or policies are effective, including the identification of any causes of inefficiencies or uneconomical practices; 
(d)  The desired result or benefits are being achieved; 
(e)  Financial and other reports are being provided that disclose fairly, accurately, and fully all information required by law, to ascertain the nature and scope of programs and activities, and to establish a proper basis for evaluating the programs and activities including the collection of, accounting for, and depositing of, revenues and other resources; 
(f)  Management has established adequate operating and administrative procedures and practices, accounting systems or internal control systems and internal management controls; and 
(g)  Indications of fraud, waste and abuse are valid and need further investigation. 
(Ord. No. 3005, 12-11-07)  
Sec. 2-467. - Standards. 
Audits shall be conducted in accordance with Government Auditing Standards. 
(Ord. No. 3005, 12-11-07)  
Sec. 2-468. - Access to employees, records and property. 
(a)  All officers and employees of the City of Virginia Beach shall furnish to the city auditor, or designee, unrestricted access to employees, information and records (including electronic data) within their custody regarding powers, duties, activities, organization, property, financial transactions, contracts and methods of business required to conduct an audit or otherwise perform audit duties. In addition, they shall provide access for the city auditor or designee to inspect all property, equipment and facilities within their custody. 
(b)  All contracts for construction; all contracts for architectural and engineering services; all franchise agreements; any public-private partnership agreement whether structured, without limitation, as a lease, a performance agreement, or grant agreement; and any contract for goods and services of an ongoing nature shall contain a "right-to-audit" clause providing the city auditor access to the contractor's records relating to or pertaining to the contract as well as records relating to or pertaining to property and equipment purchased in whole or in part with governmental funds in the performance of the contract. Right-to-audit clauses shall be included in other city contracts where the facts and circumstances support the need for the provision. 
(c)  Unless otherwise required by law, the city auditor shall not disclose any confidential or proprietary information acquired during an audit. 
(Ord. No. 3005, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 3081, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 3365, 8-5-14)  
Sec. 2-469. - Audit committee. 
(a)  To ensure independence of the audit function, an audit committee is hereby established. The audit committee shall consist of five (5) members: two (2) non-voting councilmembers and three (3) voting citizen members, who shall be appointed by the council. At least one (1) of the citizen members shall be a licensed certified public accountant, and the other two (2) citizen-members shall have a background in finance, accounting, and/or auditing. Of those first appointed, one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, one (1) for a term of two (2) years; one (1) for a term of three (3) years; and thereafter all appointments shall be for a term of three (3) years. 
(b)  The audit committee shall consult with the city auditor regarding technical issues and work to assure maximum coordination between work of the office of the city auditor and external audit efforts. 
(c)  The audit committee shall meet as needed to perform its duties but shall not meet less than three (3) times annually and shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Reviewing the city auditor's annual plan and budget before submission to council. 
(2)  Reviewing audit reports upon issuance; 
(3)  Monitoring follow-up on reported findings to assure corrective action is taken; 
(4)  Reporting to council on problems or problem areas at such times as deemed appropriate; 
(5)  Performing an evaluation of the city auditor annually and reporting the results of the evaluation and effectiveness of the audit function to council; 
(6)  Reviewing reports of the external auditors; and 
(7)  Evaluating the findings and recommendations of the peer review of the audit function as required by Government Auditing Standards. 
(Ord. No. 3005, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 3308, 11-12-13)  
Sec. 2-470. - Audit schedule. 
(a)  At the beginning of each fiscal year, the city auditor shall submit an annual audit schedule to the audit committee for review and comment. The schedule shall include the proposed plan, and the rationale for the selections, for auditing departments, offices, boards, activities, contractors and agencies for the period. This schedule may be amended after review with the audit committee, but the city auditor shall have final authority to select the audits planned. City council shall be notified of any amendments. 
(b)  City council may request an unscheduled audit depending upon newly discovered facts, provided, however, that such request must be approved by a majority of the members of city council. 
(Ord. No. 3005, 12-11-07)  
Sec. 2-471. - Agency response. 
A draft of the audit report will be forwarded to the audited agency for review and comment regarding factual content prior to its release. The agency must respond to the city auditor, in writing, within thirty (30) days specifying (i) agreement with audit findings and recommendations or reasons for disagreement with findings and/or recommendations; (ii) plans for implementing solutions to issues identified; (iii) a timetable to complete such activities. The city auditor will include the agency's response in the report. If no response is received, the city auditor will note that fact in the transmittal letter and will release the audit report. 
(Ord. No. 3005, 12-11-07)  
Sec. 2-472. - Audit reports. 
Each audit will result in a report, written or in some other retrievable form, and be prepared in accordance with Government Auditing Standards. The report shall be distributed to the audit committee, city council and management, and it shall also be available for public examination. 
(Ord. No. 3005, 12-11-07)  
Sec. 2-473. - Annual follow-up. 
The city auditor shall follow-up on audit recommendations as practical to determine if corrective action has been taken, and may request periodic status reports from audited agencies regarding actions taken to address reported deficiencies and audit recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 3005, 12-11-07)  
Sec. 2-474. - Contracted auditors or other experts. 
(a)  The city auditor will coordinate and manage the audit contract of the City's Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) and related federal grants. Council must approve the selection of a certified public accounting firm for the CAFR audit in accordance with City Charter § 8.06. 
(b)  Within budget limitations, the city auditor may obtain the services of certified public accountants or other professional experts necessary to perform audit work. An audit that is performed by contract must be conducted by persons who have no financial interests in the affairs of the governmental entity or its officers. 
(Ord. No. 3005, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 3069, 3-10-09)  
Sec. 2-475. - Notification of audits and audit-related issues. 
City management shall notify the city auditor of any external audits as soon as it is made aware of an upcoming audit. City management shall also notify the city auditor of any audit-related issues pertaining to violations of federal, state or local laws and regulations involving city funds, grants, or resources. 
(Ord. No. 3105, 10-27-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3105, adopted October 27, 2009, amended § 2-475 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 2-475, pertained to federal, state and other grants, and derived from Ord. No. 3005, 12-11-07.  
Sec. 2-476. - Fraud, waste or abuse. 
(a)  The office of the city auditor will oversee and coordinate all actions taken in a preliminary investigation of a suspected fraudulent activity. To the extent allowed by law, the office of the city auditor shall review relevant information in a confidential manner and shall conduct a prompt preliminary investigation of the alleged activity. If evidence indicates possible fraud, waste or abuse, a full investigation shall follow including coordination with appropriate law enforcement agencies. A summary of investigative findings shall be communicated to the audit committee. 
(b)  In accordance with Virginia Code § 2.2-3705.3(7), records of a completed investigation shall be disclosed upon request to any Virginia citizen or member of the media, unless such disclosure is prohibited by law. The information disclosed shall include the name of the department or agency involved, the nature of the complaint, the job category of the subject of the complaint, a summary of the investigative procedures and findings, and what actions, if any, were taken to resolve the complaint. If a person is the subject of the complaint, the identity of that person shall only be disclosed if the investigation results in corrective action or the person consents to release of his or her identity. "Corrective action" consists of suspension, demotion, or termination. An investigation shall be considered completed when all related investigatory activities have been concluded. With respect to an investigation that leads to criminal charges, the investigation shall be considered completed upon exhaustion of all appeals. The identity of complainants or persons supplying information to investigators shall not be disclosed. 
(Ord. No. 3005, 12-11-07)  
Sec. 2-477. - Annual report. 
The city auditor shall submit an annual report to council within forty-five (45) days after the fiscal year indicating audits completed, major findings, and corrective actions taken. 
(Ord. No. 3005, 12-11-07)  
Secs. 2-478—2-489. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXIX. - DEPARTMENT OF CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
 
Sec. 2-490. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby created a department to be designated the department of cultural affairs which shall consist of a director of the department, and such other employees as may be authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 3591, 5-14-19)  
Sec. 2-491. - Functions. 
The department of cultural affairs shall be responsible for administering and coordinating cultural activities and functions of the city including the four history museums owned and operated by the city: the Francis Land House, Thoroughgood House, Lynnhaven House, and the Princess Anne County Training School/Union Kempsville High School Museum. The department shall also be responsible for the provision of such other services as may be directed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 3591, 5-14-19)  
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Rate advertising by hotels and other establishments, § 15-4; advertising of business constitutes prima facie evidence of liability under license code, § 18-7; license tax for bill posters, § 18-63; license tax for advertising businesses, § 18-74; prohibition against traffic or highway signs with commercial advertising thereon, § 21-298; advertising obscene items, exhibitions or performances, § 22-6; obscene placards, posters, bills, etc., § 22-7; unlawful use of words "official tourist information" or similar language in advertising, § 23-37; use of automobile graveyard, junkyard or dump fence for advertising purposes, § 25-25; certain advertising in connection with going-out-of-business sales prohibited, § 32-17. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Definition of "sign". 
The word "sign," as used in this chapter, shall mean any structure, display, device or other object or thing, visible from any public street or right-of-way, any area open to use by the general public, or any navigable body of water, including, but not limited to, any word, letter, series of words or letters, painting, mural, logo, insignia, emblem, service mark or other graphic or pictorial representation, which that: (i) identifies or advertises, or directs or attracts attention to, any product, merchandise, service, business or establishment, (ii) or which suggests the identity or nature of any business or establishment, (iii) or which invites or proposes a commercial transaction, or (iv) communicates a message of a noncommercial nature. The term does not include architectural elements incorporated into the style or function of a building, numerals signifying a property address, or names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type construction and made an integral part of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 3443, 4-19-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3443, adopted April 19, 2016, amended § 3-1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 3-1, pertained to definition of "billboard". See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 3-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3443, adopted April 19, 2016, repealed § 3-2, which pertained to signs and billboards prohibited in certain area; exception. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 3-3. - Signs and other advertising devices in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  No person shall erect, place or maintain any sign in, over or upon any public street, public right-of-way or other public property in the city, except for the following signs: 
(1)  Signs of a noncommercial nature erected on public property by order of a governmental officer in the performance of his official duties or required by law, including, but not limited to, directional signs, regulatory signs, warning signs, and informational signs; 
(2)  Signs permitted to encroach in, over or upon any public street, public right-of-way or other public property pursuant to applicable provisions of Article VI of Chapter 33; or 
(3)  Other signs expressly allowed to be located on public property by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  Any sign permitted by this section shall be subject to all applicable codes, ordinances, standards, specifications and other requirements of law pertaining to such sign. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to remove and discard any sign determined to be in violation of this section. In addition, a violation of any provision of this section shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day that a violation continues. 
(Code 1965, §§ 3-11, 3-12; Ord. No. 3443, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 3-4. - Scattering advertising matter. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 3 misdemeanor for any person to scatter or cause to be scattered, on the streets of, or in or about any lot or yard in, the city, any sample, handbill, dodger, circular or other paper or advertising matter or device that litters the streets and premises in the city. 
(Code 1965, § 3-1)  
Sec. 3-5. - Placing advertising matter in parked vehicles. 
No person shall place or cause to be placed handbills, cards or posters or other advertising matter on or in motor vehicles parked on the streets of the city or in driveways or in any parking areas, public or private, within the city. A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 3-2; Ord. No. 1662, 11-24-86)  
Sec. 3-6. - Motor vehicle signs. 
(a)  Signs displayed on motor vehicles operated or parked on a public street or in such location as to be visible from the main traveled way of a public street shall be permitted, provided the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The motor vehicle is not partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle; or 
(2)  The motor vehicle displays valid license plates and a valid inspection decal; 
(3)  The motor vehicle is not used solely for purposes of the display of advertising; and 
(4)  No more than four (4) signs having a maximum combined area of two hundred fifty (250) square feet shall be simultaneously displayed on a motor vehicle, and no sign shall exceed ninety (90) square feet in area; provided, however, that the provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to buses, trolleys or other motor vehicles used primarily for purposes of providing public transportation or to motor vehicles on which signs exclusively advertise the business of the owner of the vehicle. 
(b)  No motor vehicle shall be driven on any street within a residential subdivision for the purpose of displaying advertising, except as required by detour or upon order of a public safety employee of the city or state. 
(c)  The following types of signs shall be prohibited while the motor vehicle on which they are displayed is operated or parked on a public street or in such location as to be visible from the main traveled way of a public street: 
(1)  Flashing, pulsating or blinking signs; 
(2)  Signs in which the message displayed changes more frequently than once every four (4) seconds; 
(3)  Electronic changeable copy signs, including signs containing light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices used to change the advertising displayed by such signs; and 
(4)  Signs that project more than one (1) foot above the portion of the motor vehicle to which they are affixed or that obscure the vision of the driver of the motor vehicle or of other motorists. 
(d)  Violations of any of the provisions of this section shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(e)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Motor vehicle" shall be defined in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 or any successor statute, and shall also include any trailer or other vehicle drawn by or affixed to a motor vehicle; 
(2)  "Owner" shall be defined as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 or any successor statute, and shall also include a lessee of a motor vehicle under a written lease. 
(Ord. No. 3443, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 3-7. - Use of radios, amplifiers, etc., on vehicles for advertising purposes. 
(a)  The use, in, upon or attached to any motor vehicle operating on any street of the city, of any radio, phonograph, musical instrument, bell, whistle, loudspeaker, amplifier or device of any kind whatsoever whereby sound therefrom is cast upon any street to promote or advertise the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the purpose of advertising auction sales, sporting events or other businesses or things advertised thereby, is prohibited. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to motor vehicles driven in a duly authorized parade. The use of a loudspeaker on a motor vehicle for making auction sales in streets directly in front of the property then being sold, and entirely outside of the business districts of the city, as such districts are defined in section 4-2 of this Code, shall not be construed as a violation of this section, when such use is limited strictly to the selling at auction of such property. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 22-28)  
Secs. 3-8—3-20. - Reserved.  
Chapter 4 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— License tax for various amusements, §§ 18-52, 18-53, 18-62, 18-67—18-70, 18-104, 18-109, 18-110; obscene exhibitions and performances, § 22-5; scalping tickets to public events, § 23-33; swimming pools, § 34-1 et seq.; admissions tax, § 35-181 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Permit for special events. 
(a)  Events for Which Permit Required. No person or entity shall hold, organize or sponsor any of the following events or activities unless a permit therefor has been granted by the city: 
(1)  Parades, processions, marathons, bicycle races and other events utilizing the sidewalks or vehicular travel portion of city streets and highways, or the boardwalk. 
(2)  Carnivals, bazaars and similar events which offer such activities as amusement rides or devices, games of skill, animal rides or exhibitions, food concessions, and informal live entertainment. 
(3)  Outdoor festivals or other musical entertainment offering live or recorded music for public or private audiences in other than a fully enclosed building, with the exception of outdoor musical entertainment at any private residence attended by fewer than one hundred fifty (150) persons. 
(4)  Motion picture, video or broadcast television productions, other than news media, involving the staging of vehicles, equipment, props or personnel on public property, including buildings, streets and sidewalks, or requiring the use of city equipment or services, or the participation of city employees. 
(5)  Organized scheduled contests and exhibitions held on the sand beaches of the city. 
(6)  Marine events, including any prescheduled organized concentration of watercraft, involving participants and/or spectators, of a competitive or noncompetitive nature, which may interfere with ordinary navigation or require supplementary regulation by federal, state or city authorities. 
(7)  Scheduled races, exhibitions or other events involving the operation of motorized vehicles of any type. 
(8)  Scheduled gatherings of two hundred (200) or more persons on any public property, other than parks. 
(8a)  Activities on a parcel being used as a short term rental property as defined in section 111 of the city zoning ordinance, at which fifty (50) or more people are present. Further, no more than one hundred (100) total people shall be present at the activity. No more than three (3) special events permits shall be issued within a twelve-month period. 
(9)  Activities or events requiring a variance from the regulations for parks promulgated by the director of parks and recreation. 
(10)  Organized camps, athletic leagues or games, exercise classes, or other instruction, education or recreational activities or events which take place on city property in the Resort Area or on the sand beaches of the city, for which a fee is collected by a for-profit event organizer, sponsor, or producer, and which include three or more individuals paying to participate in the activity or event. 
(11)  Organized horseback riding events held on the sand beaches of the city; provided, however, that no such permit shall be issued unless (i) the applicant is a 501(c)(3) charitable organization, (ii) the event is held between November 1 and May 1, and (iii) the event lasts no longer than one day. The restrictions contained in section 6-12 shall not apply to activity authorized by such a permit. 
(12)  Agritourism activities allowed pursuant to section 401(a) of the City Zoning Ordinance, but not including agritourism activities requiring a conditional use permit or allowed pursuant to section 401(c) of the City Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Application: Contents and Fee. An application for any permit required by this section shall be made to the city manager or his designee, accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee as provided in section 4-1.1. The application shall be submitted not less than thirty (30) days nor more than six (6) months prior to the date of the proposed activity. An application for a major event held for two (2) or more consecutive days shall be filed not less than sixty (60) days nor more than six (6) months before the first date of the proposed activity. The application shall contain the following information, utilizing a form provided by the city manager: 
(1)  Description of the proposed activity. 
(2)  Date, time and location/route of proposed activity and the anticipated number of participants and spectators. 
(3)  Provisions for sanitation facilities, crowd, noise and traffic control, parking and loudspeaker placement. 
(4)  Food and beverages to be sold or distributed. 
(5)  The designation of an individual or individuals who shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with the provisions of this section and the conditions of the permit. 
(6)  Proposed equipment, vehicles, staging, bleachers, shelters and electricity requirements. 
(7)  If revenue is anticipated to be generated by the activity, the individuals or entity that will benefit therefrom. 
(8)  Such additional information or assurances as the city manager may require. 
(9)  If portable storage containers are requested, the duration of the containers at the site, the number of containers and the location of the containers. 
(c)  Application: Submission and Processing Requirements. 
(1)  A completed application shall be processed and either granted or denied within a reasonable time of receipt, but not more than thirty (30) days of receipt of any application requiring sixty (60) days' advance filing or fifteen (15) days following receipt of any application requiring thirty (30) days' advance filing. Such decision shall be in writing, setting forth the conditions of the permit, if granted, or the reasons for denial. The decision shall be provided to the applicant at the address stated in the application. 
(2)  If an application is submitted after the filing deadline set forth in subsection (a), the city manager or his designee may modify the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) upon a demonstration by the applicant, in writing, that circumstances giving rise to the proposed event did not reasonably allow the applicant to apply for a permit within the time prescribed. 
(d)  Permit Approval Process. 
(1)  The permit shall be granted by the city manager if the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Any proposed use of public property, right-of-way, or facilities will not unreasonably interfere with the normal use of the property, right-of-way or facility by the city or the general public. 
(ii)  The proposed activity does not present a safety or health risk to participants, spectators or the public, or an environmental hazard. 
(iii)  The proposed activity is compatible with the surrounding area or neighborhood, in consideration of anticipated noise, traffic, crowd capacity and other identifiable factors. 
(iv)  The applicant has provided proof of liability insurance underwritten by insurers acceptable to the city, indemnifying the applicant against any perils, suits, claims and losses which may arise in connection with the proposed activity. Such coverage shall be in amounts consistent with a standard schedule approved by the city manager, based upon risks associated with each type of event, in consideration of anticipated attendance. 
(v)  City resources necessary to support the proposed activity are reasonably available. 
(2)  When the grounds for anticipated denial of an application can be corrected by altering the date, time, duration, route or location of the event, the city manager or his designee may conditionally approve the application, subject to the applicant's acceptance of such conditions. Any conditions so imposed shall provide only for such modification of the applicant's proposal as may be necessary to achieve compliance with this section. 
(3)  Prior to the final denial of any application, the applicant shall be apprised of the reason therefor and shall be entitled to a hearing before the city manager or his representative. 
(e)  Permit Requirements. The city manager or his designee may impose, as conditions to granting a permit, such further requirements and restrictions as will reasonably protect the public health, safety, welfare, peace and order. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The payment of a reasonable fee for the use or allocation of city property, equipment and personnel not exceeding the actual costs incurred by the city in connection with the proposed activity; and the posting of a performance bond or other surety securing payment of such fee. 
(2)  The provision of adequate crowd and traffic control, security, fire protection, food handling, waste and refuse disposal, and noise restrictions. 
(3)  The duration, location and number of any portable storage containers. 
(f)  Exceptions for Expressive Activities. 
(1)  The requirements for insurance and for payment of fees for the use or allocation of city property, equipment and personnel authorized by this section shall not be imposed for any noncommercial gathering, parade or procession held for purposes of expressive activity, upon demonstration, in writing, that the applicant is financially unable to pay the costs of such fees and services and that the right to engage in expressive activity would be unreasonably curtailed by failure to waive such requirements; provided, that insurance may be required for collateral activities such as food service and the use of structures and equipment which present a demonstrable risk or hazard. 
(2)  Upon demonstration that the enforcement of the limitation provisions of subsections (b) and (c) would unreasonably restrict the right of free expression, the city manager shall waive the time prescribed for advance notice of an event and impose only such provisions as will not unreasonably restrict the element of timeliness of the expressive activity. 
(3)  For purposes of this section and of section 4-1.1, expressive activity shall include any public gathering, procession or parade, the primary purpose of which is the exercise of the rights of assembly and free speech as guaranteed by the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States. 
(g)  Revocation or Suspension. The city manager, or his designee, shall be authorized to revoke or suspend any permit previously granted by him (1) for violation of any provisions of this section or of any condition of the permit; (2) for any material misrepresentation, intentional or otherwise, made in connection with the application; (3) when weather conditions render the subject activity unsafe; and (4) when otherwise required in the interest of public health, safety and welfare or environmental considerations. In the event a permit is revoked or suspended, the permittee shall immediately discontinue, or cause to be discontinued, the activity for which the permit was granted, but shall thereafter be entitled to a hearing concerning the revocation or suspension decision as provided by subsection (d)(3). 
(h)  Duration. Any permit granted under the provisions of this section shall remain in effect for the duration of the proposed activity; provided, however, that any permit for outdoor musical entertainment granted to any restaurant or any establishment holding an on-premises license to sell alcoholic beverages may be issued for a period not to exceed one (1) year. 
(i)  Other Requirements. The granting of any permit required by this section shall not eliminate any requirement for any business license, any other permit(s) which may be prescribed by any other federal, state or local statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations, or compliance with any other applicable federal, state or local statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations. 
(j)  Administration. The city manager may designate one (1) or more officers or employees of the city to administer the provisions of this section. 
(k)  Violation. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 20-90; Ord. No. 1829, 2-6-89; Ord. No. 2138, 6-9-92; Ord. No. 3218, 2-28-12; Ord. No. 3262, 10-23-12; Ord. No. 3357, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 3389, 1-6-15; Ord. No. 3602, 10-1-19) 
Cross reference— License tax for theatrical performances, exhibitions, etc., § 18-110.  
Sec. 4-1.1. - Permit processing fee. 
A nonrefundable processing fee shall be submitted with the completed application for a special event. The fee shall be used to defray the administrative expenses associated with processing the permit. The amount of the nonrefundable permit processing fee shall be established by the city manager or his designee. 
No fee shall be required to process a permit for a scheduled public gathering not requiring street closure, held for noncommercial purposes, in exercise of the right of expressive activity. 
(Ord. No. 2138, 6-9-92; Ord. No. 3173, 5-10-11)  
Sec. 4-2. - Minors prohibited in poolrooms and billiard rooms; exceptions. 
(a)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall enter or frequent any public poolroom or billiard room in the city and no person in charge or control of any such place shall permit any person under such age to be or remain therein. The proprietor, manager or other person in charge of such place shall have posted conspicuously at the entrance thereto a sign in bold letters, not less than two (2) inches in height as follows: "NO MINORS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE ALLOWED." 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to family billiard centers. For the purposes of this subsection, a "family billiard center" is defined as a licensed establishment for the playing of billiards, when such establishment: 
(1)  Is illuminated throughout its interior at a level of forty (40) footcandles. 
(2)  Has no partitioned or closed off areas, other than those for toilet facilities, office space or storerooms, and all playing areas and billiard tables are visible from a public way or street. 
(3)  Has a window or windows open to view from a public way or street, having a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of glass area, which windows shall not be permanently covered or otherwise obstructed. 
(4)  Contains only regulation size (minimum measurements four and one-half (4½) feet by nine (9) feet) billiard tables, which shall not be of the "coin-operated" type, and such center shall contain a minimum of ten (10) such tables. 
(5)  Has separate restroom facilities for both sexes. 
The operator of such center must have a certificate of approval from the police department. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. In case of a second or any subsequent conviction of the proprietor or other person in charge of a poolroom or billiard room for violating this section, the permit for the operation of the establishment may be revoked, in addition to the fine imposed. In any prosecution for a violation of this section, proof of the presence of a minor in such poolroom or billiard room shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge on the part of the proprietor or other person then in charge. 
(Code 1965, § 23-31; Ord. No. 2237, 6-22-93) 
Cross reference— Curfew for minors, § 23-2. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate presence of minors in places of amusement, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-432.  
Sec. 4-3. - Use of pool tables prohibited during certain hours in establishments selling alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No pool table located in any restaurant, tavern or other business establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages in the city shall be operated, played or used during the hours when alcoholic beverages may not be dispensed, as established by the regulations of the state alcoholic beverage control commission. 
(b)  Any person who violates, or permits the violation of, this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-42) 
Cross reference— License tax for sale of alcoholic beverages, §§ 18-49, 18-50.  
Secs. 4-4—4-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DANCE HALLS; TEENAGE EVENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2208, adopted Mar. 23, 1993, added "Teenage Nightclubs" to the title of this article. 
Cross reference— License tax for dance halls, § 18-76. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate public dance halls, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-433. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-16. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
(a)  Dance hall means any place or event open to the general public where dancing is permitted, no alcoholic beverages are provided or consumed during the event, and to which (1) an admission fee is charged or for which compensation is in any manner received, either directly or indirectly, by cover charge, membership fee, donation, or otherwise; or (2) where refreshments, food or any form of merchandise are provided or exhibited for compensation before, during or after the event; provided, however, that any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are dispensed pursuant to a license issued by the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board shall not be considered a dance hall. 
(b)  City manager means the city manager or such other employee or officer of the city as he may designate. 
(c)  Teenage event means any event conducted in a dance hall open only to members of the general public between the ages of fourteen (14) and seventeen (17), inclusive, other teenagers with a current high school identification card and other patrons or employees authorized by this article. Establishments issued a valid license to sell alcohol may operate a teenage event only when all alcoholic beverages are stored in a locked area and access to the locked area is prohibited at all times the teenage event is open for business. 
(d)  Manager means the person to whom the permit is issued or any person present at the dance hall or teenage event who is charged with supervising the event or in any way conducting its business, or both. 
(e)  Person means any individual, group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association or other entity formed for the purpose of conducting business, or any combination of the foregoing. 
(Code 1965, § 11-1; Ord. No. 1047, 6-9-80; Ord. No. 2208, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 3139, 6-22-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-433.  
Sec. 4-17. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article, or any term, condition or restriction of a permit granted under this article, or failing to comply with any action of the city manager pursuant to section 4-35, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. In addition thereto and not in lieu thereof, any continuing violation of any provision of this article may be enjoined by the circuit court upon application of the city attorney. 
(b)  Neither the commencement of criminal or civil proceedings under this section, nor any judgment rendered therein, shall preclude the city manager from taking action in accordance with section 4-35. 
(Code 1965, § 11-13; Ord. No. 2208, 3-23-93)  
Sec. 4-18. - Security officers required. 
(a)  At least two (2) uniformed, fully certified department of criminal justice service (DCJS) security officers or law enforcement officers shall be provided, at the expense of the permittee, for every one hundred (100) patrons, or portion thereof, in attendance at any dance hall or teenage event. 
(b)  During any dance hall or teenage event the occupancy load is restricted to the number assigned by the fire marshall's office or the number for which security guards are present, whichever number is lower. 
(c)  Every security officer must provide proof of DCJS certification if requested by a police officer. The manager shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor for each security guard who fails to provide such proof upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2208, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 3139, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 4-19. - Right of entry of police and fire marshal; enforcement. 
The chief of police shall enforce the provisions of this article, and for that purpose, any law enforcement officer of the city may enter any dance hall or teenage event for which a permit has been granted or is required under this article during all hours of operation. 
(Code 1965, § 11-12; Ord. No. 2208, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 3139, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 4-20. - Entry prohibited. 
(a)  The manager shall not allow any patron under the age of eighteen (18) years to remain in a dance hall after 10:30 p.m. unless lawfully employed therein. 
(b)  The manager shall not allow any patron eighteen (18) years of age or older who does not possess a current high school identification card or who is not the parent or legal guardian of a patron to enter a teenage event during hours of operation unless for purposes related to his lawful employment; and the manager shall not allow any juvenile under the age of fourteen (14) years to enter a teenage event for any reason. 
(c)  The manager of any dance hall or teenage event shall conduct, or cause to be conducted, a positive identification check of each patron seeking admittance to ensure compliance with this section. Acceptable forms of identification include valid government-issued or school-issued identification cards. However, where a patron under the age of 18 has no identification card, a note from his or her parent or legal guardian that provides the following information: (i) name and age of underage patron; (ii) name of parent or legal guardian; (iii) name/location of teen event; and (iv) phone number where parent or legal guardian may be contacted at any time during the teen event. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any patron to falsely represent his or her age in order to gain admittance to a dance hall or teenage event or for anyone to aid, abet or assist in making such false representation. 
(Ord. No. 2208, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 3139, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 4-21. - Required closing hours. 
(a)  No dance hall shall remain open after 2:00 a.m. 
(b)  No teenage event shall remain open after 10:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2208, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 3139, 6-22-10)  
Secs. 4-22—4-31. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS; REVOCATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Dance hall ordinance to provide for issuance of operating permit, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-433. 
 
Sec. 4-32. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a dance hall or teenage event in the city without a valid permit authorizing the operation of such event. Any public safety employee may require patrons present at an unpermitted dance hall or teenage event to immediately disperse. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to rent or lease a premises to any third party for the purpose of conducting or operating a dance hall or teenage event unless the third party has obtained the permit required under this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise set forth in this subsection, no permit for a dance hall or teen event shall issue for a period of more than three (3) consecutive days, the dates of which shall be specified on the face of the permit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any applicant who owns the property upon which a dance hall or teen event is to be operated or who is a tenant under a lease providing for the continuous and exclusive control and occupancy of such property for a period of at least one year from the proposed effective date of the permit may apply for a permit that may be valid for one year. Rights exercised under the provisions of a one-year permit are not transferable to any third party. 
(Code 1965, § 11-4; Ord. No. 2208, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 3139, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 4-33. - Application. 
(a)  To obtain a permit required by this article a person shall submit an application to the city manager. To obtain a permit to operate a dance hall or teenage event the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable processing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Such application shall contain, or have appended to it, the following information: 
(1)  The street address where the proposed dance hall or teenage event is to be located; 
(2)  The name and residence address of each manager or other person who has a sponsorship or financial interest in the proposed dance hall or teenage event; 
(3)  If the applicant for the dance hall or teenage event permit is a corporation or other entity, such application shall set forth the names and residence addresses of the officers and directors of such corporation or other entity, or if there are no such officers or directors, the names and addresses of all persons having an ownership interest therein of twenty (20) percent or more; 
(4)  If food is offered, a statement as to the type of food to be offered and a description of the facilities to be utilized for the preparation and service thereof, together with appropriate health department permits or copies of filed applications therefore; 
(5)  A written certification by the zoning administrator that the proposed use of the property is permitted and that there is sufficient vehicular parking provided on the property to meet the requirements of the City Zoning Ordinance [Appendix A]; 
(6)  A written certification by the building official that the proposed structure or property is in compliance with the requirements of the Uniform Statewide Building Code for the proposed use; 
(7)  Certification from the commissioner of the revenue that required business license(s) has or have been obtained; 
(8)  Applicant shall certify compliance with the requirements of section 4-18. For one- to three-day permits, certification from DCJS must be submitted for all security personnel prior to the event; 
(9)  The name and address of the person who is designated to receive notices on behalf of the applicant; 
(10)  A statement of whether any of the individuals whose names are required to be set forth in the application pursuant to subdivisions (2) and (3) has ever applied for, or had an ownership interest in any business entity which applied for, a permit required by this article or a similar ordinance of any other county, city or town. If such statement is in the affirmative, the applicant shall give full particulars as to the nature of the application, the date thereof, and the disposition of the application; and 
(11)  Proof of liability insurance underwritten by insurers acceptable to the city, indemnifying the applicant against any perils, suits, claims and losses which may arise in connection with the proposed event. Such coverage shall be in amounts consistent with a standard schedule approved by the city manager, based upon risks associated with each type of event, in consideration of anticipated attendance. 
(b)  In the case of one- to three-day permits, applications for permits shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the event. In the case of one-year permits, applications for permits shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the first event. All applications shall be approved by the police department, planning department/zoning, commissioner of the revenue and the fire marshal's office, and the Virginia Beach Health Department if food or beverages are available. Such entities must be permitted access to the event location for inspection purposes prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1965, §§ 11-5, 11-6; Ord. No. 2208, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 3139, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 4-34. - Grant or denial; conditions; hearing. 
(a)  The application shall be granted if it contains all of the information and certifications required by section 4-33 and: 
(1)  None of the individuals whose names are required to be set forth in the application pursuant to section 4-33 has been convicted of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude or the possession or sale of, attempted possession or sale of, or conspiracy to possess or sell, a controlled substance, alcohol or firearms; and in the case of an application for a permit to operate a teenage event, in addition to the foregoing, contributing to the delinquency of a minor or any other criminal offense against a juvenile; 
(2)  There has been no misrepresentation or misstatement concerning, or omission of, any fact, material or otherwise, in the application, whether such misrepresentation, misstatement or omission is intentional or inadvertent; 
(3)  None of the individuals whose names are required to be set forth in the application have been convicted of any violation of this article within the last twelve (12) months; and 
(4)  The event is not located in a residential dwelling; including but not limited to single-family, duplex or multi-family dwellings. 
(b)  The city manager shall grant or deny the application within fourteen (14) days after receipt by him of a complete application; provided, however, that in the event the city manager is unable to determine within such time whether or not the application complies with the requirement for granting a permit on the basis of the information provided, he may so notify the applicant and require the applicant to provide such additional information as may be necessary. 
(c)  The city manager may attach such conditions to a permit as are reasonably related to the preservation and protection of the public peace and order. 
(d)  A permit shall not be issued to a person, nor shall a permit be deemed to authorize the operation of a dance hall, or teenage event by any person, other than the applicant or applicants whose names are set forth in the application. 
(e)  Any permit holder aggrieved by a decision of the city manager may appeal such action to the circuit court by proper application filed within thirty (30) days from the date of such decision. 
(Code 1965, § 11-8; Ord. No. 2208, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 3139, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 4-35. - Conditions and restrictions; revocation; violations. 
(a)  Every permit granted under this article shall be subject to the conditions and restrictions stated in the permit and to all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. Notwithstanding any rights or privileges conferred by the permit, any imminent threat to public safety may be immediately abated by a law enforcement officer. 
(b)  The granting of any permit required by this section shall not eliminate any requirement for any other permit(s) which may be prescribed by any other federal, state or local statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations, or compliance with any other applicable federal, state or local statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall supersede the provisions of the City Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)  Upon the submission by the chief of police of a written complaint to the city manager, setting forth facts which, if proven, would constitute grounds for taking any of the actions set forth in subsection (f), the city manager shall promptly notify the permit holder, or his designee for receiving notice, of such complaint and schedule a hearing thereon. Such grounds shall be limited to those set forth in subsection (e). The notice shall be personally delivered or sent by certified or regular mail to the person designated to receive such notices and shall: 
(1)  Set forth the facts upon which the complaint is based or, alternatively, make reference to the complaint and contain a copy of such complaint as an attachment; 
(2)  State the actions which may be taken by the city manager pursuant to subsection (f) or, alternatively, make reference to this section and contain a copy thereof as an attachment; 
(3)  State the date, time and place of such hearing, which shall not be held less than seven (7) days after the date the notice is mailed or delivered; and 
(4)  State that the applicant is entitled to be present at the hearing, in person or by a representative, and to present evidence on his behalf. 
(e)  In cases involving one-year permits, the city manager may, after notice and hearing, take such action as is allowed pursuant to subsection (f) if he finds, by a preponderance of the evidence presented at such hearing, that: 
(1)  The establishment is a public nuisance; 
(2)  The establishment is frequented by patrons under the age of eighteen (18) years after 10:30 p.m.; 
(3)  That the establishment is frequented by patrons engaged in disorderly, violent, indecent or unlawful conduct; 
(4)  The operation of the establishment is in violation of any of the provisions of the Virginia Fire Prevention Code, the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, the City Zoning Ordinance, public health regulations or any provision of this article; 
(5)  The establishment or its operation is not in strict compliance with the terms of the permit; 
(6)  The application contains any misrepresentation, misstatement or omission, intentional or inadvertent, concerning any information required to be provided in, or in connection with, the application; or 
(7)  Illegal drugs or beverages containing alcohol were consumed or sold during the permitted event; or 
(8)  Patrons, employees or persons under the influence of illegal drugs or alcohol were allowed entrance into the permitted event. 
(f)  If the city manager finds, by a preponderance of the evidence presented at such hearing, that one (1) or more of the grounds alleged in the complaint have been proven, he may: 
(1)  Revoke the permit; 
(2)  Suspend the permit; 
(3)  Attach one (1) or more additional conditions or restrictions to the permit; or 
(4)  Require the posting of a bond, in an amount and form satisfactory to the city manager, securing to the city the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of the permit and compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
The city manager shall render a decision within ten (10) days of the date of the hearing and shall promptly notify the permit holder, or the person designated to receive notices, of the action taken by the city manager. Such notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail. 
(g)  Any permit holder aggrieved by a decision of the city manager may appeal such action to the circuit court within thirty (30) days from the date of such decision; provided, however, that the commencement of such appeal shall not stay the action of the city manager. 
(Code 1965, § 11-9; Ord. No. 2208, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 3139, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 4-36. - Not transferable. 
A permit granted under this article shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1965, § 11-10; Ord. No. 2208, 3-23-93)  
Sec. 4-37. - New permit upon change in location. 
Any change in the location of a dance hall or teenage event shall invalidate the permit. 
(Code 1965, § 11-11; Ord. No. 1047, 6-9-80; Ord. No. 2208, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 3139, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 4-38. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any dance hall or teenage event officially sponsored by a school, religious use or governmental entity; unless the dance hall or teenage event is held in an alcoholic beverage control board-licensed establishment. Nothing in this section exempts any school, religious use or governmental entity from the provisions of any other city or state laws or regulations, including but not limited to zoning, health department, and building code regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 2208, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 3139, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 4-39. - Special provisions applicable to teenage events. 
The provisions of this section shall apply only to teenage events. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to employ anyone who has been convicted of any offense set forth in section 4-34(a)(1) at a teenage event. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to permit anyone under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance to enter upon, or remain within, a teenage event. 
(c)  No patron, having exited a teenage event, shall be permitted to reenter the premises on the same day or remain on the property. 
(Ord. No. 2208, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 3139, 6-22-10)  
Sec. 4-40. - Special provision applicable to one-year permits. 
Persons exercising authority under the provisions of a one-year permit shall provide the police commander of the precinct in which the premises is located, a minimum of seven (7) days written notice prior to any dance hall or teenage event. 
(Ord. No. 3139, 6-22-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3139, adopted June 22, 2010, repealed the former § 4-40, and enacted a new § 4-40 as set out herein. The former § 4-40 pertained to severability and derived from Ord. No. 2208, 3-23-93.  
Secs. 4-41—4-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FAMILY TABLE TOP COMMERCIAL RECREATION CENTERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-46. - Defined. 
As used in this article, the term "family table top commercial recreation center" or "center" shall mean any establishment where foosball, table tennis, shuffleboard or any other game of recreation or amusement is displayed for public patronage, where the insertion of a coin, slug or token or the payment of a fee is required and where five (5) or more such tables or game machines are used. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.2)  
Sec. 4-47. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a, violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 4-48. - Exceptions from article. 
There are excepted from the provisions of this article establishments that are duly licensed and regulated by the state alcoholic beverage control commission. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.2)  
Sec. 4-49. - Management. 
Every center shall at all times be under management and control by a person at least eighteen (18) years of age who shall be on the premises of the center at all times during the hours of operation. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.2)  
Sec. 4-50. - Window space. 
Every center shall have a window or windows with a total of not less than one hundred (100) square feet of glass which shall not be covered or otherwise obstructed during hours of business. This section shall not apply to centers lawfully operating prior to November 27, 1972. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.2; Ord. No. 1372, 5-16-83)  
Sec. 4-51. - Partitioned areas prohibited; exceptions. 
No center shall have partitioned or closed off areas other than those for toilet facilities, office space and storerooms. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.2)  
Sec. 4-52. - Illumination. 
Every center shall be illuminated throughout its interior at a level of forty (40) footcandles. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.2)  
Sec. 4-53. - Rest room facilities. 
Every center shall provide separate rest room facilities for both sexes. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.2)  
Sec. 4-54. - Off-street parking facilities. 
Every center operating under this article shall be provided with off-street parking facilities as required by the comprehensive zoning ordinance. This section shall not apply to centers lawfully operating prior to November 27, 1972. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.2) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, off-street parking requirements, App. A, § 2.03.  
Sec. 4-55. - Minors prohibited between 12:01 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.; exceptions. 
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be allowed to remain in any center between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless accompanied by his parent or guardian. A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.2) 
Cross reference— General curfew for minors, § 23-2. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate presence of minors in places of amusement, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-432.  
Secs. 4-56—4-66. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OPERATING PERMIT 
 
Sec. 4-67. - Required. 
No person shall operate a family table top commercial recreation center within the city, without first obtaining an annual permit from the city manager or his authorized representative. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.2; Ord. No. 1308, 7-12-82)  
Sec. 4-68. - Filing and contents of application. 
An application for a permit required by this division shall be filed initially, and annually thereafter, in the office of the city manager and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, age, social security number, race and sex of the applicant, date and place of his birth and, where pertinent, the relationship of the applicant to any company, corporation or other entity which has any interest in the ownership or management of the center. 
(2)  Prior criminal convictions, excluding traffic offenses, of the applicant, if any. 
(3)  Prospective location of the center. 
(4)  Maximum number of patrons the center will accommodate. 
(5)  A list of all employees who are expected to serve in a managerial capacity in the center. 
(6)  A certification by the applicant that all requirements of this article have been complied with. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.2; Ord. No. 1308, 7-12-82)  
Sec. 4-69. - Fee. 
Each application for a permit under this division shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), which shall not be refundable. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.2; Ord. No. 1308, 7-12-82)  
Sec. 4-70. - Investigation of applicant and proposed center; grant or denial. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit under this division, the city manager shall immediately cause an investigation to be made concerning the qualifications of the applicant and whether the proposed center is in compliance with this article. The city manager shall grant or deny such permit and shall notify the applicant of his action within thirty (30) days of the filing of the application. If the city manager denies such permit, he shall state, in writing, his reasons for such action. The following factors shall constitute grounds for denial of the permit: 
(1)  A finding by the city manager that the applicant has falsified his application in a material manner. 
(2)  A finding by the city manager that the applicant or any of his designated managerial employees has a criminal record which reveals any convictions for violations of any drug control laws or any other pattern of criminal misconduct involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  A finding by the city manager that the applicant consistently fails to cooperate with law-enforcement personnel in the exercise of their official duties. 
(4)  A finding by the city manager that the application is not properly completed as required in this division. 
(5)  A finding by the city manager that the proposed center fails to comply with the provisions of this article. 
No other factors shall be sufficient grounds for denial of a permit applied for under this division. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.2)  
Sec. 4-71. - Not assignable; void if center not operated for sixty days. 
No permit issued under this division shall be assignable in any manner whatsoever. When the permittee shall cease to operate the center for a period of sixty (60) days, the permit shall be void. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.2)  
Sec. 4-72. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The city manager may revoke or suspend for a period of thirty (30) days the permit for the operation of a family table top commercial recreation center if he finds: 
(1)  That the premises have been declared a common nuisance by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  That the permittee has consistently failed to operate the center in an orderly manner. 
(3)  That the permittee has failed to take prompt and vigorous action to prevent violations of criminal statutes occurring on the premises which are known or should have been known to the permittee. 
(4)  That circumstances exist which would have justified a denial of such permit at the time of its issuance. 
(5)  That the permittee has failed to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  A permittee shall be entitled to a hearing before the city manager before his permit is revoked or suspended under this section. The city manager shall give the permittee thirty (30) days' notice of his intention to revoke or suspend such permit along with his grounds for revocation or suspension by certified mail, return receipt requested. The hearing shall be held not more than twenty (20) days after giving of the notice. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.2)  
Secs. 4-73—4-84. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2438, adopted Feb. 11, 1997, repealed Art. IV, §§ 4-85—4-94, in its entirety. Said article pertained to bingo games and raffles, and derived from Code 1965, § 23-12.1 and from the following ordinances: 
Ord. No. 	Date 	Ord. No. 	Date 
1009 	11-26-79 	1862 	 5- 8-89 
1115 	11-10-80 	1885 	 7- 3-89 
1255 	 2- 8-82 	2104 	 8- 2-82 
1312 	11-26-79 	2235 	 6-22-93 
1662 	12-8-86 	2280 	 6-28-94 
 
 
Secs. 4-85—4-94. - Reserved.  
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals on beach and adjacent areas, § 6-5; riding horses on beach or dunes, § 6-12; applicability of traffic regulations to persons riding or driving animals, § 21-15; noisy animals, § 23-47(a)(2); interfering with police animals, § 27-7. 
State Law reference— General authority of city to regulate animals and fowl, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-870. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-100. - Violations. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-101. - Enforcement of this chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the city animal control officers and by city law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-102. - Definitions. 
All definitions of words and phrases contained in the Code of Virginia § 3.2-6500 are hereby adopted and shall apply to such words and phrases when used in this chapter, unless clearly indicated to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-103. - Animal control unit advisory board. 
(a)  The Virginia Beach Animal Control Unit Advisory Board ("advisory board'") shall serve as an advisory board to the Virginia Beach Police Department and shall be vested with the following duties and functions. The committee shall serve as a group of interested community members who will meet on a quarterly basis to provide advice to help sustain and advocate for the operation of the city's Adoption-Friendly Animal Care and Adoption Center ("adoption center") and the animal control unit's enforcement efforts so as to best serve the community. 
(b)  The advisory board shall support the city's animal adoption, animal enforcement and animal sheltering functions and shall enhance the city's relationship with animal care professionals, animal advocacy groups and community members. The advisory board shall provide vision and leadership recommendations to the police department in order to meet the city's present and future animal care needs. 
(Ord. No. 3185, 6-28-11; Ord. No. 3575, 12-11-18)  
Sec. 5-104. - Membership. 
The advisory board shall consist of ten (10) voting members and three (3) nonvoting members, plus two (2) nonvoting city council liaisons. The members shall be appointed by the police department. The ten (10) voting members shall consist of: two (2) Virginia Beach SPCA ("VBSPCA") representatives; two (2) representatives from the external veterinary community; five (5) interested citizens who are not affiliated with any animal welfare groups, and a representative of the Virginia Beach Health Department. When requested in order to fill a VBSPCA vacancy on the advisory Board, the VBSPCA Director shall each submit a list of at least four (4) nominees for appointment by the police department as the representatives of their organization and a selection will be made by the chief of police or his designee. Any of the persons nominated must be current members in good standing of the organization. When a vacancy exists for a member of the external veterinary community or an interested citizen member, a search will be conducted via public outlet to seek interested persons who are in good community standing. Selections will be made by the chief of police or his designee. The adoption center manager, the animal enforcement unit lieutenant and the adoption center veterinarian shall be the three (3) nonvoting members and shall be permanent members of the advisory board. All voting members shall be residents of the City of Virginia Beach and shall be appointed to three-year terms and subject to a term limit of three (3) consecutive three-year terms. 
(Ord. No. 3185, 6-28-11; Ord. No. 3487, 2-21-17; Ord. No. 3575, 12-11-18)  
Sec. 5-105. - Duties. 
The advisory board shall: 
(a)  Serve as the advisory body to the police department on behalf of the community in matters related to animal care by serving as an independent, unbiased sounding board; 
(b)  Serve in an advisory capacity for staff, addressing mission critical service topics and community outreach by helping foster positive relationships with all customers; 
(c)  Provide advisory recommendations to staff to ensure quality care for the animals cared for at the adoption center, including: 
(1)  Advice regarding general animal control issues; 
(2)  Advice regarding the status of rabies in the city and the public health aspect of rabies; 
(3)  Recommendations regarding animal licensing procedures and fees; 
(4)  Advice regarding animal shelter operations in the city; 
(5)  Recommendations regarding field health operations; and 
(6)  Consultations with city staff and public health experts regarding animal issues, culminating with reports of such findings and recommendations to the city manager and city council; 
(d)  Increase awareness of animals available for adoption at the adoption center; 
(e)  Increase awareness of the importance of spaying/neutering animals; 
(f)  Educate the community regarding the humane treatment of animals and other matters related to animal care responsibilities; 
(g)  Provide a forum for public discussion of the animal care unit's efforts to bring about positive change and process improvement; 
(h)  Serve as a means of communication between animal care professionals, animal advocacy groups, community members and municipal staff; 
(i)  Support the animal control unit in its task to provide the best possible care to the animals and quality customer service to the members of the Virginia Beach community; 
(j)  Undertake projects and activities to benefit the animal control unit and the community; 
(k)  Advocate on behalf of the animal control unit in the community; and 
(l)  Provide an annual report to city council. 
(Ord. No. 3185, 6-28-11)  
Secs. 5-106—5-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RABIES 
 
Sec. 5-200. - Vaccination or inoculation of dogs or cats. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, hold or harbor any dog or cat over the age of four (4) months within the city, unless such dog or cat is currently vaccinated with a rabies vaccine, licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture for use in that species. If, however, the requirement of vaccination or inoculation threatens the physical well-being of such dog or cat, the owner of such dog or cat shall have a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian certifying the same and the owner shall keep such dog or cat in quarantine until the same is inoculated or vaccinated. 
(b)  Any person transporting a dog or cat into the city from some other jurisdiction shall comply with this section within thirty (30) days from the day he brings such dog or cat into the city, if such dog or cat is to be kept in the city more than thirty (30) days. 
(c)  The vaccination or inoculation required by this section shall be administered by or under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. When so administered, the veterinarian shall issue to the owner of the dog or cat a tag and a certificate of rabies inoculation or vaccination, properly executed and signed by the veterinarian, certifying that the dog or cat in question has been inoculated or vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this section. Such tag shall be firmly attached to the dog's or cat's collar and shall be worn at times when the dog or cat is not on the property of the owner or custodian of the dog or cat. The owner or custodian of the dog or cat shall furnish, within a reasonable period of time, upon request of any animal control officer, law enforcement officer or official of the department of health, the certificate of vaccination for such dog or cat. 
(d)  City council authorizes a rabies clinic to be conducted at least once every two (2) years, and the animal control division shall ensure that the clinic is conducted in conformance with the requirements of Code of Virginia § 3.2-6521. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3292, 6-11-13, eff. 7-1-13)  
Sec. 5-201. - Report of existence of rabid animals. 
Every person having knowledge of the existence of an animal apparently afflicted with rabies shall report immediately to the local health department the existence of such animal, the place where seen, the owner's name, if known, and the symptoms suggesting rabies. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-202. - Report of animal bites of human beings. 
All animal bites of human beings shall be reported to the department of public health within twenty-four (24) hours after occurrence. Such report shall include the name and post office address of the person bitten, the owner of the biting animal and a reasonable description of the animal. The responsibility of so reporting is mutually charged to attending physicians, veterinarians, owners of the biting animals and persons bitten and any other persons who may have knowledge of such fact. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-203. - Emergency ordinance. 
Where there is sufficient reason to believe a rabid animal is at large city council may pass an emergency ordinance as provided in Code of Virginia § 3.2-6522. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-204. - Confinement or destruction of dogs, cats and other animals showing signs of or suspected of having rabies. 
Any dog, cat or other animal found within the city showing active signs of rabies or suspected of having rabies shall be confined under competent observation for such time as may be necessary to determine a diagnosis. If confinement is impossible or impracticable, such dog, cat or other animal shall be euthanized by one of the methods authorized in Code of Virginia § 3.2-6546. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-205. - Destruction or confinement of dog or cat bitten by rabid animal. 
(a)  Any dog or cat, for which no proof of current rabies vaccination is available and that is exposed to rabies by an animal believed to be afflicted with rabies, shall be confined in a pound, kennel or enclosure approved by the health department for a period not to exceed six (6) months at the expense of the owner. An inactivated rabies vaccine may be administered at the beginning of the confinement. A rabies vaccination shall be administered prior to release. If this is not feasible, the dog or cat shall be humanely euthanized. 
(b)  Any dog or cat, for which there is proof of a valid rabies vaccination and that is exposed to rabies by an animal believed to be afflicted with rabies shall be revaccinated immediately following the bite and shall be confined to the premises of the owner, or other site as may be approved by the health department, for a period of forty-five (45) days. 
(c)  When any animals, other than a dog or cat, is exposed to rabies by an animal believed to be afflicted with rabies, that newly exposed animal shall be confined at the discretion of and in a manner approved by the health director, or euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-206. - Confinement or destruction of animal which has bitten person. 
(a)  At the discretion of the director of public health, any animal which has bitten a person shall be confined under competent observation for ten (10) days, unless the animal develops active symptoms of rabies or expires before that time; provided, that a seriously injured or sick animal may be humanely euthanized and its head sent to the health department for evaluation. 
(b)  At the discretion of the director of health, any potentially rabid animal, other than a dog or cat, that exposes or may have exposed a person to rabies shall be confined in a manner approved by the health department or humanely euthanized and its head sent to the health department for evaluation. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-207. - Concealing or harboring animal to prevent its destruction or confinement under article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or harbor any dog, cat or other animal to keep the same from being destroyed or confined in accord with this article. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Secs. 5-208—5-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LOCAL LICENSES 
 
Sec. 5-300. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog or cat four (4) months old or older in this city, unless such dog or cat is licensed under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-301. - Application; applicant to be city resident. 
(a)  Any person may obtain a one-, two-, or three-year city dog or cat license by making oral or written application to the city treasurer or an appointed agent, accompanied by the amount of the license tax and the evidence of vaccination required by section 5-306. 
(b)  Additionally, any person obtaining a rabies vaccination from a vet-agent as provided in section 5-302 below may obtain a one-, two-, or three-year local license that runs concurrently with the vaccination administered by paying the tax as provided in section 5-303. The vet-agent shall only have authority to license dogs and cats of resident owners or custodians who reside within the city. 
(c)  Any person purchasing a dog or cat license shall provide residency information to the city treasurer or the appointed agent. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false statement in or present any false evidence with an application submitted under this section, in order to secure a dog or cat license to which such person is not entitled. 
(d)  A one-year license tag shall be valid for up to twelve (12) months from the date of issue, not to exceed the duration of the current rabies vaccination; a two-year license tag shall be valid for up to twenty-four (24) months from the date of issue, not to exceed the duration of the current rabies vaccination; and a three-year license tag shall be valid for up to thirty-six (36) months, not to exceed the duration of the current rabies vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-302. - Veterinarians as appointed agents. 
(a)  The city treasurer may appoint agents for the collection of the license tax and the issuance of the license tags. Any veterinarian who vaccinates or supervises the vaccination of dogs and cats against rabies and is licensed to do business in Virginia Beach may submit an application to the city treasurer for such an agent appointment. 
(b)  The vet-agent shall have authority to issue local license tags on those occasions where he or she is presented with a current rabies certificate or when administering rabies vaccinations to dogs or cats of owners or custodians who reside within the city. The issued local tag shall run concurrently with the vaccination administered or in conjunction with the current certificate. The vet-agent shall collect the required fee as outlined below in section 5-303. The fee and the required report shall be submitted to the city treasurer as provided in the written agreement required in subsection (d) below. 
(c)  For every one-, two-, or three-year local license tag issued, the vet-agent shall deduct one dollar ($1.00) from the amount due to the city treasurer. 
(d)  Each appointed vet-agent shall agree in writing to abide by procedures and protocols established by the city treasurer. Any vet-agent who fails to follow the established procedures or protocols may have his or her authority to collect the license taxes and issue the license tags revoked by the city treasurer.  
Sec. 5-303. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  A license tax is hereby imposed on dogs and cats required to be licensed under this article in the following nonrefundable amounts: 
(1)  For each dog or cat, not spayed or not neutered: 
1-year tag .....$10.00 
2-year tag .....$20.00 
3-year tag .....$30.00 
(2)  For each dog, spayed or neutered: 
1-year tag .....$7.00 
2-year tag .....$14.00 
3-year tag .....$21.00 
(3)  For each cat, spayed or neutered: 
1-year tag .....$5.00 
2-year tag .....$10.00 
3-year tag .....$15.00 
(4)  Kennel of five (5) to twenty (20) dogs, or five (5) to twenty (20) cats, annually .....$35.00 
(5)  Kennel of twenty-one (21) or more dogs, or of twenty-one (21) or more cats, annually .....$50.00 
Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 3.2-6500, a "kennel" is any establishment in which five or more canines, felines, or hybrids of either are kept for the purpose of breeding, hunting, training, renting, buying, boarding, selling, or showing. The owner of a kennel or cattery shall pay the kennel or cattery tax imposed above but shall not be required to also pay the individual dog or cat license fees listed in subsections (1) and (2) for any dog or cat that is owned by the owner of the kennel or cattery and that is housed within the kennel or cattery. 
(b)  A license tax in the nonrefundable amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) is hereby imposed on pet shops, annually.* [] 
Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 3.2-6500, a "pet shop" is a retail establishment where companion animals are bought, sold, exchanged, or offered for sale or exchange to the general public. 
(c)  A quarterly prorated license tax shall be imposed on any dog or cat owner when he or she moves to Virginia Beach or purchases, adopts, or otherwise acquires a dog or cat that has a current rabies vaccination. This prorated fee may only be imposed by the staff at the office of the city treasurer, and no prorated fee may be offered by appointed agents authorized by section 5-302. The prorated fee shall be based on date of residence or date of purchase as compared to the date of rabies expiration. Verification of these dates must be provided at time of licensing. Quarterly prorated license fee shall be determined based upon the amount of time remaining before the rabies vaccination expires. The quarterly prorated fee shall be as follows: 
(1)  Twenty-five (25) percent of the annual fee if at least one (1) month, but less than four (4) months, remain before expiration of the vaccination. 
(2)  Fifty (50) percent of the annual fee if at least four (4) months, but less than seven (7) months, remain before expiration of the vaccination. 
(3)  Seventy-five (75) percent of the annual fee if at least seven (7) months, but less than ten (10) months, remain before expiration of the vaccination. 
(4)  One hundred (100) percent of the annual fee if at least ten (10) months remain before expiration of vaccination. 
(d)  A quarterly prorated license fee shall be imposed on any dog or cat owner having a valid rabies certificate issued between January 3, 2005 and September 30, 2007. The prorated fee shall be based on the time remaining on January 1, 2008 and the expiration of the rabies certificate. Quarterly prorated fees shall be imposed only on portions of years, and shall be imposed as follows: 
(1)  Twenty-five (25) percent of the annual fee if at least one month, but less than four (4) months, remain before expiration of the vaccination. 
(2)  Fifty (50) percent of the annual fee if at least four (4) months, but less than seven (7) months, remain before expiration of the vaccination. 
(3)  Seventy-five (75) percent of the annual fee if at least seven (7) months, but less than ten (10) months, remain before expiration of the vaccination. 
(4)  One hundred (100) percent of the annual fee if at least ten (10) months remain before expiration of vaccination. 
(e)  No license tax shall be levied under this section on any dog that is trained and serves as a guide dog for a blind person, that is trained and serves as a hearing dog for a deaf or hearing-impaired person, or that is trained and serves as a service dog for a mobility-impaired person. For the purposes of this subsection, a "hearing dog" is a dog trained to alert its owner, by touch, to sounds of danger and sounds to which the owner should respond, and a "service dog" means a dog trained to accompany its owner for the purpose of carrying items, retrieving objects, pulling a wheelchair or other such activities of service or support. 
(f)  Any person who applies for a license tag for a neutered or spayed dog or cat shall present, at the time of application, an appropriate veterinarian's certification suitable to the city treasurer attesting to the neutering or spaying of the dog or cat. If such certification is not so presented, the dog or cat shall be taxed the fee levied on unneutered and unspayed dogs or cats. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3563, 7-3-18, eff. 1-1-19) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
*This goes into effective January 1, 2019. 
 
Sec. 5-304. - When tax due and payable. 
The license tax on dogs and cats shall be due and payable as follows: 
(1)  When a dog or cat becomes four (4) months of age and receives its first rabies vaccination. 
(2)  When a dog or cat receives a subsequent rabies vaccination. 
(3)  Within thirty (30) days from the day a person brings a dog or cat into the city from another jurisdiction, if such dog or cat is to be kept in the city more than thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-305. - Failure to pay tax when due. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat to fail to pay the tax imposed by this article when the same is due. Payment of such tax subsequent to a summons to appear before a court for failure to do so within the time required shall not operate to relieve such owner from the penalties provided for such failure. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-306. - Issuance, composition and contents. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a proper application and the prescribed license tax, the city treasurer or an appointed agent shall issue a dog or cat license; provided that no such license shall be issued for any dog or cat, unless there is presented to the city treasurer or an appointed agent evidence satisfactory to the treasurer or the appointed agent that the owner has complied with section 5-200 with respect to such dog or cat. 
(b)  Each dog or cat license shall consist of a license tax receipt and a metal tag. Such receipt shall have recorded thereon the amount of the tax paid, the name and address of the owner or custodian of the dog or cat, the date of payment, the period for which the license is issued, the serial number of the tag and whether the license is for a male or female, cat or dog, neutered/spayed or unaltered, or for a kennel. The metal tag issued hereunder shall be stamped or otherwise permanently marked to show the name of the city and shall bear a serial number. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-307. - Preservation and exhibition of license receipt; tag to be worn by dog or cat; exceptions. 
(a)  Dog or cat license tags shall be securely fastened to a substantial collar by the owner or custodian and worn by such dog or cat. The owner of the dog or cat may remove the collar and license tag required by this section when a dog is engaged in lawful hunting; when the dog or cat is competing in a dog or cat show; when the dog or cat has a skin condition which would be exacerbated by the wearing of a collar; when the dog or cat is confined; or when the dog or cat is on the property of the owner or custodian of the dog or cat. 
(b)  Any dog or cat not wearing a collar bearing a license tag marked with the name of the city shall prima facie be deemed to be unlicensed, and in any proceedings under this article, the burden of proof of the fact that such dog or cat has been licensed or is otherwise not required to bear a tag at the time shall be on the owner of the dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-308. - Removal of tag. 
It shall be unlawful for a person except the owner or custodian, to remove a legally acquired license tag from a dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-309. - Duplicate tags. 
If a dog or cat license tag shall become lost, destroyed or stolen, the owner or custodian shall at once apply to the city treasurer for a duplicate license tag, presenting the original license receipt. Upon affidavit of the owner or custodian before the city treasurer that the original license tag has been lost, destroyed or stolen, the treasurer shall issue a duplicate license tag, which the owner or custodian shall immediately affix to the collar of the dog or cat. The treasurer shall endorse the number of the duplicate and the date issued on the face of the original license receipt. The fee for a duplicate tag shall be one dollar ($1.00). 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-310. - Records and reports; disposition of unsold tags. 
The city treasurer shall enter, in a dog or cat license sales record, the date of the sale of dog or cat tags, including sales to kennels and catteries, and the names and addresses of persons, in alphabetical order, to whom sold and shall keep an account of the amount of the license tax paid. At the close of the fiscal year, an annual report of such sales shall be filed by the treasurer with the director of finance, who shall audit such records, accounts and unsold dog or cat license tags. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-311. - Pet shops; posting of information about dogs. 
(a)  Any pet shop, as the term is defined in Code of Virginia § 3.2-6500, that sells dogs shall place a clear and conspicuous sign near the cages in the public sales area stating "USDA APHIS Inspection Reports Available Prior to Purchase." The sign shall be no smaller than eight and one-half (8½) inches high by eleven (11) inches wide, and the print shall be no smaller than one-half inch. 
(b)  Any pet shop that sells dogs shall maintain for each dog in its possession a written record that includes the following information: 
(1)  The breed, age, and date of birth of the dog, if known; 
(2)  The sex, color, and any identifying marks of the dog; 
(3)  Any additional identifying information, including a tag, tattoo, collar number, or microchip; 
(4)  Documentation of all inoculations, worming treatments, and other medical treatments, if known, including the date of the medical treatment, the diagnosis, and the name and title of the treatment provider; 
(5)  For a dog obtained from a breeder or dealer: (i) the state in which the breeder, and if applicable, the dealer are located; (ii) the U.S. Department of Agriculture license number of the breeder and, if applicable; (iii) the dealer; the final inspection reports for the breeder and, if applicable, the dealer, issued by the U.S. Department of Agriculture from the two years immediately before the date the pet store received the dog; and (iv) the facility where the dog was born and the transporter or carrier of the dog, if any; 
(6)  For a dog obtained from a public animal shelter, the name of the shelter; and 
(7)  For a dog obtained from a private animal shelter or humane society, the name of the shelter or organization and the locality in which it is located. 
(c)  Any pet shop that sells dogs shall maintain a copy of the written record required by subsection (b) for at least two (2) years after the date of sale of the dog and shall make such record available to the Office of the State Veterinarian upon reasonable notice, to any bona fide prospective purchaser upon request, and to the purchaser at the time of sale. Any such pet shop shall transmit the information required by subdivisions (b)(5), (6), and (7) to the local animal control officer upon request. 
(Ord. No. 3556, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18)  
Sec. 5-312. - Pet shop licensing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pet shop, as the term is defined in Code of Virginia § 3.2-6500, in this city without a valid license issued under this article. Such license shall not be transferable and shall expire at the end of each calendar year, unless otherwise revoked. The revenues derived from the license tax shall be used for the administration and enforcement of this section. 
(b)  Prior to issuing or renewing a license for a pet shop, the Police Department shall: 
(1)  Inspect the premises to determine compliance with this article, standards applicable to pet shops in the Virginia Code, and all other state and local laws, and consult with the zoning administrator to determine whether the location is the subject of any current zoning violations; 
(2)  Determine that the applicant has a valid sales tax permit and is in good standing with the Virginia Department of Taxation; 
(3)  Confirm that the applicant has never been convicted of a violation related to the treatment of animals under any state or local law. 
(c)  A public hearing shall be held prior to the issuance of a license for new pet shops going into business after the enactment of this section and also prior to the revocation or denial of the renewal of a license. The applicant and any other interested person shall be given an opportunity to appear and be heard at any such hearing. 
(d)  Pet shops shall be inspected annually by the Police Department's Animal Enforcement Unit to ensure compliance with this article, standards applicable to pet shops in the Virginia Code, and all other state and local laws, and to ensure the humane treatment of the animals. Pet shops which are required by law to make inspection reports from the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) available for consumers and animal control officers shall be inspected bi-annually by the Bureau of Animal Control. 
(e)  Pet shops selling dogs shall comply with the provisions of section 5-311 as a condition of licensing. 
(f)  The Police Department shall deny issuance of a license to a pet shop for fraudulent practices or the inhumane treatment of animals, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Providing false or misleading statements on the license application; 
(2)  Violating any state or local laws or ordinances related to the inhumane treatment of animals. 
(g)  The Police Department shall deny renewal of, or revoke, a license to a pet shop for fraudulent practices or the inhumane treatment of animals, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Failing to comply with the recordkeeping and disclosure requirements in subsection (e) of this section; 
(2)  Providing false or misleading statements about the source of companion animals acquired or sold by the pet shop or dealer; 
(3)  Providing false or misleading information to the public related to the companion animals being sold by the pet shop; 
(4)  Selling dogs in violation of Va. Code Ann. § 3.2-6511.1; or 
(5)  Violating standards applicable to pet shops under the Virginia Code, or other laws or ordinances related to the treatment of animals. 
(h)  A pet shop licensed under this section may request a hearing with the City Manager or their designee in the event a license is revoked or license renewal is denied. 
(i)  It shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor for a pet shop to operate without a permit in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3563, 7-3-18, eff. 1-1-19) 
Editor's note— This section 5-313 goes into effect January 1, 2019.  
Secs. 5-313—5-399. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS BY THE BUREAU OF ANIMAL CONTROL; MANDATORY STERILIZATION  
DIVISION 1. - ANIMAL SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION 
 
Sec. 5-400. - General. 
(a)  The bureau of animal control shall be operated in accordance with Code of Virginia, tit. 3.2, ch. 65 and with the regulations issued by the board of agriculture and consumer services. 
(b)  Any animal seized, impounded or disposed of by the bureau of animal control, shall be seized, impounded or disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia §§ 3.2-6546 (when found running at large) and 3.2-6569 (when found abandoned, cruelly treated, or suffering from an apparent violation of this chapter that has rendered the animal in such condition as to constitute a direct and immediate threat to its life, safety or health.) 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-401. - Fees for the impoundment and adoption of animals, generally. 
(a)  The bureau of animal control is hereby authorized to charge a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first day an animal is impounded and two dollars ($2.00) per day for each additional day or part thereof for the care of any animal impounded for any reason. 
(b)  If a dog or cat impounded under this article is not claimed by its owner or caretaker within five (5) days or within ten (10) days if the dog or cat has a collar, tag, license tattoo, or other form of identification, it shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia § 3.1-796.96. 
(c)  In the event any person proposes to adopt such dog or cat, pursuant to such section, he shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for dogs; twenty dollars ($20.00) for cats; and fifteen dollars ($15.00) for all other animals to cover the cost of transfer, seizure and veterinary care for the animal. 
(d)  Any person adopting an animal spayed or neutered at the expenses of the city shall also incur an additional cost of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for dogs, and forty dollars ($40.00) for cats. In the event sterilization services are not available from the city, any person adopting an unaltered animal will be required to deposit an additional one hundred dollars ($100.00) for dogs, and forty dollars ($40.00) for cats which shall be reimbursed if proof of sterilization is presented to the bureau of animal control within thirty (30) days of the adoption. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (c) and (d) above, the chief of police is authorized to lower the adoption fees for (1) special adoption events and (2) in the event of excessive shelter over-population. 
(f)  The person desiring to adopt the animal shall sign an adoption contract agreeing to abide by the rules and regulations of the Animal Care and Adoption Center. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3136, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 3236, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 5-402. - Recovery of veterinary fees. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, when any animal in the custody of the bureau of animal control is found injured, disabled or diseased, the superintendent of the bureau of animal control may request the assistance of a veterinarian to treat such animal. If the owner of the animal is found, the owner shall be liable for all fees to the veterinarian for treatment provided. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-403. - Sale of adopted animal prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who acquires an animal from the bureau of animal control to sell the animal within a period of six months from the time the animal is acquired from the facility. A violation of this chapter shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Secs. 5-404—5-419. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MANDATORY STERILIZATION 
 
Sec. 5-420. - Sterilization of adopted dogs and cats; enforcement; civil penalty. 
(a)  Every new owner of a dog or cat adopted from the bureau of animal control shall cause to be sterilized the dog or cat pursuant to the agreement required by this division. 
(b)  A dog or cat shall not be released for adoption from the bureau of animal control unless: 
(1)  The animal has already been sterilized; or 
(2)  The individual adopting the animal signs an agreement to have the animal sterilized by a licensed veterinarian: (i) within thirty (30) days of the adoption, if the animal is sexually mature; or (ii) within thirty (30) days after the animal reaches six months of age, if the animal is not sexually mature at the time of adoption. 
(c)  The date by which a dog or cat must be sterilized may extend for thirty (30) days upon presentation of a written report from a veterinarian stating that the life or health of the adopted animal may be jeopardized by sterilization. In cases involving extenuating circumstances, the veterinarian and the bureau of animal control may negotiate the terms of an extension of the date by which the animal must be sterilized. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the sterilization of a sexually immature dog or cat upon the written agreement of the veterinarian, the bureau of animal control, and the new owner. 
(e)  Upon the petition of any animal control officer, the general district court may order the new owner to take any steps necessary to comply with the requirements of this division. This remedy shall be exclusive of and in addition to any civil penalty that may be imposed under this division. 
(f)  Any person who violates subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-421. - Sterilization agreement; confirmation; civil penalty. 
(a)  The sterilization agreement required by section 5-420 shall, at a minimum, include the following information: 
(1)  The date of the agreement; 
(2)  The names, addresses, and signatures of the bureau of animal control and the new owner; 
(3)  A description of the dog or cat to be adopted; 
(4)  The date by which the dog or cat is required to be sterilized; and 
(5)  A statement printed in conspicuous, bold print, that sterilization of the dog or cat is required under this division; that a person who violates this division is subject to a civil penalty; that the new owner may be compelled to comply with the provisions of this division; and that in the event of noncompliance with this division, any monetary deposit collected to ensure compliance may be forfeited. 
(b)  Each new owner who signs a sterilization agreement shall, within seven (7) days of the sterilization, cause to be delivered or mailed to the bureau of animal control written confirmation signed by the veterinarian who performed the sterilization. The confirmation shall briefly describe the dog or cat; include the new owner's name and address; certify that the sterilization was performed; and specify the date of the procedure. The bureau of animal control may charge and collect from the new owner a refundable deposit before releasing a dog or cat for adoption to ensure sterilization. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-422. - Notification concerning lost, stolen or dead dogs or cats; civil penalty. 
If an adopted dog or cat is lost or stolen or dies before the animal is sterilized and before the date by which the dog or cat is required to be sterilized, the new owner shall, within seven days of the animal's disappearance or death, notify the bureau of animal control of the animal's disappearance or death. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-423. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  An owner reclaiming his dog or cat from a bureau of animal control; or 
(2)  The bureau of animal control when an animal is disposed of by sale or gift to a federal agency, state-supported institution, agency of the commonwealth, agency of another state, or licensed federal dealer having its principal place of business located within the commonwealth; or 
(3)  An animal transferred to another bureau of animal control. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-424. - Actions for civil penalties. 
Any animal control officer shall be entitled to bring a civil action for any violation of this division that is subject to a civil penalty. Any civil penalty assessed pursuant to this division shall be paid into the treasury of the city and used for the purpose of defraying the costs of the bureau of animal control, including efforts to promote sterilization of cats and dogs. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Secs. 5-425—5-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ANIMAL WELFARE  
DIVISION 1. - CRUELTY TO ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 5-500. - Cruelty to animals; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who: (i) overrides, overdrives, overloads, tortures, ill-treats, abandons, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly or unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates, or kills any animal, whether belonging to himself or another; (ii) deprives any animal of necessary food, drink, shelter or emergency veterinary treatment; (iii) sores any equine for any purpose or administers drugs or medications to alter or mask such soring for the purpose of sale, show, or exhibition of any kind, unless such administration of drugs or medications is within the context of a veterinary client-patient relationship and solely for therapeutic purposes; (iv) willfully sets on foot, instigates, engages in, or in any way furthers any act of cruelty to any animal; (v) carries or causes to be carried by any vehicle, vessel or otherwise any animal in a cruel, brutal, or inhumane manner, so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering; or (vi) causes any of the above things, or being the owner of such animal permits such acts to be done by another is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
In addition to the penalties provided in this subsection, the court may, in its discretion, require any person convicted of a violation of this subsection to attend an anger management or other appropriate treatment program or obtain psychiatric or psychological counseling. The court may impose the costs of such a program or counseling upon the person convicted. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the following: 
(1)  The dehorning of cattle conducted in a reasonable and customary manner; 
(2)  Authorized wildlife management activities or hunting, fishing or trapping as regulated by the Code of Virginia; or 
(3)  To farming activities as provided by the Code of Virginia or regulations adopted thereunder. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to kill a domestic dog or cat for the purpose of obtaining the hide, fur or pelt of the dog or cat. A first-time violation of this subsection is a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(d)  Any person convicted of violating this section may be prohibited by the court from possession or ownership of companion animals. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-501. - Adequate space for animals; time restriction on tethering dogs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to fail to provide any animal with adequate space. "Adequate space" means sufficient space to allow each animal to (i) easily stand, sit, lie, turn about, and make all other normal body movements in a comfortable, normal position for the animal and (ii) interact safely with other animals in the enclosure. 
(b)  When a dog is tethered, "adequate space" means a tether that permits the above actions and is appropriate to the age and size of the dog. The tether must be attached to the dog by a properly applied collar, halter, or harness configured so as to protect the dog from injury and prevent the dog or the tether from becoming entangled with other objects or dogs, or from extending over an object or edge that could result in the strangulation or injury of the dog. Furthermore, the tether must be at least fifteen (15) feet in length, or four (4) times the length of the dog, as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail, whichever is greater, except when the dog is being walked on a leash or is attached by a tether to a lead line or when an animal control officer, having inspected an animal's individual circumstances, has determined that in such an individual case, a tether of at least ten (10) feet or three (3) times the length of the animal, but shorter than fifteen (15) feet or four (4) times the length of the animal, makes the animal more safe, more suited, and better equipped to tolerate its environment than a longer tether. The tether shall not, by its material, size, or weight or any other characteristic, cause injury or pain to the animal; shall not weigh more than one-tenth of the animal's body weight; and shall not have weights or other heavy objects attached to it. The walking of an animal on a leash by its owner shall not constitute the tethering of the animal for the purpose of this definition. When freedom of movement would endanger the dog, temporarily and appropriately restricting movement of the dog according to professionally accepted standards is considered to be provision of adequate space. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any dog to be tethered for more than one (1) hour, cumulatively in any twenty-four-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3440, 4-5-16; Ord. No. 3633, 7-21-20)  
Secs. 5-502—5-519. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS 
 
Sec. 5-520. - Definitions, as used in this division. 
(a)  "Dangerous dog" means: 
(1)  A canine or canine crossbreed that has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a companion animal that is a dog or cat or killed a companion animal that is a dog or cat. A canine or canine crossbreed is not a dangerous dog if, upon investigation, a law-enforcement officer or animal control officer finds that (i) no serious physical injury as determined by a licensed veterinarian has occurred to the dog or cat as a result of the attack or bite; (ii) both animals are owned by the same person; or (iii) such attack occurred on the property of the attacking or biting dog's owner or custodian; or 
(2)  A canine or canine crossbreed that has bitten, attacked or inflicted injury on a person. A canine or canine crossbreed is not a dangerous dog if, upon investigation, a law-enforcement officer or animal control officer finds that the injury inflicted by the canine or canine crossbreed upon a person consists solely of a single nip or bite resulting only in a scratch, abrasion, or other minor injury. 
No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog as a result of biting, attacking, or inflicting injury on a dog or cat while engaged with an owner or custodian as part of lawful hunting or participating in an organized, lawful dog handling event. No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog if the court determines, based upon the totality of the evidence before it, or for other good cause, that the dog is not dangerous or a threat to the community. 
(b)  "Vicious dog" means a canine or canine crossbreed that has: (i) killed a person; (ii) inflicted serious injury to a person, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or (iii) continued to exhibit the behavior that resulted in a previous finding by a court or, on or before July 1, 2006, by an animal control officer as authorized by ordinance, that it is a dangerous dog, provided that its owner has been given notice of that finding. 
(c)  "Serious injury" means an injury having a reasonable potential to cause death or any injury other than a sprain or strain, including serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of bodily function and requiring significant medical attention. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3291, 6-11-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3510, 6-20-17, eff. 7-1-17)  
Sec. 5-521. - Enforcement procedures—Dangerous dogs. 
(a)  Any law enforcement officer or animal control officer who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed within the city is a dangerous dog may apply to a magistrate for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before the general district court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. If a law-enforcement officer successfully makes an application for the issuance of a summons, he shall contact the bureau of animal control and inform them of the location of the dog and the relevant facts pertaining to his belief that the dog is dangerous. 
(b)  An animal control officer shall confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. If the animal control officer determines that the owner or custodian can confine the animal in a manner that protects the public safety, he may permit the owner or custodian to confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. However, whenever an owner or custodian of an animal found to be a dangerous dog is charged with a violation of sections 5-524, 5-525, or 5-526, the animal control officer shall confine the dangerous dog until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. 
(c)  If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a dangerous dog, the court shall order the animal's owner to comply with the provisions of this section. The court, upon finding the animal to be a dangerous dog, may order the owner, custodian, or harborer thereof to pay restitution for actual damages to any person inured by the animal or whose companion animal was injured or killed by the animal. The court, in its discretion, may also order the owner to pay all reasonable expenses incurred in caring and providing for such dangerous dog from the time the animal is taken into custody until such time as the animal is disposed of or returned to the owner. The procedure for appeal and trial shall be the same as provided by law for misdemeanors. Trial by jury shall be as provided in the Code of Virginia, Article 4 (§ 19.2-260 et seq.) of Chapter 15 of Title 19.2. The Commonwealth shall be required to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3291, 6-11-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3510, 6-20-17, eff. 7-1-17)  
Sec. 5-522. - Exceptions to enforcement procedures—Dangerous dogs. 
No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a dangerous dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor is the ownership of a particular breed of canine or canine crossbreed prohibited. No animal shall be found to be a dangerous dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was: (i) committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; (ii) committing, at the time, a willful trespass upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; or (iii) provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the animal, or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal at other times. No police dog that was engaged in the performance of its duties as such at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be a dangerous dog. No animal that, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, a person, or its owner's or custodian's property, shall be found to be a dangerous dog. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3291, 6-11-13, eff. 7-1-13)  
Sec. 5-523. - When dog owner is a minor—Dangerous dogs. 
If the owner of an animal found to be a dangerous dog is a minor, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3291, 6-11-13, eff. 7-1-13)  
Sec. 5-524. - Registration procedures—Dangerous dogs. 
(a)  The owner of any animal found to be a dangerous dog shall, within thirty (30) days of such finding, obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the bureau of animal control for a fee of one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00), in addition to other fees that may be authorized by law. The bureau of animal control shall also provide the owner with a uniformly designed tag that identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall affix the tag to the animal's collar and ensure that the animal wears the collar and tag at all times. By January 31 of each year, until such time as the dangerous dog is deceased, all certificates obtained pursuant to this subsection shall be updated and renewed for a fee of eighty-five dollars ($85.00) and in the same manner as the initial certificate was obtained. The animal control officer shall post registration information on the Virginia Dangerous Dog Registry. 
(b)  All dangerous dog registration certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence: (i) of the animal's current rabies vaccination, if applicable; (ii) that the animal has been neutered or spayed; and (iii) that the animal is and will be confined in a proper enclosure or is and will be confined inside the owner's residence or is and will be muzzled and confined in the owner's fenced-in yard until the proper enclosure is constructed. In addition, owners who apply for certificates or renewals thereof under this section shall not be issued a certificate or renewal thereof unless they present satisfactory evidence that: (i) their residence is and will continue to be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property; and (ii) the animal has been permanently identified by means of electronic implantation. All certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons who present satisfactory evidence that the owner has liability insurance coverage, of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), that covers animal bites. The owner may obtain and maintain a bond in surety, in lieu of liability insurance, to the value of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(c)  The owner shall cause the Bureau of Animal Control to be promptly notified of: (i) the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners; (ii) all of the means necessary to locate the owner and the dog at any time; (iii) any complaints or incidents of attack by the dog upon any person or cat or dog; (iv) any claims made or lawsuits brought as a result of any attack; (v) chip identification information; (vi) proof of insurance or surety bond; and (vii) the death of the dog. 
(d)  All fees collected pursuant to this section, less the costs incurred for producing and distributing the certificates and tags, and less the fees due to the State Veterinarian for maintenance of the Virginia Dangerous Dog Registry, shall be paid into a fund for the purpose of paying the expenses of training courses required under Code of Virginia § 3.2-6556. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3241, 6-26-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 3291, 6-11-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3510, 6-20-17, eff. 7-1-17)  
Sec. 5-525. - Confinement of court-designated dangerous dogs. 
While on the property of its owner, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height and design to prevent its escape or direct contact with or entry by minors, adults, or other animals. While so confined within the structure, the animal shall be provided for according to Code of Virginia § 3.2-6503. When off its owner's property, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be kept on a leash and muzzled in such a manner as not to cause injury to the animal or interfere with the animal's vision or respiration, but so as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3291, 6-11-13, eff. 7-1-13)  
Sec. 5-526. - Dangerous dog status notification requirements. 
After an animal has been found to be a dangerous dog, the animal's owner shall immediately, upon learning of same, cause the bureau of animal control to be notified if the animal: (i) is loose or unconfined; or (ii) bites a person or attacks another animal; or (iii) is sold, is given away, or dies. Any owner of a dangerous dog who relocates to a new address shall, within ten (10) days of relocating, provide written notice to the appropriate local animal control authority for the old address from which the animal has moved and the new address to which the animal has been moved. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3291, 6-11-13, eff. 7-1-13)  
Sec. 5-527. - Penalty—Dangerous dogs. 
(a)  The owner of any animal that has been found to be a dangerous dog who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this division is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any owner or custodian of a canine or canine crossbreed or other animal is guilty of a: 
(1)  Class 2 misdemeanor if the canine or canine crossbreed previously declared a dangerous dog pursuant to this division, when such declaration arose out of a separate and distinct incident, attacks and injures or kills a cat or dog that is a companion animal belonging to another person; or 
(2)  Class 1 misdemeanor if the canine or canine crossbreed previously declared a dangerous dog pursuant to this division, when such declaration arose out of a separate and distinct incident, bites a human being or attacks a human being causing bodily injury. 
(c)  Upon conviction, the court may (i) order the dangerous dog to be disposed of pursuant to Code of Virginia § 3.2-6562 or (ii) grant the owner up to thirty (30) days to comply with the requirements of this section, during which time the dangerous dog shall remain in the custody of the animal control officer until compliance has been verified. If the owner fails to achieve compliance within the time specified by the court, the court shall order the dangerous dog to be disposed of pursuant to Code of Virginia § 3.2-6562. The court, in its discretion, may order the owner to pay all reasonable expenses incurred in caring and providing for such dangerous dog from the time the animal is taken into custody until such time that the animal is disposed of or returned to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3263, 1-22-13; Ord. No. 3291, 6-11-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3510, 6-20-17, eff. 7-1-17)  
Sec. 5-528. - Enforcement procedures—Vicious dogs. 
(a)  Any law-enforcement officer or animal control officer who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed is a vicious dog shall apply to a magistrate for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before a general district court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. If a law-enforcement officer successfully makes an application for the issuance of a summons, he shall contact the local animal control officer and inform him of the location of the dog and the relevant facts pertaining to his belief that the dog is vicious. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian, or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. 
(c)  If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a vicious dog, the court shall order the animal euthanized in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia § 3.2-6562. The court, upon finding the animal to be a vicious dog, may order the owner, custodian, or harborer thereof to pay restitution for actual damages to any person injured by the animal or to the estate of any person killed by the animal. The court, in its discretion, may also order the owner to pay all reasonable expenses incurred in caring and providing for such vicious dog from the time the animal is taken into custody until such time as the animal is disposed of. The procedure for appeal and trial shall be the same as provided by law for misdemeanors. Trial by jury shall be as provided in Code of Virginia, Article 4 (§ 19.2-260 et seq.) of Chapter 15 of Title 19.2. The Commonwealth shall be required to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(Ord. No. 3291, 6-11-13, eff. 7-1-13)  
Sec. 5-529. - Exceptions to enforcement procedures—Vicious dogs. 
No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a vicious dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor is the ownership of a particular breed of canine or canine crossbreed prohibited. No animal shall be found to be a vicious dog if the threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person who was (i) committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; or (ii) committing, at the time, a willful trespass upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; or (iii) provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the animal, or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal at other times. No police dog that was engaged in the performance of its duties as such at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be a vicious dog. No animal that, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, a person, or its owner's or custodian's property, shall be found to be a vicious dog. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3291, 6-11-13, eff. 7-1-13)  
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED ACTS 
 
Sec. 5-530. - Dogs or cats running at large. 
(a)  Any person owning, keeping or harboring any dog or cat within the city that is found running at large shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. For the purposes of the section, a dog shall be deemed to run at large while roaming, running or self hunting off the property of its owner or custodian. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of any person owning, keeping or harboring any dog or cat within the city to keep such dog or cat confined to the premises of such person. The words "confined to the premises" shall be construed to mean that such dog or cat shall be kept on the owner's or custodian's premises, unless in the custody of a responsible person. 
(c)  This section shall not apply where the owner, custodian or trainer has released a dog for the express purpose of hunting game in an area zoned agricultural, where it is lawful to hunt, or competing in field trials or training, and such dog becomes temporarily out of control of such owner, custodian or trainer or is returning to the place of release after the hunt or chase. If such dog is observed violating any other section of this Code, or committing an unlawful act under state law, it shall become subject to impoundment; and the owner, custodian or trainer shall be liable for all fines as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-531. - Keeping dogs under restraint; leash law. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to permit the dog to go upon any city park, public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, excluding the public beaches of the city, unless it is kept firmly secured by a physical leash or lead attached to a collar or harness and under the control of a responsible person capable of physically restraining the dog. 
(b)  Any person who does not restrain his dog, in accordance with this section, whether such person be the owner or custodian of such dog, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. The animal control officer or police officer may issue a summons to any person he finds in violation of this section. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section "city park" means any city-owned and operated property open to the public for general recreational use, including, but not limited to traditional park areas, canoe and kayak launch areas, and the disabled children's beach playground known as Grommet Park. 
(d)  Exceptions. 
(1)  This section shall not apply to any person who uses a dog under his direct supervision while lawfully hunting, while engaged in a supervised formal obedience training class or show, or during formally sanctioned field trials. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to any person south of the trace line beginning at the intersection of Elbow Road and the Chesapeake-Virginia Beach City boundary line; thence northeastwardly along Elbow Road to Salem Road; thence southeastwardly along Salem Road to North Landstown Road; thence northeastwardly along Landstown Road to Princess Anne Road; thence southeastwardly along Princess Anne Road to Sandbridge Road; thence eastwardly along Sandbridge Road to its intersection with the Atlantic Ocean; with the exception of any areas zoned for residential use. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3223, 3-13-12; Ord. No. 3540, 5-1-18)  
Sec. 5-532. - Barking dogs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a dog without exercising proper care and control of such dog to prevent it from disturbing the peace of others by barking, whining, howling, or crying without provocation in a loud, continuous or untimely manner. Any person, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, in charge or control of the property where such dog is kept, or the owner of such dog, shall be responsible for exercising control of such dog under this section. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any animal control officer or police officer, who may find any dog disturbing the peace of others by barking, whining, howling, or crying without provocation in a loud, continuous or untimely manner, to advise the owner of such dog, or the person in charge or control of the property where such dog is kept, to exercise proper control and care of such dog to prevent it from barking, whining, howling, or crying in such manner. If such owner or person refuses to cooperate with the police officer or animal control officer, or is unable to prevent such dog from barking, whining, howling, or crying in such manner, or if the animal control officer or police officer is unable to locate any person on the property where such dog is kept, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer or police officer to take such dog into possession. The impoundment provisions of section 5-400 of this chapter shall be applicable to and followed by animal control officers, the bureau of animal control and police officers upon taking possession of any dog under this section. 
(c)  The animal control officer or police officer may issue a summons to any person he finds in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3541, 5-1-18)  
Sec. 5-533. - Nuisance animals generally. 
(a)  No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance. Molesting a passerby, attacking without seriously injuring any person without provocation on two (2) or more occasions, chasing vehicles, habitually attacking but not seriously injuring other domestic animals, trespassing upon school grounds, or trespassing upon private property in such manner as to damage property shall be deemed a nuisance. Three (3) or more violations of City Code sections 5-530 or 5-532 in any twelve-month period shall also be deemed a nuisance. 
(b)  Any person owning or having in his possession or under his control any animal constituting a nuisance shall be summoned before the general district court of the city to show cause why such animal should not be confined, disposed of or removed or the nuisance otherwise abated and, upon proof that the animal constitutes a public nuisance, the animal in question shall, by order of the general district court of the city, either be confined, removed from the city, or the nuisance activity otherwise abated as such court shall order. It shall be unlawful and shall constitute contempt of court for any person to harbor or conceal any animal which has been ordered disposed of or removed by the general district court, or to fail to confine or restrain an animal when such an order has been entered by the court. 
(c)  Any person who owns any dog, cat or other animal that has been adjudged a nuisance pursuant to this section by the general district court and who appeals that decision to the circuit court shall be responsible for the fees connected with the impounding of the animal by the bureau of animal control. If on appeal the circuit court determines that the dog, cat or other animal is not a nuisance, no such fees for the impounding of the animal shall be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3541, 5-1-18)  
Sec. 5-534. - Allowing dogs or horses to urinate or defecate on public or private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in immediate control of a dog or horse to: 
(1)  Allow his/her dog or horse to urinate or defecate on the private property of other persons without their consent or that of the authorized agent of the one having control of the premises. 
(2)  Allow his/her dog or horse to defecate on public property, except that defecation by a dog or horse on public property shall not constitute a violation of this section if the owner or person in immediate control of the dog or horse immediately removes the material defected and disposes of it in a safe and sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3170, 4-26-11)  
Sec. 5-535. - Dogs riding in motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a class 4 misdemeanor for any person who owns or has control of any dog to allow such dog to ride in any motor vehicle in any portion thereof that is open in such a manner as to permit such dog to jump out of the vehicle or to be thrown therefrom by acceleration of, stopping of, or accident involving, such vehicle, including, but not limited to, the open bed of a truck, the interior of a convertible vehicle with the top down or removed, the rear storage portion of a station wagon with the tailgate open, and the trunk or hatchback portion of any vehicle with the trunk or hatchback open. For purposes of this section, the operator of a motor vehicle shall be deemed to have control of any dog riding therein. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) above shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person who owns or has control of any dog and who allows such dog to ride in the prohibited portion of any motor vehicle if such dog is confined to a cage of adequate construction and design to prevent its escape therefrom; and 
(2)  Any portion of a motor vehicle which is fully enclosed except for open windows. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-536. - Leaving disabled or dead animal in road, or allowing dead animal to remain unburied. 
(a)  No person shall cast any dead animal into a road or knowingly permit any dead animal to remain unburied upon his property when offensive to the public or, having in custody any maimed, diseased, disabled or infirm animal, leave it to lie or be in a street, road or public place. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 5-537. - Disposition of dead animals generally. 
(a)  The owner of any companion animal shall forthwith cremate, bury, or sanitarily dispose of the animal upon its death. If after notice, any owner fails to do so, the bureau of animal control shall bury or cremate the companion animal and may recover costs as indicated below for this service. 
(b)  When the owner of any other animal or fowl which has died knows of such death, such owner shall forthwith have the body cremated or buried. If the owner fails to do so, any judge of a general district court, after notice to the owner if he can be ascertained, shall cause any such dead animal or fowl to be cremated or buried by a person or entity designated for that purpose. Such a person or entity shall be entitled to recover of the owner of every such animal or fowl that is cremated or buried the actual cost of the cremation or burial and a reasonable fee to be recovered, free from all exemptions in favor of such owner. 
(c)  The following fee, free of all exemptions in favor of such owner and payable to the city treasurer are authorized when such cremation services are provided by the bureau of animal control. The sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) for any small animal, such as a sheep, dog, cat or goat. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require the burial or cremation of the whole or portions of any animal or fowl which is to be used for food or in any commercial manner. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-538. - Using animals as prize or inducement. 
No person shall give away any live vertebrate animal as a prize for or as an inducement to enter any contest, a game or other competition or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement, whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-539. - Medical research. 
No person shall use or accept for the purpose of medical research or experimentation any animal bearing a tag, license, or tattooed identification, unless the individual who owns such animal consents thereto in writing. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-540. - Intentional interference with a guide or leader dog; penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to, without just cause, willfully impede or interfere with the duties performed by a dog if the person knows or has reason to believe the dog is a guide or leader dog. A violation of this subsection is a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a person to, without just cause, willfully injure a dog if the person knows or has reason to believe the dog is a guide or leader dog. A violation of this subsection is a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  As used in this section a "guide or leader dog" means a dog that: 
(1)  Serves as a dog guide for a blind person as defined in Code of Virginia § 51.5-60 or for a person with a visual disability; 
(2)  Serves as a listener for a deaf or hard-of-hearing person as defined in Code of Virginia § 51.5-111; or 
(3)  Provides support or assistance for a physically disabled or handicapped person. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-541. - Disease prevention. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog or cat with a contagious or infectious disease to permit such dog or cat to stray from the owner's premises if such disease is known to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-542. - Selling garments containing dog or cat fur prohibited; penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell a garment containing the hide, fur, or pelt that he knows to be that of a domestic dog or cat. A violation of this section is punishable by a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-543. - General restriction on keeping of livestock and other animals. 
No person shall keep horses, cows, goats, sheep, swine or other livestock or other animals within the city except in areas designated for agricultural purposes or parcels specially designated by the council for the keeping of such animals. This section shall not be construed to apply to: 
(1)  Companion animals as defined in the Code of Virginia § 3.2-6500 when such animals are kept as household pets on the premises of the owner; 
(2)  The operation of kennels, when authorized by appropriate provisions of this Code; or 
(3)  The keeping of household pets for sale at retail, where such keeping is authorized pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-544. - Livestock running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow horses, cows, goats, sheep, swine or other livestock to run at large in the city. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-545. - Fowl running at large. 
Fowl may be kept only in those areas zoned for agricultural use. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any fowl to run at large on any street or any unenclosed lot or ground within the city. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-546. - Homing or racing pigeons. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 5-545, any member of a recognized national pigeon association may house or keep in any district, and allow to fly for exercise within the corporate limits, homing or racing pigeons which are banded with numbered leg bands showing the same to be registered with such associations, provided, such pigeons are not kept so as to constitute a nuisance or create a hazard to public health. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3207, 10-25-11)  
Sec. 5-547. - Feeding wildlife on publicly-owned property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to feed any wildlife on publicly-owned property within the city; provided, however, that no violation shall be deemed to occur unless signs giving notice of the prohibition set forth in this section are posted in a conspicuous location upon the property and a law enforcement officer has provided a prior warning that continued feeding of wildlife will result in a violation of this section. 
(b)  For purpose of this section: 
(1)  "Wildlife" shall include all species of wild animals, wild birds, freshwater fish and all domestic, non-native, native or migratory waterfowl. 
(2)  "Feed" shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible material with the intention that such material be consumed by wildlife. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a civil infraction punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a first violation and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each successive violation. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-548. - Unlawful feeding of waterfowl in Salem Lakes. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 29.1-527.1, the feeding of migratory and nonmigratory waterfowl is hereby prohibited in the Salem Lakes Subdivision; provided, however, that no violation shall be deemed to occur unless signs giving notice of the prohibition set forth in this section are posted in a conspicuous location surrounding the lake and a law enforcement officer has provided a prior warning that continued feeding of wildlife will result in a violation of this section. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section: 
(1)  "Migratory and nonmigratory waterfowl" shall be those species defined by the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries as any and all waterfowl in the Anatidae family including native, nonnative, and domestic ducks and geese, and any crossbreeds or hybrids of these birds. 
(2)  "Feed" shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit or scatter any edible material. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a civil fine of $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 3251, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 5-549. - Pet shops; procurement of dogs; penalty. 
(a)  A pet shop shall sell or offer for adoption a dog procured only from a humane society or private or public animal shelter as those terms are defined in Code of Virginia § 3.2-6500 or from a person who has not received from the U.S. Department of Agriculture, pursuant to enforcement of the federal Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. § 2131 et seq.) or regulations adopted thereunder, (i) a citation for a direct violation or citations for three or more indirect violations for at least two years prior to the procurement of the dog or (ii) two consecutive citations for no access to the facility prior to the procurement of the dog. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any commercial dog breeder who is not licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture pursuant to the federal Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. § 2131 et seq.) or regulations adopted thereunder to sell any dog to a pet shop. 
(c)  A pet shop shall retain records verifying compliance with this section for a minimum of two years after the disposition of any dog. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor for each dog sold or offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. 3437, 3-15-16)  
Secs. 5-550—5-599. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - BIRD SANCTUARIES 
 
Sec. 5-600. - Established; purpose. 
There is hereby established as a sanctuary for the protection of all birds all of that area north and west of the trace of the line beginning at the intersection of North Landing Road and the Chesapeake-Virginia Beach City boundary line; thence northward along North Landing Road to Indian River Road; thence eastward along Indian River Road to New Bridge Road; thence northeastward along New Bridge Road to Sandbridge Road, thence eastward along Sandbridge Road to its intersection with the Atlantic Ocean; and all land north of False Cape State Park and east of Shipps Bay and Hells Point Creek. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-601. - Signs. 
Signs stating that the area designated by section 5-600 is a bird sanctuary may be erected in such area; provided, that the type of signs and location thereof are first approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-602. - Killing or injuring birds, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or injure any bird or to destroy the nests or eggs of any bird, except starlings, in the bird sanctuary established by section 5-600; provided that such restrictions shall not prevent the lawful hunting of game birds under authority of a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of section 38-3 of this Code. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any federal, state or local government animal or fowl management agency agents acting within the scope of their lawful duties and as permitted under the provisions of the Federal Migratory Bird Treaty Act. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 3084, 5-26-09)  
Secs. 5-603—5-699. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - WILD HORSES 
 
Sec. 5-700. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Feral horse means a horse that is either not domesticated or has escaped domestication and become wild. 
Lure means to intentionally entice or tempt by feeding, petting, or any other means intended to attract. 
Veterinary hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals. 
Wild horse means (i) a feral horse, or (ii) a horse that is the progeny of the Spanish mustang, a breed that was introduced to the Outer Banks of North Carolina as a domesticated animal by 16th century explorers but that, over time, has taken on the characteristics of a feral horse. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-701. - Declaration of public purpose. 
The provisions of this article are hereby found and declared to be in furtherance of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-702. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Unless otherwise provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-703. - Luring, removing, feeding, etc. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 5-707 of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to (i) lure a wild horse into the city limits, (ii) remove a wild horse from the city limits, (iii) lure a wild horse to within fifty (50) feet of himself/herself or any other person, or (iv) feed, ride or pet, or approach with the intent to feed, ride, or pet, a wild horse. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-704. - Possessing or harboring. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, harbor, or confine a wild horse; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the confinement of a wild horse in a veterinary hospital for treatment by, or under the care and supervision of, a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-705. - Cruelty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, torture, torment, beat, mutilate, kill, wound, injure, poison, or otherwise harm a wild horse, to subject a wild horse to conditions which are detrimental to its health, safety or welfare, or to cause or procure another person to engage in any of the foregoing acts. 
(b)  The prohibitions set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed to include any act which causes unjustifiable pain, suffering, injury or death to a wild horse. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit a law enforcement officer, an animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian from destroying a badly injured or diseased wild horse in a humane manner. 
(d)  A violation of subsection (a) of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-706. - Notification to authorities of injury to wild horse. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who injures a wild horse to fail to immediately notify the police department of such injury. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-707. - Assistance by licensed veterinarians and other authorized persons. 
Animal control officers, law enforcement officers, licensed veterinarians, and duly authorized members of the Corolla Wild Horse Fund Committee of O.B.C., Inc., the Virginia Wild Horse Rescue, and the Sandbridge Civic League, are hereby authorized to assist in protecting the health, safety and welfare of wild horses and ensuring their safe return to the Outer Banks of Currituck County, and, when acting pursuant to the authority granted herein, shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 5-703 and 5-704 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 5-708. - Interference with enforcement of article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the efforts of any animal control officer or law enforcement officer to enforce the provisions of this article, or to interfere with the efforts of any person duly authorized, pursuant to section 5-707, to assist in protecting the health, safety and welfare of wild horses and ensuring their safe return to the Outer Banks of Currituck County, North Carolina. 
(Ord. No. 3072, 3-24-09)  
Chapter 6 - BEACHES, BOATS AND WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Signs and billboards prohibited on portion of ocean front, § 3-2; amusements, Ch. 4; fires on beaches, § 12-5; license tax for beach equipment rental businesses, §§ 18-59, 18-60; license tax for marinas, § 18-87; license tax for excursion boats and other water transportation services, § 18-114; injuring, tampering with, etc., boats, § 23-41; swimming pools, Ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Waters of the state, ports and harbors, Code of Virginia, title 62.1; authority of city to adopt ordinances regulating operation of vessels on waters within its limits, including the marginal ocean adjacent thereto, and the conduct and activity of any person using such waters, § 62.1-182. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Violations of chapter generally. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 6-2. - Obstructing beach. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to put, place or set any equipment, such as dugouts, chairs, umbrellas, windbreakers, surfboards, air floats, life rafts or similar paraphernalia not actually occupied or engaged, or to build or erect any fence or other obstruction on any public sand beach, so as to obstruct, impede or retard the free and unconstrained use and occupancy of such sand beach by the public. 
(Code 1965, § 6-3)  
Sec. 6-2.1. - Tents, shelters, or structures on beach. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain, use, or occupy on any beach any tent, shelter, or structure of any kind between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. unless authorized by a valid permit issued pursuant to section 4-1 or 24-6. 
(Ord. No. 3611, 1-21-20)  
Sec. 6-3. - Playing ball, using frisbee, etc., in certain areas prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in ball playing or the use of a frisbee or any activity of like kind which may endanger the safety of others on the sandy portion of the beach area between the surf and the area east of the lifeguard stands, the boardwalk and the grassy area west of the boardwalk to the property lines from Rudee Inlet on the south to 42nd Street on the north from 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. weekdays and 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. weekends and holidays during the resort season. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in ball playing or the use of a frisbee or any activity of like kind which may endanger the safety of others on the sand beach area between Camp Pendleton and Rudee Inlet, known as Croatan Beach, on weekends and holidays 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. during the resort season. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee is authorized to designate locations within the sand beach area set forth in subsection (a) of this section where activities such as playing ball or using a frisbee or any activity of like kind may be allowed. Such areas shall be designated with appropriate markers. 
(Code 1965, § 6-73; Ord. No. 1550, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 2051, 4-23-91; Ord. No. 2125, 4-28-92; Ord. No. 2868, 4-26-05)  
Sec. 6-4. - Sleeping on beach. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep on any of the beaches within the city or to impede the operation of beach cleaning equipment between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 1965, § 6-9.2; Ord. No. 1577, 1-21-86) 
Cross reference— Sleeping in automobiles or in parks or other public property, §§ 23-54, 26-55; overnight occupancy of camper vehicle on public property, § 23-56.  
Sec. 6-5. - Animals on beach and adjacent areas. 
(a)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  The term "animal" shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to, any mammal, bird, or reptile; 
(2)  The term "owner" means any person who: (i) has a right of property in an animal; (ii) keeps or harbors an animal; (iii) has an animal in his care; (iv) acts as a custodian of an animal; or (v) is in possession of an animal; and 
(3)  The term "season" means the period from 6:00 p.m. on the Friday before Memorial Day through 6:00 p.m. Labor Day of each year. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog present on any sand beach to fail to maintain control of the dog. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit such animal to be on the sand beaches from Rudee Inlet on the south to 42nd Street on the north during the season. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit such animal to be on the boardwalk or the grassy area west of the boardwalk to the property lines during the season; provided, however, that a leashed dog, under the control of the owner, may be permitted on the boardwalk and the grassy area west of the boardwalk to the property lines during the season between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit such animal to be on any sand beach during the season; provided, however, that a dog may be permitted on beaches other than the beaches listed in subsection (c) during the season between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. if leashed or under the control of the owner. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to have the animal on Atlantic Avenue, or in the parks and connector streets between Atlantic Avenue and the boardwalk, from Rudee Inlet to 42nd Street, unless such animal is in an escape-proof container. This provision shall not be applicable to leashed dogs. 
(g)  No owner of any animal shall knowingly or willfully permit such animal to litter any sand beaches within the city or to litter the boardwalk or the grassy area west of the boardwalk to the property lines from Rudee Inlet on the south to 42nd Street on the north, at any time. In the event such animal shall defecate on the sand beaches within the city, or on the boardwalk or the grassy area west of the boardwalk to the property lines from Rudee Inlet on the south to 42nd Street on the north at any time, the person who owns or has control of such animal shall immediately remove all feces deposited thereon by such animal and dispose of same in a sanitary manner approved by the department of public health, such as by encasing same in an airtight wrapper or container and placing same in a garbage receptacle. Failure to so remove said feces in accordance with the provisions of this subsection shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(h)  Notwithstanding the above, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit such animal to be on any sand beaches within the city, at any time, unless such person shall have in his possession a container of sufficient size and adequate design to remove and dispose of all feces deposited thereon by such animal, in accordance with the provisions of subsection (g). 
(i)  With the exception of subsections (g) and (h), the provisions of this section shall not be applicable to a guide dog, hearing dog or service dog trained to accompany a person with a disability while being accompanied by such person, or to any dog or horse in the custody or control of a law enforcement officer while such officer is in the performance of his duties. 
(j)  The provisions of this section may also be enforced by city animal control officers. 
(Code 1965, § 5-43; Ord. No. 1536, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 1875, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 2053, 4-23-91; Ord. No. 2213, 5-4-93; Ord. No. 3186, 6-28-11; Ord. No. 3235, 5-22-12; Ord. No. 3334, 3-25-14) 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 5.  
Sec. 6-6. - Prohibited items on beaches and adjacent areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take or carry or have in his possession upon the sand beaches or upon any parking area, public street or right-of-way adjacent to any of the sand beaches of the city any glass container or any alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1965, § 6-9.1; Ord. No. 949, 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1016, § 17-16, 1-14-80; Ord. No. 1369, 4-18-83; Ord. No. 1551, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 1578, 1-21-86)  
Sec. 6-7. - Litter control on beach. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the word "litter" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Section 31-1 of this Code. 
(b)  No person shall discard litter upon any beach within the city. All litter shall be placed in refuse receptacles meeting the requirements of chapter 31 of this Code. 
(c)  All concessionaires and contractors operating on or adjacent to the beaches shall maintain proper litter control by providing receptacles and cleaning up, each day, litter which is deposited within the area of their responsibility. 
(d)  In the Beach District, this section shall apply also to the boardwalk and to grass areas adjacent to the boardwalk and east of the motels. 
(e)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-16, 1-14-80; Ord. No. 2500, 8-4-98)  
Sec. 6-8. - Use of wheeled devices with a wheel diameter of less than twelve (12) inches on dune cross-overs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful at any time for any person to use any wheeled device with a wheel diameter of less than twelve (12) inches on any of the dune cross-over timber walkways located at the beach accesses between 59th Street and 89th Street. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the use of wheelchairs for the transportation of disabled persons, the use of baby carriages, strollers or related modes of transportation for infants, or wagons or other cart-like devices. 
(Ord. No. 2727, 11-12-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2385, adopted May 14, 1996, repealed § 6-8, which pertained to permits for sales and solicitations on the boardwalk and adjacent areas, and which 
derived from Code 1965, § 6-5.1; and Ord. No. 1370, adopted April 25, 1983. Ord. No. 2727, adopted Nov. 12, 2002, added new provisions as herein set out.  
Sec. 6-9. - Use of motorized vehicles on pedestrian pathways. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any type of motorized vehicle on the pedestrian pathways connecting Sandpiper Road and Sandfiddler Road, or connecting Sandfiddler Road and the sandy beaches located in the Sandbridge area of the City. 
(b)  The term "motorized vehicle" means any wheeled device with a motor that can be used to transport a person. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the use of a motorized wheelchair or other single-occupant vehicle designed to transport a disabled person. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine. 
(Ord. No. 3266, 3-12-13)  
Sec. 6-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2849, adopted Oct. 26, 2004, repealed former § 6-10 in its entirety, which pertained to use of roller skates, roller blades, skateboards, scooters, etc., on boardwalk or grassy area, bicycle path, oceanfront parks and plazas, public restrooms, and sidewalks adjacent thereto and derived from Ord. No. 942, adopted May 7, 1979; Ord. No. 1698, adopted May 11, 1987; Ord. No. 2052, adopted April 23, 1991; Ord. No. 2134, adopted June 2, 1992; Ord. No. 2448, adopted May 27, 1997; and Ord. No. 2618, adopted Feb. 13, 2001.  
Sec. 6-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2849, adopted Oct. 26, 2004, repealed former § 6-11 in its entirety, which pertained to driving motor vehicles on boardwalk or grassy area, bicycle path, oceanfront parks and plazas, and sidewalks adjacent thereto and derived from the 1965 Code, § 6-4; Ord. No. 1370, adopted April 25, 1983; and Ord. No. 1700, adopted May 11, 1987.  
Sec. 6-12. - Riding horses or driving vehicles on beach or dunes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or any other animal or to operate or drive a vehicle of any kind on the sand beaches or upon the sand dunes within the city, except that area between the ocean and sand dunes south of the exit ramp at the southern end of Little Island Recreation Park (now being used as a public way to commute back and forth to a place of residence). 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the police mounted patrol, city vehicles operated while cleaning or working on the beach, police and emergency vehicles, erosion commission vehicles, vehicles of net fishermen operating under proper permits, vehicles operated by physically handicapped persons by permission of the city manager or his designee, or vehicles operated by wildlife rescue workers pursuant to written authorization by the police department's second precinct commander. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply in the resort area to conduct that is explicitly authorized by a special events permit issued pursuant to City Code Section 4-1 or by franchise awarded by the city council. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to electric powered utility carts, as defined in Chapter 7. 
(Code 1965, § 6-6; Ord. No. 1849, 4-3-89; Ord. No. 2123, 4-28-92; Ord. No. 2927, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 2960, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 2973, 2-27-07; Ord. No. 3028, 6-10-08; Ord. No. 3186, 6-28-11; Ord. No. 3535, 3-6-18) 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 5; traffic, Ch. 21.  
Sec. 6-13. - Removing, grading sand from shores, beaches, etc. 
(a)  Required. In order to conserve the beaches and shores in the city and to protect those areas adjacent to the beaches and shores in the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to alter the contours of sand by grading, carrying away or removing, or to cause the contours of the sand to be altered by grading, carrying away or removing, any sand from the shores, beaches, dunes, or highland along the shores, beaches or dunes in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city manager. 
(b)  Exemptions. Specifically exempt from this section are the authorized replenishment or nourishment activities of the City of Virginia Beach or the Virginia Beach Erosion Council. 
(c)  Application. Any person desiring a permit required by this section shall file an application therefor with the department of planning. Such application shall be accompanied by plans and other data in reference to the work as deemed appropriate by the planning director. Plans shall be prepared, stamped and endorsed by such qualified professional licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Virginia as the planning director may require; provided, however, that this requirement may be waived if, in the judgment of the planning director, the nature of the work to be performed renders it unnecessary. 
(d)  Issuance. The planning director shall review any application filed under this section and if, in his opinion, the activity does not adversely encroach upon the rights of others, the activity does not despoil the beach, shores or adversely affect the highland adjacent to the beaches and shores in the city and the activity will be conducted with practices acceptable to the planning director, he shall recommend to the city manager approval of the permit applied for. If the planning director does not recommend approval of the permit, he shall recommend to the city manager that the permit be denied. 
(e)  Applicants bond. No permit required by this section shall be issued until the applicant has posted a bond approved as to form and surety, insuring strict compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the planning director, based on such factors as the estimated cost to perform the requested activity and to restore the area including but not limited to stabilization costs of vegetation and sand fencing. 
(f)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 6-10; Ord. No. 1753, 1-4-88; Ord. No. 2022, 12-18-90; Ord. No. 2157, 6-23-92) 
Cross reference— Soil removal and other land-disturbing activities, Ch. 30.  
Sec. 6-14. - Disturbing or removing structures, grass, etc., placed to catch sand for rebuilding dunes. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to disturb or remove any structure erected or maintained or any grass, vines, shrubbery or brush located within two hundred (200) feet of the shoreline of the city for the purpose of catching sand for rebuilding sand dunes. 
(Code 1965, § 6-11)  
Sec. 6-15. - Changing clothes in public lavatories or toilet rooms or in public view. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to undress or put on a bathing suit or wet suit, change from a bathing suit or wet suit to normal clothes or change from normal clothes to a bathing suit or wet suit: 
(1)  In any public lavatory or toilet room in the city, without obtaining permission or consent from the owner or proprietor thereof; or 
(2)  Upon the sand beaches or upon any parking area, public street, park or right-of-way of the city, or upon private property in view of the public. 
(b)  It shall not be a violation of subsection (2), above, to put on a wet suit over a bathing suit already being worn, or to remove a wet suit if wearing a bathing suit which is not removed. 
(Code 1965, § 6-1; Ord. No. 1780, 5-16-88)  
Sec. 6-16. - Designation and marking of swimming areas. 
The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized to designate areas for public swimming or public bathing and to mark such areas with buoys which comply with state and federal laws or with the rules and regulations of the appropriate federal and state agencies. 
(Code 1965, § 6-15; Ord. No. 1370, 4-25-83)  
Sec. 6-16.1. - Recreational area for swimming and other water activities. 
(a)  The City of Virginia Beach hereby finds and declares that, due to the large number of adults and children who engage in swimming, wading, crabbing, fishing and other water activities in the waters adjacent to the sand beaches of the Chesapeake Bay and the Atlantic Ocean, the operation of motorboats in such waters when close to shore presents a substantial danger to the public. By adoption of this section, it is the intent of the city to promote the public health, safety, welfare and good order by restricting the operation of motorboats in such waters, and thereby alleviating this danger. 
(b)  During the period May 1 through October 15 of each year, from 10:00 a.m. until sunset, the area adjacent to the beaches of the Chesapeake Bay, extending one hundred (100) yards seaward from the shoreline, and extending eastward from the eastern boundary of the Little Creek Naval Amphibious Base to the western boundary of Ft. Story, along with the area adjacent to the beaches of the Atlantic Ocean, extending one hundred (100) yards seaward from the shoreline, and extending northward from the northern boundary of the Back Bay National Wildlife Refuge to the southern boundary of Ft. Story, are hereby designated as recreational areas for swimming, wading, crabbing, fishing and other water activities not involving the use of motorboats; provided, however, that the areas so established shall not be deemed to include the navigable waters of the Lynnhaven Inlet. Within such designated areas, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorboat except when proceeding to or from the beach or an anchorage, at an angle perpendicular to the shoreline, at the minimum speed required to maintain steerage and headway, and while maintaining a distance of no less than one hundred (100) feet from any person or persons in the water. 
(c)  Any person engaged in the business of the rental of motorboats, and any person who provides, for a fee, a ramp or other launching services for the launching of motorboats into waters accessible to the areas designated in subsection (b) of this section, shall be required to post, in a clear, conspicuous and sufficient manner, a sign indicating that local law prohibits any person from operating a motorboat in such designated areas from May 1 through October 15 of each year, except when proceeding to or from the beach or an anchorage, at an angle perpendicular to the shoreline, at the minimum speed required to maintain steerage and headway, and while maintaining a distance of no less than one hundred (100) feet from any person or persons in the water. 
(Ord. No. 2317, 4-11-95; Ord. No. 2333, 6-6-95; Ord. No. 2690, 4-23-02)  
Sec. 6-17. - Unsafe swimming or wading areas. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee is authorized to prohibit swimming or wading at such times and in such areas or places as may be determined to be unsafe. Whenever an area has been determined to be unsafe pursuant to this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to swim or wade in such area if the area has been identified as unsafe by the posting of "no-swimming" flags or other appropriate markers, or after being informed by a police officer, other public safety official, or lifeguard that the area has been determined to be unsafe. 
(b)  Any person convicted of the unauthorized removal or theft of "no-swimming" flags or other caution markers shall be subject to a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine. 
(Code 1965, 6-16.1; Ord. No. 1370, 4-25-83; Ord. No. 2264, 5-10-94; Ord. No. 2698, 5-14-02)  
Sec. 6-18. - Rudee Inlet jetties designated as unsafe areas. 
(a)  The Rudee Inlet jetties are hereby designated as unsafe public areas and the city manager shall post such areas with signs, in three (3) inch letters, which shall be clearly legible and shall read as follows: KEEP OUT—UNSAFE AREA 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter, remain upon, use or occupy any designated unsafe area which is marked in accord with this section. 
(Ord. No. 968, 7-16-79)  
Sec. 6-19. - Swimming in the nude. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class I misdemeanor for any person not wearing a bathing suit or other clothing to bathe in any lake, pond or in the Atlantic Ocean or Chesapeake Bay within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 6-11.1) 
Cross reference— Public nudity generally, § 22-10; indecent exposure, § 22-11.  
Sec. 6-20. - Swimming more than fifty yards offshore. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim outside of the area extending fifty (50) yards eastward from the high-tide water mark of the Atlantic Ocean within the city or beyond control of a lifeguard, unless express permission has been obtained from the supervising lifeguard to do so. Any person requested by a lifeguard to come in shall do so and failure to do so shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1965, § 6-11.2)  
Sec. 6-21. - Vehicles prohibited on Little Island exit ramp. 
No person shall operate any vehicle on the exit ramp at the south end of Little Island Park, excepting law enforcement, maintenance and emergency vehicles and vehicles operating on the beach by permission of the Virginia Division of Parks and Recreation. 
(Code 1965, § 6-34; Ord. No. 1812, 10-17-88)  
Sec. 6-22. - Bridges and piers; prohibited activities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dive or jump from any bridge over any watercourse in the city, or from any public fishing pier. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be in or on the water within two hundred (200) feet of any public fishing pier. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to any person attempting a rescue or in any other emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2228, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 2541, 6-22-99)  
Sec. 6-23. - Net fishing and setting crab pots prohibited in certain waters. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to set or fish any net or set crab pots in or across any of the lakes within the Beach District or in Raineys Gut, Crystal Lake, or Stratton Creek in the city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, one (1) crab pot per person, not to exceed two (2) crab pots per household, may be set in Crystal Lake, provided that any crabs caught are only used for personal consumption and are not sold or otherwise used for commercial purposes. For purposes of this subsection, the term "household" shall mean a group of persons who live together as a family under the same roof. 
(Code 1965, § 6-8; Ord. No. 2500, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 2612, 8-22-2000)  
Sec. 6-24. - Authority of city manager to prohibit fishing and crabbing. 
The city manager is authorized to prohibit fishing or crabbing in such areas shall be marked with appropriate markers and it shall be unlawful for any person to fish or crab in any area so marked. 
(Code 1965, § 6-8.1)  
Sec. 6-25. - Voluntarily sinking or abandoning vessels or floating loose timber, etc., in waters. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 2 misdemeanor for any person voluntarily to sink or abandon, or permit or cause to be sunk or abandoned, any vessel, barge, scow or other craft in the waters in the city, or to float loose timbers, logs or other debris therein. 
(Code 1965, § 6-24)  
Sec. 6-26. - Marking and removal of sunken vessels generally. 
Whenever any vessel, barge, scow or other craft is wrecked or sunk in any of the waters in the city, accidentally or otherwise, the owner of such vessel, barge, scow or other craft shall immediately mark it with a buoy and a lighted lantern at night, and maintain such markers until such sunken craft is removed, and it shall be the responsibility of such person to immediately remove the same and to prosecute such removal with diligence. The neglect or failure of the owner to so mark and to remove the craft shall be unlawful and a Class 2 misdemeanor. Each day such craft remains abandoned and unmarked shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(Code 1965, § 6-24)  
Sec. 6-27. - Removal or repair of dangerous or obstructing structures or vessels. 
(a)  Whenever the director of public works or his agent shall be of the opinion that any wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or any other structure or vessel might endanger the public health or safety, or might constitute an obstruction or hazard to the lawful use of the waters within or adjoining the city, he shall ascertain the lawful owner of such property and notify such owner in writing, by certified mail, to remove, repair or secure such wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure or vessel. If the lawful owner of such property fails to remove, repair or secure the same within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing of such notice, the city, through its own agents or employees, may remove, repair or secure such property. 
(b)  In the event the city, through its own agents or employees, removes, repairs or secures any wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure or vessel, after complying with the notice requirements of subsection (a) above, the cost or expense thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property and, to the extent applicable, may be collected by the city as taxes and levies are collected. 
(c)  If the identity or whereabouts of the lawful owner of any property referred to in subsection (a) above is unknown or not able to be ascertained after a reasonable search and after written notice has been mailed to the last known address of any known owner, the city, through its own agents or employees, may repair or remove such wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure or vessel, after giving notice by publication once each week for two (2) weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where such property is located. 
(d)  Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid, to the extent applicable, shall constitute a lien against such property, and such lien shall be recorded in the judgment lien docket book in the circuit court of the city. Such lien may be released to a personal judgment against the owner. 
(e)  Any property owner aggrieved of a determination of the director of public works or his agent may appeal such determination to the city manager or his designee, in writing, within fifteen (15) business days of the date on which such determination was mailed. The city manager or his designee shall schedule a hearing of such appeal on a date not later than ten (10) business days after the filing of the appeal; provided, however, that such hearing may, at the discretion of the city manager or his designee, be rescheduled for good cause shown. The director of public works or his agent shall take no action otherwise permitted under this section during the pendency of such appeal. 
(Code 1965, § 6-24.1; Ord. No. 2409, 8-6-96) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.3.  
Sec. 6-28. - Fishing rules for Lynnhaven and Rudee Inlets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the passage of any boat, jet-ski, surfboard or vessel of any type in the waters of either Lynnhaven Inlet and its connecting tributaries or Rudee Inlet and its connecting tributaries by the placing of fishing nets or fishing lines in the path of said boat, jet-ski, surfboard or vessel. 
(b)  Should any of the above-mentioned vessels approach fishing net or line, that net or line shall be retrieved without delay to allow unobstructed passage of the boat, jet-ski, surfboard or vessel. 
(c)  It shall also be unlawful to cast a fishing net or line within fifty (50) feet of any passing boat, jet-ski, surfboard, or vessel, while that boat, jet ski, surfboard or vessel is in the waters of either Lynnhaven Inlet and its connecting tributaries or Rudee Inlet and its connecting tributaries. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1386, 7-11-83)  
Sec. 6-29. - Appointment of persons to enforce article I. 
The city manager is authorized to appoint persons in addition to the regular police officers of the city to enforce this article by the issuance of summonses. Such persons shall wear a uniform as prescribed by the city manager or his duly authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 1445, 4-9-84)  
Sec. 6-30. - Fishing from sand beaches. 
It shall be unlawful to fish from the sand beaches of the city from 42nd Street to Rudee Inlet between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. weekends and holidays during the resort season. 
(Ord. No. 1579, 1-21-86; Ord. No. 2054, 4-23-91; Ord. No. 2500, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 2868, 4-26-05)  
Sec. 6-31. - Shark fishing prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Place in the marginal adjacent ocean or bay within five hundred (500) yards of the mean low water line any chum, blood or free floating bait for the purpose of attracting sharks, or 
(2)  Fish for sharks within the city limits and the marginal adjacent waters within five hundred (500) yards of the mean low water line. 
These prohibitions shall include fishing or chumming from any beach, structure, jetty or boat, utilizing tackle, bait or chum intended for or commonly used to catch or attract sharks. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1720, 7-13-87; Ord. No. 1745, 10-26-87; Ord. No. 2729, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 6-32. - Casting garbage, etc., into waters. 
Except as otherwise permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw or dump any garbage, refuse, dead animal, trash, carton, can, bottle, container, box, lumber, timber or like material, or other solid waste, except fish or crab bait in any form, into any of the waters of this city. When a violation of any provision of this section has been observed by any person, and the matter dumped or disposed of has been ejected from a boat, the owner or operator of such boat shall be presumed to be the person ejecting such matter; provided, however, that such presumption shall be rebuttable by competent evidence. Every such act shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or confinement in jail not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1895, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 2985, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 6-33. - Marina operators to maintain record of vessels. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of keeping or operating a marina where vessels are moored or anchored for compensation shall at all times keep and maintain on the premises a register in which shall be recorded the hull registration number or documented name and state or country of registration of each vessel which remains overnight or longer, a description thereof by length and manufacturer or hull type, the printed or typed name of the owner, captain or other person in charge of the vessel, the date of arrival and the berth, slip or anchorage assigned. Such register shall be signed by the owner, captain or other person in charge of the vessel. The operator or keeper of the marina or his agent shall thereafter record the date when the berth, slip or anchorage was surrendered and vacated, and shall maintain this completed record for one year. The register required by this section shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable times by any law enforcement officer in the performance of his duties. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to write or cause or permit to be written in the register required by this section any false information, including any name other than the true name of the captain, owner or other person in charge of any vessel recorded therein. 
(c)  The parking areas, piers and public spaces of all marinas shall be subject to entry and inspection at all times by any public safety officer in the performance of his duties. 
(d)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1951, 3-5-90)  
Secs. 6-34—6-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PORT ADVISORY COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 6-41. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the word "commission" shall mean the Port of Virginia Beach Advisory Commission created by this article. 
(Code 1965, § 6-84)  
Sec. 6-42. - Created; purpose. 
An agency of the city government is hereby created pursuant to Section 3.05 of the Charter, to be known as the "Port of Virginia Beach Advisory Commission," for the purpose of regulating use, growth and development of the city's port, harbor and marina facilities and to provide, designate and develop free facilities to be open to all on equal terms. 
(Code 1965, § 6-84)  
Sec. 6-43. - Composition; qualifications, appointment and terms of members. 
The commission shall consist of seven (7) members. The members shall be citizens of the city who have an interest in and special knowledge of the economic and recreational effect of the ocean, bays, rivers and lakes in, near or adjacent to the city. The members shall be appointed by the city council. The first members appointed shall be appointed for terms of four (4), three (3), two (2) and one year in the order of their appointment and shall thereafter be appointed for terms of four (4) years. Vacancies occurring for whatever cause shall be filled by the council. 
(Code 1965, § 6-85) 
Cross reference— Limitation on terms of members of boards and commissions and application for appointment of such members, § 2-3.  
Sec. 6-44. - Election and term of chairman. 
The commission shall elect annually one of its members to be chairman for a term of one year and until his successor is chosen and qualifies. 
(Code 1965, § 6-85)  
Sec. 6-45. - Designation of secretary. 
The commission shall have a secretary who shall be designated by the city manager. 
(Code 1965, § 6-85)  
Sec. 6-46. - Meetings; quorum. 
The commission shall hold such regular meetings as it may determine. Special meetings may be held at any time on call of the chairman of the commission, the city manager or any three (3) members. Four (4) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. 
(Code 1965, § 6-85)  
Sec. 6-47. - General powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the commission and it shall have the power: 
(1)  By virtue of the adoption of a federal project for the improvement of the entrance channel, mooring and turning basins in the Lynnhaven Bay, Long Creek, Broad Bay and Linkhorn Bay areas, the commission shall provide and maintain, without cost to the United States, a marina for the use of recreational and sport-fishing craft. Such facilities are to include at least four hundred (400) feet of berthing space with adequate shore and water access thereto, and with such services as may be required for full utilization of the improvement by the public on equal terms. 
(2)  To provide and maintain without cost to the United States a public marina or terminal for commercial vessels, including those operated by commercial fishermen, oystermen, clammers and crabbers, such facilities to include at least three hundred (300) feet of berthing space with adequate shore and water access thereto, and with such services as may be required for full utilization of the improvement by the public on equal terms. 
(3)  To develop, promote, foster and stimulate the use of the port, harbor and marina facilities, and to do all other things necessary or appropriate to accomplish such objectives. 
(4)  To serve as a public relations agency for developing, promoting, fostering and stimulating the use of the port, harbor and, marina facilities and accomplishing such objectives and to make public, from time to time, information relative to the functions, activities and business of the port. 
(5)  To serve as a liaison agency between the city government and the users of such port, harbor or marina facilities and the persons authorized or designated to operate such facilities or any of them. 
(6)  To recommend to the city manager the employment or appointment of personnel to carry out the objectives of the commission. 
(Code 1965, § 6-86)  
Sec. 6-48. - Annual report of activities. 
The commission shall, after the close of each fiscal year, prepare and submit to the city manager, who shall transmit the same to the city council, a report of its activities. 
(Code 1965, § 6-87)  
Secs. 6-49—6-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC BATHHOUSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Dressing rooms, etc., at public swimming pools,§ 34-42. 
 
Sec. 6-61. - Violations of article. 
A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 6-62. - Rules and regulations of health director. 
The director of public health shall have the power to adopt and enforce such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, governing public bathhouses as he may deem proper and necessary for the protection of the health, morals and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such rules and regulations. 
(Code 1965, § 6-65)  
Sec. 6-63. - Running water required. 
Running water shall be provided in every public bathhouse. 
(Code 1965, § 6-63)  
Sec. 6-64. - Employment of diseased persons prohibited. 
No person affected with any communicable disease shall be employed in any public bathhouse. 
(Code 1965, § 6-64)  
Sec. 6-65. - Maintenance of premises generally. 
All owners, managers, operators and attendants in charge of any public bathhouse shall maintain such bathhouse and the surroundings thereof in a sanitary condition at all times. 
(Code 1965, § 6-59)  
Sec. 6-66. - Tubs and showers to be disinfected. 
All bathtubs and shower stalls of any public bathhouse shall be thoroughly cleansed with an approved disinfectant after each separate use. 
(Code 1965, § 6-60)  
Sec. 6-67. - Sterilization, etc., of bathing suits and towels furnished to bathers. 
All bathing suits and towels furnished to bathers by any public bathhouse shall be sterilized and thoroughly rinsed and dried after each use. 
(Code 1965, § 6-61)  
Sec. 6-68. - Use of sponges prohibited. 
The use of sponges at any public bathhouse is prohibited. 
(Code 1965, § 6-62)  
Secs. 6-69, 6-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LIFEGUARDS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Lifeguards at public swimming pools, § 34-38. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-71. - Recognized certificate required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to accept employment or to be employed as a lifeguard within the city; to appear on or at any public or private beach or recreational swimming facility within the city and hold himself or herself out or represent himself or herself as a lifeguard; to represent himself or herself as a lifeguard to any employer, prospective employer or any other person within the city; or publicly to wear any emblem the effect of which is to cause the public to believe that he or she is a lifeguard, unless such person holds a certificate from a formal lifeguard training program recognized by the department of emergency medical services or the department of parks and recreation. 
(b)  In addition to the restrictions set forth in subsection (a), it shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not he or she is duly certified as a lifeguard, to appear on or at any public beach or any recreational swimming facility operated by the city and to hold himself or herself out or represent himself or herself as a lifeguard unless he or she is employed by or under contract with the city as a lifeguard. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 6-2; Ord. No. 2336, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 2698, 5-14-02)  
Secs. 6-72—6-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1370, enacted on April 25, 1983, repealed Art. IV, Div. 2, §§ 6-81—6-94. Said sections pertained to the Virginia Beach patrol and derived from §§ 6-66—6-72 and 6-74—6-83 of the 1965 Code and Ord. No. 1192, enacted on July 6, 1981. 
 
Secs. 6-81—6-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BOATING, SKIING AND SURFING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Fees for boating and fishing on lakes of Mount Trashmore Park, § 24-14. 
State Law reference— Motor boats and water safety, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-166 et seq.; authority of city to adopt ordinances regulating operation of vessels on waters within its limits, including the marginal ocean adjacent thereto, and the conduct and activity of persons using such waters, § 62.1-182. 
 
Sec. 6-106. - Violations of article generally. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 6-31)  
Sec. 6-107. - Article does not prohibit regattas, races and exhibitions. 
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to prohibit regattas, the running of races or exhibitions during an approved, publicly announced, properly supervised and adequately patrolled regatta, race, speed trial or exhibition. Written approval for such events from the city manager, pursuant to the rules and regulations of the United States Coast Guard, or from the commission of game and inland fisheries of the Commonwealth, shall be deemed sufficient evidence of approval. 
(Code 1965, § 6-21)  
Sec. 6-108. - Marinas established. 
(a)  There is hereby established the following area to be used and it is hereby designated as a boat harbor or marina for the use of recreational and sport-fishing craft, to contain at least four hundred (400) feet of berthing space with adequate shore and water access, and which shall have such services as may be required for full utilization and to be used by the public on equal terms and described as follows: 
Marina I. Recreational and sport-fishing craft: All that certain tract of land and appurtenances beginning at the intersection of Broad Bay Road and Great Neck Road and running west one thousand (1,000) feet, more or less, and being one hundred sixty (160) feet, more or less, in width and being surrounding by Long Creek canal and the service canal to Broad Bay known as Davis Island. 
(b)  There is hereby established the following area to be used and it is hereby designated as a public terminal or marina for commercial vessels, including those operated by commercial fishermen, oystermen, clammers and crabbers, to contain at least three hundred (300) feet of berthing space with adequate shore and water access and such services as may be required for full utilization by the public on equal terms, and described as follows: 
Marina II. Commercial—Public terminal: All that certain tract of land beginning at a point in Lynnhaven Road approximately six hundred ten (610) feet east of Vista Circle and running in an easterly direction five hundred fifteen (515) feet to Long Creek Road, thence easterly three hundred (300) feet to the eastern property line (canal), thence northerly six hundred ten (610) feet to the south side of Lynnhaven Road, and thence westerly two hundred seventy-five (275) feet to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1965, §§ 6-88, 6-89)  
Sec. 6-109. - Muffling devices for motor boats. 
(a)  The exhaust of every internal combustion engine used on any motor boat on the waters within the city shall be effectively muffled by equipment so constructed and used as to muffle the noise of the exhaust in a reasonable manner. The muffling device shall exhaust at or below the water line or it shall be equipped with mechanical baffles. The use of cutouts is prohibited, except as approved by the Department of Game and Inland Fisheries or the U.S. Coast Guard. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Code 1965, § 6-17; Ord. No. 2690, 4-23-02) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 62.1-175, 62.1-185.  
Sec. 6-110. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3180, adopted May 24, 2011, repealed § 6-110, which pertained to noise created by persons aboard boat or other water craft; boat operator responsible for noise created by operation of boat and derived from Code 1965, § 6-30; Ord. No. 2690, 4-23-02.  
Sec. 6-111. - Operation of motor boats at such excessive speed or in such manner as to cause dangerous wake. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating any motor boat to pass under any bridge or to operate any motor boat in any public waterway at such excessive speed or in such manner as to cause swells or wakes that are capable of causing damage to other boats or vessels or to bulkheads, piers or shorelines. 
(b)  The operator of a motor boat, when approaching or passing vessels under way or lying to or at anchor or made fast to the shore, or when approaching or passing piers, docks or boathouses, or when approaching or passing persons in the water or using water skis or surfboards, shall slacken speed and shall operate such motor boat at such speed and in such manner as to avoid endangering persons or property by the effect of the motor boat's operation or wake. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, §§ 6-16.2, 6-25; Ord. No. 1243, 12-21-81; Ord. No. 1574, 1-13-86)  
Sec. 6-112. - Designation of channel lines; mooring or anchoring within marked channels. 
(a)  The City Manager is authorized to establish channel lines in those waters within the city not so regulated by any agency of the United States or the Commonwealth. Areas so designated shall be marked with markers approved by state or federal agencies having authority to give approval on request of the City Manager. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except in case of emergency, to moor or anchor any boat or vessel or to obstruct or impede the passage of any vessel within any marked channel in the navigable waters of the city. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed three (3) months, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 6-12; Ord. No. 2123, § 4-28-92; Ord. No. 2938, 5-9-06)  
Sec. 6-112.1. - Designation of slow—No-wake zones. 
(a)  The director of public works is authorized to designate areas in the waterways of the city as slow—No-wake zones, and to mark such areas with appropriate signs or buoys; provided, that such designated areas shall be approved by the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motorboat proceeding in any area marked "SLOW" or "SLOW—NO-WAKE" by signs or buoys installed in accordance with this section to proceed at a speed greater than necessary for safe navigation. 
(Ord. No. 1932, 10-30-89)  
Sec. 6-112.2. - Designation of channel for vessels transiting the area of the Lynnhaven Basin, Broad Bay and The Narrows. 
(a)  There is hereby established a channel for vessels transiting between Long Creek Canal and the entrance to Linkhorn Bay, through Broad Bay and The Narrows. Such channel shall be marked with appropriate markers and navigational aids conforming to the requirements of the U.S. Coast Guard. 
(b)  There is hereby established a channel for vessels transiting the Lynnhaven Turning Basin and the Lynnhaven Channel. The Lynnhaven Turning Basin is defined as that body of water bordered on the north by the Lesner Bridge; then following south along the shoreline running from the southern edge of the west end of the Lesner Bridge to the entrance of Crab Creek; then running along a line east from Crab Creek to Long Creek Channel Marker 2, continuing east from Channel Marker 2 to Long Creek Channel Marker 4; then bordered on the east by a line running from Long Creek Channel Marker 4 to the southern edge of the east end of the Lesner Bridge. Such channel shall be marked with appropriate markers and navigational aids conforming to the requirements of the U. S. Coast Guard. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to anchor, fish, crab, swim, water ski or in any way obstruct any vessel transiting in said channel. Powered vessels shall not operate in said channel except as necessary to transit or cross same, proceeding in accordance with the Inland Rules of the Road. 
(d)  No part of this section shall be deemed to prohibit fishing, crabbing, swimming or wading from the shorelines abutting the Lynnhaven Channel or the Lynnhaven Turning Basin. 
(Ord. No. 1981, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 2736, 2-25-03)  
Sec. 6-113. - Mooring or tying up to channel markers, buoys, bridges, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except in case of emergency, to moor or tie up any boat or vessel to designated channel markers, buoys, navigational aids, bridges or bridge abutments. This prohibition shall not apply to the Chesapeake Bay Bridge or its islands or abutments. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed three (3) months, or both. 
(Code 1965, § 6-12.1; Ord. No. 2938, 5-9-06)  
Sec. 6-114. - Restrictions on launching, landing, parking or stationing recreational vessels in certain areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to launch or land a sailboat, motorboat, motorized personal watercraft, canoe, rowboat, flatboat, kayak, umiak, scull or any other similar recreational vessel on the beach area north of Rudee Inlet to the center line of 42nd Street prolongated eastward, during the resort season between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. weekends and holidays. The provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable to any person who is awarded a contract, based upon competitive procurement principles, to conduct an operation for the rental of designated recreational vessel(s) or to any person who rents a vessel from an authorized rental operator provided the vessel(s) so rented is launched or landed within the area designated in such contract. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or station a sailboat, motorboat, motorized personal watercraft, canoe, rowboat, flatboat, kayak, umiak, scull or other similar recreational vessel on the beach area north of Rudee Inlet to the center line of 42nd Street prolongated eastward, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  In an emergency; 
(2)  With an approved race or regatta permit; 
(3)  In the process of launching or landing a vessel specified above in the areas and during the time periods permitted in subsection (a) of this section; or 
(4)  Pursuant to a contract in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to launch, land, park or station a motorboat or motorized personal watercraft on the beach between the area north of the center line of 42nd Street prolongated eastward and the southern boundary line of Fort Story, except in an emergency or with an approved race or regatta permit. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to launch or land any motorboat, motorized personal water craft or any other motorized recreational vessel on the beaches extending south of Fleet Combat Training Center Dam Neck to the southern boundary of Little Island Park, or on the beaches south of Rudee Inlet to the northern boundary of Camp Pendleton Military Reservation, during the season from 6:00 p.m. on the Friday before Memorial Day Weekend through 6:00 p.m. on the Monday following Labor Day Weekend, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. weekends and holidays, except as hereafter provided: 
(1)  Watercraft may be launched or landed in an emergency or for law enforcement purposes. 
(2)  Commercial fishing boats operating from the beaches by permission of the Virginia Division of Parks and Recreation shall be exempt from the restrictions of this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to launch, land, park or station a sailboat, motorboat, motorized personal watercraft, canoe, rowboat, flatboat, kayak, umiak, scull or any other similar recreational vessel on the beach area between the western end of the Lesner Bridge continuing southwest along the shoreline of the Lynnhaven Turning Basin and then west to the Lynnhaven Boat Ramp at Crab Creek with the following exceptions: 
(1)  In an emergency; or 
(2)  With an approved race or regatta permit. 
(f)  In addition to the other provisions of this section, sailboats parked on the beach shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to park or station a sailboat on any sand dune or in front of any access point or street end. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to drive any type of anchor into the beach to secure a sailboat, unless approved by the director of the department of public works as to type, size and location. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to secure a sailboat to fixtures or structures on the beach. 
(g)  Any police officer of the City of Virginia Beach is hereby authorized to remove and impound or have removed and impounded any vessel which appears to be in violation of this section or which is lost, stolen, abandoned or unclaimed. In addition to the fine imposed for a violation of this section, such vessel shall be removed and impounded at the owner's expense until lawfully claimed or disposed of. 
(h)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 6-13; Ord. No. 1033, 4-21-80; Ord. No. 1037, 5-12-80; Ord. No. 1150, 3-9-81; Ord. No. 1909, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2055, 4-23-91; Ord. No. 2087, 7-9-91; Ord. No. 2103, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 2126, 4-28-92; Ord. No. 2227, 5-23-93; Ord. No. 2736, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 2868, 4-26-05; Ord. No. 2901, 11-22-05)  
Sec. 6-115. - Sound-producing device required for launching or landing sailboat along land abutting ocean. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to launch or land a sailboat along any land abutting the waters of the Atlantic Ocean without having on board a sound-producing device capable of producing a sound for six (6) seconds duration and audible for one-half mile. Such sound-producing device shall be sounded upon launching and landing. No siren shall be considered a sound-producing device for the purposes of this section, if it shall not instantaneously produce a sound. 
(Code 1965, § 6-14; Ord. No. 1034, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 6-115.1. - Responsibility of owner of boat unlawfully launched, landed, etc. 
Whenever any vessel has been launched, landed, parked or stationed on the city beaches in violation of any of the provisions of this article or any other ordinance, the owner of such vessel shall be prima facie responsible for such violation and subject to the penalty prescribed therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1033, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 6-116. - Surfing generally. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  City manager shall mean the city manager or his duly authorized designee. 
(2)  Labor Day Weekend shall be deemed to end at 6:00 p.m. on Labor Day. 
(3)  Memorial Day Weekend shall be deemed to begin at 6:00 p.m. on the Friday before Memorial Day. 
(4)  Shorebreak shall mean the area between the shoreline of the Atlantic Ocean and a continuous line running thirty (30) feet east of the shoreline. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided herein, from Memorial Day Weekend to Labor Day Weekend, it shall be unlawful for any person to use a surfboard in the waters of the Atlantic Ocean, between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Fridays, weekends and holidays, in any of the following areas: 
(1)  In the area from the northern boundary of Little Island Park to the southern boundary of the designated lifeguard-patrolled swimming area located at the terminus of Sandbridge Road; 
(2)  In the area from the northern boundary of the designated lifeguard-patrolled swimming area located at the terminus of Sandbridge Road to the southern boundary of Dam Neck Fleet Combat Training Center; 
(3)  In the area from the center line of 42nd Street to the center line of 56th Street; and 
(4)  In the area from the center line of 58th Street to the southern boundary of Fort Story. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided herein, from Memorial Day Weekend to Labor Day Weekend, it shall be unlawful for any person to use a surfboard in the waters of the Atlantic Ocean, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. weekends and holidays, in the following areas: 
(1)  In the designated lifeguard-patrolled swimming area located at the terminus of Sandbridge Road; 
(2)  In the area from the northern jetty of Rudee Inlet to the center line of 42nd Street; and 
(3)  In the area from the center line of 56th Street to the center line of 58th Street. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided herein, from Memorial Day Weekend to Labor Day Weekend, it shall be unlawful for any person to use a surfboard in the waters of the Atlantic Ocean, between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. any day of the week, in the area from the southern boundary of Rudee Inlet to the point located two hundred (200) feet north of the northern boundary of Camp Pendleton. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b) through (d) of this section, the use of a surfboard in the waters of the Atlantic Ocean shall be permitted in the following areas: 
(1)  In the area from the southern boundary of Little Island Park to the state line, subject to any restrictions imposed by the United States Government with respect to any area of the beach under its ownership and/or control; 
(2)  At Little Island Park, subject to any restrictions imposed by the director of parks and recreation; 
(3)  In the area from the southern jetty of Rudee Inlet to a point eight hundred (800) feet south thereof; 
(4)  In the area from the northern jetty of Rudee Inlet to a point five hundred (500) feet north thereof; 
(5)  In the area beginning three hundred (300) feet north of the center line of 3rd Street and extending to a point one hundred (100) feet north of the center line of 5th Street; 
(6)  In any area determined to be unsafe for swimming or wading, pursuant to section 6-17 of this chapter; and 
(7)  In any other area that the city manager may, from time to time, designate as a surfing area. 
(f)  In addition to the prohibitions set forth in subsections (b) through (d) of this section: 
(1)  No person shall use a surfboard from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise. 
(2)  No person shall use a surfboard unless a leash or tether joins the surfer to the surfboard; 
(3)  No person shall use a surfboard in the area between the south and north jetties of Rudee Inlet; 
(4)  No person shall, from Memorial Day Weekend to Labor Day Weekend, use a surfboard within the shorebreak unless such person is paddling, or wading beside the surfboard for purposes of entering the water or returning to the beach, or unless such person is in an area specifically designated by this section or the city manager as a surfing area; and 
(5)  No person shall engage in any activity other than surfing in any area specifically designated by this section or the city manager as a surfing area. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, whenever the city manager determines that surfing in a particular area poses a threat of danger to the general public, he may prohibit surfing in such area for the period of time during which the threat of danger exists. Any such area shall be conspicuously marked by "No Surfing" signs, which signs shall remain in place until the prohibition has been lifted, and it shall be unlawful for any person to surf in any area so marked. 
(h)  In addition to the regular police officers of the city, the emergency medical services chief and his duly authorized designees are authorized to enforce the provisions of this section by the issuance of summonses, provided the chief or any such designee is in uniform at the time a summons is issued. 
(i)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor; provided, however, that any person who violates subsection (f)(2) of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 6-33; Ord. No. 1048, 5-14-79; Ord. No. 1159, 4-6-81; Ord. No. 1174, 5-11-81; Ord. No. 1362, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 1699, 5-11-87; Ord. No. 2056, 4-23-91; Ord. No. 2135, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 2541, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2575, 4-4-00; Ord. No. 2698, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 3432, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 6-116.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2950, adopted June 27, 2006, repealed former § 6-116.1 of the Code, which pertained to surfing generally (effective July 1, 1999, through October 31, 1999) and derived from Ord. No. 2541, adopted June 22, 1999.  
Sec. 6-117. - Towing skiers or surfboarders without observer or mirror and without flotation device prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor boat on any of the waters in this city for towing a person or persons on water skis, surfboards or other similar devices, unless (i) there is in such motor boat a person, in addition to the operator, in a position to observe the progress of the person or persons being towed, or the vessel is equipped with a rear view mirror sufficient for observing all persons being towed, and (ii) each skier or surfboarder wears a U.S. Cost Guard approved personal flotation device. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 6-18; Ord. No. 2285, 7-5-94) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 62.1-179(a), 62.1-185.  
Sec. 6-118. - Water skiing or surfboarding prohibited during certain hours. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor boat on any waters in this city towing a person or persons on water skis, surfboards or other similar devices, between the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise; and it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in water skiing, surfboarding or other similar activities on any of the waters in the city during such hours. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Code 1965, § 6-19; Ord. No. 2228, 5-25-93) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 62.1-179(b), 62.1-185.  
Sec. 6-119. - Exceptions from Sections 6-117 and 6-118. 
The provisions of Sections 6-117 and 6-118 shall not apply to a performer engaged in a professional exhibition or to a person engaged in an activity authorized by Section 6-107. 
(Code 1965, § 6-19) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-179(c).  
Sec. 6-120. - Boating, skiing, etc., prohibited in marked swimming areas. 
(a)  Except in the case of an emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorboat, water skis, motorized water transportation or any self-propelled vehicle, surfboard or other similar device within the area of water designated and marked as provided in Section 6-16. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Code 1965, § 6-16; Ord. No. 1370, 4-25-83) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 62.1-180, 62.1-185.  
Sec. 6-120.1. - Restrictions on operation of personal watercraft. 
(a)  No person shall, in any waters of the city, including the marginal adjacent ocean: 
(1)  Operate a personal watercraft unless each person riding on or being towed behind the personal watercraft is wearing a type I, type II, type III or type V personal flotation device approved by the United States Coast Guard; 
(2)  Operate a personal watercraft between sunset and sunrise; 
(3)  Operate a personal watercraft in excess of the slowest possible speed required to maintain steerage and headway within fifty (50) feet of (i) any shore, dock, pier, boathouse, boat ramp, or bulkhead; (ii) any vessel other than a personal watercraft; (iii) the boundary of any designated swimming area; or (iv) any person in the water; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit a personal watercraft from towing a person who, by virtue of the length of the tow rope, is less than fifty (50) feet from the personal watercraft; 
(4)  Operate a personal watercraft unless he or she is at least fourteen (14) years of age. Any person between fourteen (14) and 35 years of age shall also successfully complete an approved boating safety education course and carry on his or her person, while operating a personal watercraft, proof of successful completion of such course. Upon the request of any law-enforcement officer, such person shall provide proof of having successfully completed an approved course; 
(i)  Any person 50 years of age or younger who operates a personal watercraft on or after July 1, 2011 must comply with the requirements cited in (4) above. 
(ii)  Any person, regardless of age, who operates a personal watercraft on or after July 1, 2012 must comply with the requirements cited in (4) above. 
(5)  Operate a personal watercraft unless the lanyard is attached to his or her person, clothing, or personal flotation device, if the personal watercraft is equipped with a lanyard-type engine cut-off switch; 
(6)  Operate a personal watercraft while carrying a number of passengers in excess of the number for which the craft was designed by the manufacturer; or 
(7)  When launching or landing a personal watercraft, approach or depart from any beach at other than an angle perpendicular to the shoreline or proceed at a speed greater than that which is necessary to maintain steerage and headway. 
(b)  No owner or person having control of a personal watercraft shall authorize or knowingly permit a person under the age of fourteen (14) to operate the personal watercraft. No owner or person having control of a personal watercraft shall authorize or knowingly permit a person fourteen (14) years of age or older who has not completed an approved boating safety education course as required by section 6-120.1.(a)(4) above to operate the personal watercraft. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, "personal watercraft" means a motor boat less than sixteen (16) feet in length which uses an inboard motor powering a jet pump, as its primary motive power and which is designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing, or kneeling on, rather than in the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside, the vessel. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to participants in any regatta, race, marine parade, tournament or exhibition which is approved by the Virginia Board of Game and Inland Fisheries or the United States Coast Guard. 
(f)  A violation of this section shall not constitute negligence, be considered in mitigation of damages of whatever nature, be admissible in evidence or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising out of the operation, ownership, or maintenance of a personal watercraft, nor shall anything in this section change any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining to any such civil action, nor shall this section bar any claim which otherwise exists. 
(Ord. No. 1996, 8-7-90; Ord. No. 2072, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 2317, 4-11-95; Ord. No. 2333, 6-6-95; Ord. No. 2527, 5-4-99; Ord. No. 3168, 4-26-11)  
Sec. 6-120.2. - Regulation of personal watercraft rentals. 
(a)  Any business which offers personal watercraft for rent shall require any person to whom a personal watercraft is rented, and any other person who will operate the personal watercraft, to fill out and sign a rental agreement or application. Such agreement or application, shall include the full legal name, address, and date of birth of the applicant and any other operator(s), and shall be kept on file for a minimum of ninety (90) days. 
(b)  Any business which offers personal watercraft for rent shall also require any person to whom a personal watercraft is rented, and any other person who will operate the personal watercraft, to present, prior to such rental or operation, (i) a government-issued identification card containing his or her photograph, and (ii) proof of successful completion of a boating safety education course as required by section 6-120.1.(a)(4) above. The identification card, or a copy thereof, shall be retained by the business during the time the personal watercraft is rented. 
(c)  No person who rents, leases or operates a personal watercraft shall knowingly misrepresent any material fact or falsify any information requested on the rental agreement or application. 
(d)  Any business which offers personal watercraft for rent on a short-term basis (e.g., by the hour or half-hour) shall have at least one motorboat of at least fifty (50) horsepower operated by an employee or agent of the business, in order to monitor and ensure the safe operation of the personal watercraft. 
(e)  No business which offers personal watercraft for rent shall rent a personal watercraft that has an engine displacement which exceeds eight hundred (800) cubic centimeters unless the personal watercraft is equipped with a mechanical device that cannot be disabled or removed by a renter of the watercraft and that limits the maximum attainable speed of the watercraft to no more than forty (40) miles per hour. 
(f)  Any business which offers personal watercraft for rent shall have at least two (2) marine VHF radios in operation during the time that a personal watercraft rental is being operated, and such radios shall monitor channel 16 whenever they are not being actively used on a working channel. 
(g)  No business which offers personal watercraft for rent shall rent a personal watercraft to any person who is prohibited by state law from operating a personal watercraft. 
(h)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2544, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2602, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 3085, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 3168, 4-26-11)  
Sec. 6-121. - Reckless boating, skiing, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to operate any motor boat or other vessel, or to manipulate any water skis, surfboard or other similar device, or engage in spearfishing while skindiving or scuba diving on or in any of the waters in the city, in a reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the life, limb or property of any person. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provision of this article, upon the trial of any person charged with a violation thereof where the degree of culpability is slight, the court in its discretion may find the accused not guilty of reckless boating, skiing, surfboarding or spearfishing but guilty of improper boating, skiing, surfboarding or spearfishing, which shall be punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, §§ 6-20, 6-22; Ord. No. 1880, 6-19-89; Ord. No. 2082, 7-9-91) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions to subsection (a) above, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-176.  
Sec. 6-121.1. - Disregarding signal by law enforcement officer to stop; attempts to elude; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who, having received a visible or audible signal of a flashing light or siren from any game warden or other law-enforcement officer to bring his motorboat or other vessel to a stop, fails to do so promptly shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who, having received a visible or audible signal of a flashing light or siren from any game warden or other law-enforcement officer to bring his motorboat or other vessel to a stop, (i) operates or navigates such motorboat or other vessel in willful or wanton disregard of such signal so as to endanger the life of the law enforcement officer or other persons or to interfere with the operation of a law-enforcement vessel, or (ii) increases his speed and attempts to escape or elude a law-enforcement officer shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2228, 5-25-93)  
Sec. 6-121.2. - Reckless operation of a personal watercraft. 
A person shall be guilty of reckless operation of a motorboat or vessel who operates any personal watercraft recklessly or at a speed or in such a manner so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person, which shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Weaving through vessels which are underway, stopped, moored or at anchor while exceeding a reasonable speed under the circumstances and traffic conditions existing at the time; 
(2)  Following another vessel or person on water skis or other similar device, crossing the path of another vessel, or jumping the wake of another vessel more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of both vessels and the traffic on and the condition of the waters at the time; 
(3)  Crossing between the towing vessel and a person on water skis or other device; or 
(4)  Steering toward an object or person and turning sharply in close proximity to such object or person in order to spray or attempt to spray the object or person with the wash or jet spray of the personal watercraft. 
A person who violates this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, and for a second or subsequent offense, the court shall order the person not to operate a personal watercraft which is underway upon the waters of the Commonwealth for a period of twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 2690, 4-23-02)  
Sec. 6-122. - Operating motor boat, vessel, water skis, etc., while under influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs; penalty; removal of vessel. 
(a)  No person shall operate any watercraft or motorboat which is underway (i) while such person has a blood alcohol concentration at or greater than the blood alcohol concentration at which it is unlawful to drive or operate a motor vehicle as provided in Code of Virginia Section 18.2-266 as indicated by a chemical test administered in accordance with Section 6-122.2, (ii) while such person is under the influence of alcohol, (iii) while such person is under the influence of any narcotic drug or any other self-administered intoxicant or drug of whatsoever nature, or any combination of such intoxicants or drugs to a degree which impairs his ability to operate the watercraft or motorboat safely, (iv) while such person is under the combined influence of alcohol and any drug or drugs, to a degree which impairs his ability to operate the watercraft or motorboat safely, or (v) while such person has a blood concentration of any of the following substances at a level that is equal to or greater than: 
(1)  0.02 milligrams of cocaine per liter of blood, 
(2)  0.1 milligrams of methamphetamine per liter of blood, 
(3)  0.01 milligrams of phencyclidine per liter of blood, or 
(4)  0.1 milligrams of 3,4-methylenedioxy 
methamphetamine per liter of blood. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, the word "operate" shall include being in actual physical control of a watercraft or motorboat and "underway" shall mean that a vessel is not at anchor, or made fast to the shore, or aground. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia Section 29.1-738.5. 
(d)  In any case in which a law enforcement officer arrests the operator of a vessel, and there is no legal cause for the retention of the vessel by the officer, the officer shall allow the person arrested to designate another person who is present at the scene of the arrest to operate the vessel from the scene to a place designated by the person arrested. If such a designation is not made, the officer may cause the vessel to be taken to the nearest appropriate place for safekeeping. 
(Code 1965, § 6-23; Ord. No. 1892, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 2285, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 2287, 8-2-94; Ord. No. 2396, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 2989, 6-26-07)  
Sec. 6-122.1. - Analysis of breath to determine alcohol content of blood. 
Any person who is suspected of a violation of subsection (a) of Sections 6-122 or 6-122.01 shall be entitled, if such equipment is available, to have a preliminary breath analysis for the purpose of obtaining an analysis of the probable alcohol content of his or her blood. The procedures and requirements of Code of Virginia, section 18.2-267, shall apply, mutatis mutandis. 
(Ord. No. 1892, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 2407, 7-9-96)  
Sec. 6-122.01. - Persons under age twenty-one operating watercraft after consuming alcohol; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to operate any watercraft or motorboat upon the waters of the Commonwealth after consuming alcohol. Any such person with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.02 percent or more by weight by volume or 0.02 grams or more per two hundred ten (210) liters of breath but less than 0.08 by weight by volume or less than 0.08 grams per two hundred ten (210) liters of breath as indicated by a chemical test administered in accordance with Section 6-122.2 shall be in violation of this section. 
(b)  A violation of subsection (a) shall be punishable by denial by the court of such person's privilege to operate a watercraft or motorboat for a period of six (6) months from the date of conviction and by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be eligible to attend an alcohol safety action program under the provisions of Code of Virginia Section 29.1-738.5, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2407, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 2989, 6-26-07)  
Sec. 6-122.2. - Consent to blood or breath test. 
(a)  Any person who operates a watercraft or motorboat which is underway upon waters of the Commonwealth shall be deemed thereby, as a condition of such operation, to have consented to have samples of his or her blood, breath or both blood and breath taken for a chemical test to determine the alcohol, drug or both alcohol and drug content of his or her blood, if such person is arrested for operating a watercraft or motorboat which is underway in violation of subsection (a) of Sections 6-122 or 6-122.01, within three (3) hours of the alleged offense. Any person so arrested for a violation of clause (i) or (ii), or both, of Section 6-122(a), or for a violation of Section 6-122.01(a), shall submit to a breath test. If the breath test is not available, or the person is physically unable to submit to a breath test, a blood test shall be given. The accused shall, prior to the administration of the test, be advised by the person administering the test that he/she has a right to observe the process of analysis and to see the blood-alcohol reading on the equipment used to perform the breath test. If such equipment automatically produces a written printout of the breath test result, this written printout, or a copy thereof, shall be given to the accused in each case. 
(b)  Any person, after having been arrested for a violation of clause (iii), (iv) or (v) of Section 6-122(a) or for a violation of Section 6-122.01, may be required to submit to a blood test to determine the drug or both drug and alcohol content of his or her blood. When a person, after having been arrested for a violation of clause (i) or (ii), or both, of Section 6-122(a) or for a violation Section 6-122.01, submits to a breath test, in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, or refuses to take or is incapable of taking such a breath test, he/she may be required to submit to tests to determine the drug or both drug and alcohol content of his or her blood if the law-enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe the person was operating a watercraft or motorboat under the influence of any drug or combination of drugs, or the combined influence of alcohol and drugs. 
(c)  If a person, after being arrested for a violation of subsection (a) of Sections 6-122 or 6-122.01 and after having been advised by the arresting officer that a person who operates a watercraft or motorboat which is underway upon the waters of the Commonwealth shall be deemed thereby, as a condition of such operation, to have consented to have a sample of his or her blood and breath taken for a chemical test to determine the alcohol or drug content of his or her blood, and that the unreasonable refusal to do so constitutes grounds for a court to order him or her not to operate a watercraft or motorboat which is underway upon the waters of the Commonwealth, then refuses to permit the taking of a sample of his or her blood or breath or both blood and breath samples for such tests, the arresting officer shall take the person arrested before a committing magistrate. If the person is unable to be taken before a magistrate because the person is taken to a medical facility for treatment or evaluation of his medical condition, the arresting officer at a medical facility, in the presence of a witness other than a law-enforcement officer, shall again advise the person, at the medical facility, of the law requiring blood or breath samples to be taken and the penalty for refusal. If he/she again so refuses after having been further advised by such magistrate or by the arresting officer at the medical facility of the law requiring a blood or breath sample to be taken and the penalty for refusal, and so declares again his or her refusal in writing upon a form provided by the Supreme Court of Virginia, or refuses or fails to so declare in writing and such fact is certified as prescribed in Code of Virginia, Section 18.2-268.3, then no blood or breath sample shall be taken even though he/she may thereafter request same. 
(d)  When any person is arrested for operating a watercraft or motorboat which is underway in violation of subsection (a) of Section 6-122, the procedures and requirements of Code of Virginia, Sections 18.2-268.1 through 18.2-268.11 shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to this section. 
(e)  If the court or jury finds the defendant guilty of unreasonably refusing to permit a blood or breath sample to be taken, the court shall order such person not to operate a watercraft or motorboat which is underway for a period of twelve (12) months for a first offense and for twenty-four (24) months for a second or subsequent offense of refusal within five (5) years of the first or other such refusal. However, if the defendant pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (a) of Sections 6-122 or 6-122.01, the court may dismiss the refusal warrant. 
(Ord. No. 1892, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 2082, 7-9-91; Ord. No. 2163, 7-7-92; Ord. No. 2335, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 2407, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 2646, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 2989, 6-26-07)  
Sec. 6-122.3. - Presumptions from alcoholic content. 
In any prosecution for operation of a watercraft or motorboat which is underway in violation of clause (ii) or (iv) of Section 6-122(a), the amount of alcohol in the blood of the accused at the time of the alleged offense as indicated by a chemical analysis of a sample of the accused's blood or breath to determine the alcoholic content of his blood in accordance with the provisions of Section 6-122.2 shall give rise to the rebuttable presumptions at Code of Virginia Section 18.2-269(A)(1) through (4). 
(Ord. No. 1892, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 2335, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 2989, 6-26-07)  
Sec. 6-122.4. - Additional penalty for reckless or intoxicated operation of a watercraft or motorboat. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalties authorized by law, upon conviction of any person for violation of any provision of Sections 6-121 or 6-122, the court shall order such person not to operate a watercraft or motorboat which is underway upon the waters of the Commonwealth for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of a first conviction or for a period of three (3) years from the date of a second or subsequent conviction within ten (10) years of a first conviction. The period specified in any such order prohibiting operation of a watercraft or motorboat which is underway imposed pursuant to this section shall run consecutively with any such order imposed for refusal to permit a blood or breath sample to be taken. 
(b)  A first offense of violating this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. A second or subsequent offense shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. In addition, the court shall suspend the person's privilege to operate a motorboat or watercraft for the same period for which it had been suspended or revoked when such person violated this section. 
(c)  The period specified in any such order prohibiting operation of a watercraft or motorboat which is underway imposed pursuant to this section may be suspended by the court only as authorized in Code of Virginia, Section 29.1-738.5. 
(Ord. No. 1892, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 2396, 6-25-96)  
Sec. 6-123. - Rental of personal watercraft during dangerous water conditions. 
(a)  Whenever the director of emergency medical services, the chief of police, or one of their duly authorized designees determines that, due to the condition of the Atlantic Ocean, the Chesapeake Bay, and/or the waters adjacent thereto, the operation of personal watercraft in any such body of water would be dangerous to the health, safety and welfare of the operators of such watercraft, passengers thereon, and/or other persons in or on the water, every business in the city which provides personal watercraft for rent shall be notified of such determination, and such notification shall identify the specific body or bodies of water to which the notification applies. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the notification set forth in subsection (a), such businesses shall be prohibited from renting personal watercraft for use in any body of water to which the notification applies, and shall not resume the rental of such watercraft until they are officially notified that the condition of the water no longer poses a threat of danger to the public. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the term "personal watercraft" means a motorboat less than sixteen (16) feet in length which uses an inboard motor powering a jet pump as its primary motive power, and which is designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing, or kneeling on, rather than in the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside, the vessel. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2503, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 2519, 12-8-98)  
Sec. 6-124. - Life preservers, fire extinguishers, etc., required. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person to operate any watercraft or vessel which does not carry, in conformance with the regulations of the Virginia Board of Game and Inland Fisheries applicable to vessels of that category: 
(a)  At least one life preserver for each person on board; 
(b)  On power vessels, operable fire extinguishing equipment; 
(c)  On vessels sixteen (16) feet and over and vessels carrying passengers for hire, visual distress signals; and 
(d)  On vessels thirty-nine (39) feet and over, audible signalling devices. 
(Ord. No. 1891, 7-10-89)  
Sec. 6-125. - Skin and scuba divers, diver's flag required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in skin diving or scuba diving from a boat in any waters which are open to boating, or assist in such diving, without displaying a diver's flag from a mast, buoy or other structure at the place of diving; and no person shall display such a flag except when diving operations are underway or in preparation, or display such a diver's flag in a location which will unreasonably obstruct vessels from making legitimate navigational use of the water. 
(b)  The diver's flag will be square, not less than twelve (12) inches on a side, and shall be of red background with a diagonal white stripe, of a width equal to one-fifth of the flag's height, running from the upper corner adjacent to the mast downward to the opposite outside corner. 
(c)  No operator of a vessel underway shall permit such vessel to approach closer than twenty-five (25) yards to any structure from which a diver's flag is being displayed. 
(Ord. No. 1894, 7-10-89)  
Sec. 6-126. - Identification numbers required for motorboats. 
(1)  No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of any motorboat on any waters of the city unless the motorboat is numbered in accordance with Code of Virginia, Section 29.1-702 et seq., federal law, or a federally approved numbering system of another state. In addition to the numbering requirements, (i) the certificate of number must be in effect and available on board for inspection, (ii) the identifying number set forth in the certificate of number must be displayed on each side of the bow of the motorboat, and (iii) decals signifying the last month and year during which the certificate of number is valid must be displayed on each side of the motorboat within six (6) inches of the registration number so as to be visible while the motorboat is being operated. 
(2)  Violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1894, 7-10-89)  
Sec. 6-127. - No discharge zone. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following phrases shall have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them: 
(1)  Container seal shall mean a tamper-evident plastic or wire security device. 
(2)  Discharge shall include, but is not limited to, any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or dumping. 
(3)  Lynnhaven River Watershed in the City of Virginia Beach is designated as all contiguous waters south of the Lesner Bridge at Lynnhaven Inlet (latitude 36°54'27.90?N and longitude 76°05'30.90?W) and north of the watershed break point at the intersection of West Neck Creek and Dam Neck Road (latitude 36°47'17.60?N and longitude 76°04'14.62?W). 
(4)  Macerator pump valve shall mean a valve in a vessel's sewage piping that in the open position allows an overboard discharge of sewage via a through-hull fitting. 
(5)  Marine sanitation device shall mean any equipment installed on a vessel and that is designed to receive, retain, treat, or discharge sewage and any process to treat such sewage. 
(6)  No discharge zone shall mean an area determined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Commonwealth where there is established a complete prohibition of all treated or untreated discharges of sewage from all vessels. 
(7)  Sewage shall mean human body wastes, the wastes from toilets and other receptacles intended to receive or retain human wastes, and liquid-carried human wastes together with such industrial wastes and other liquid as may be present. 
(8)  Vessel shall mean every description of watercraft or other artificial contrivance used, or capable of being used on the waters of the Commonwealth, including boats and houseboats, regardless of size, means of propulsion or place of registry. 
(9)  Y-valve shall mean a valve in a vessel's sewage piping that in the open position allows an overboard discharge of sewage via a through-hull fitting and in the closed position prevents an overboard discharge and retains sewage in a holding tank. 
(b)  The Lynnhaven River Watershed has been designated a no discharge zone by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(c)  The following requirements apply in the no discharge zone: 
(1)  All discharge of sewage, whether treated or not, and other wastes from all vessels into the no discharge zone is prohibited. 
(2)  Vessels without installed toilets shall dispose of any collected sewage from portable toilets or other containment devices at appropriate facilities approved by the Virginia Department of Health, in a manner that complies with state law. 
(3)  Vessels with installed toilets shall have a marine sanitation device to allow sewage holding capacity, unless the toilets are rendered inoperable. 
(4)  Houseboats having installed toilets shall have a holding tank with the capability of collecting and holding sewage and disposing of collected sewage at a pump-out facility or other facility approved by the Virginia Department of Health for collection of sewage wastes; if the houseboat lacks such capability, the installed toilet shall be removed. 
(5)  Y-valves, macerator pump valves or any other through-hull fitting valves capable of allowing a discharge of sewage from marine sanitation devices shall be secured in the closed position by a device that is not readily removable, including, but not limited to, a numbered container seal, such that through-hull sewage discharge capability is rendered inoperable. 
(6)  Every owner or operator of a marina within the no discharge zone shall notify boat patrons leasing slips of the sewage discharge restriction. As a minimum, notification shall consist of no discharge zone information in the slip rental contract and a sign indicating the area is a no discharge zone. 
(7)  All vessels shall place in their marine sanitation device a dye tablet supplied by the city. 
(d)  Violations of this section shall, upon conviction, be a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(e)  The Virginia Beach Police Department and other law-enforcement officers of this Commonwealth and the Federal Government shall have the authority to enforce this section. 
(Ord. No. 2983, 6-12-07)  
Secs. 6-128—6-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PERMIT TO CONSTRUCT, ALTER OR REPAIR LANDINGS, DOCKS AND SIMILAR STRUCTURES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Building regulations, Ch. 8. 
 
Sec. 6-136. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, construct, alter, extend or repair any landing, wharf, dock, pier, bulkhead, jetty or like structure in the waters, adjacent marshlands and lowlands in the city, without a permit. Any person failing or refusing to obtain such permit shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 6-35; Ord. No. 3418, 6-16-15)  
Sec. 6-137. - Application. 
Any person desiring a permit required by this article shall file an application therefor with the department of planning. Such application shall be accompanied by plans and other data in reference to the work proposed to be done. Plans shall be prepared, stamped and endorsed by such qualified professional licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Virginia as the planning director may require; provided, however, that this requirement may be waived if, in the judgment of the planning director, the nature of the work to be performed renders it unnecessary. 
(Code 1965, § 6-36; Ord. No. 2023, 12-18-90; Ord. No. 21-57, 6-23-92)  
Sec. 6-138. - Fee. 
The application processing fee for a permit required by this article shall be two hundred thirty dollars ($230.00). The fee for a building permit required by this article shall be based on the cost of the construction as provided in section 8-31(a) of the City Code. 
(Code 1965, § 6-39; Ord. No. 2756, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 3418, 6-16-15; Ord. No. 3545, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18)  
Sec. 6-139. - Issuance. 
The planning director or his designee shall review an application filed under this article and if, in his opinion, the proposed structure does not encroach upon the rights of others, the water or watercourses are not obstructed and the structure in question conforms to the area and is built in accordance with accepted practices, he shall approve the issuance, by the department of planning, of the permit applied for. 
(Code 1965, § 6-37; Ord. No. 2157, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 3418, 6-16-15)  
Secs. 6-140—6-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PERMIT FOR DREDGING, FILLING, ETC., IN WATERS, MARSHLANDS AND LOWLANDS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Soil removal and other land-disturbing activities, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Dredging sand or gravel, Code of Virginia, §§ 62.1—62.1-193. 
 
Sec. 6-151. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dredge or carry on any landfill operation or to extend any existing real estate into waters, marshlands or lowlands in the city, without a permit. Any person failing or refusing to obtain such a permit shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 6-40; Ord. No. 2003, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 3418, 6-16-15)  
Sec. 6-152. - Application. 
Any person desiring a permit required by this article shall file an application with the department of planning. Plans accompanying such applications shall be prepared, stamped and endorsed by such qualified professional licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Virginia as the planning director may require; provided, however, that this requirement may be waived if, in the judgment of the planning director, the nature of the work to be performed renders it unnecessary. 
(Code 1965, § 6-41; Ord. No. 2003, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 2024, 12-18-90; Ord. No. 2157, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 3418, 6-16-15)  
Sec. 6-152.5. - Fee. 
The fee for a permit required by this article shall be two hundred thirty dollars ($230.00). 
(Ord. No. 2805, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 3545, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18)  
Sec. 6-153. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3418, adopted June 16, 2015, repealed § 6-153, which pertained to applicant's bond. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 6-154. - Issuance; conditions of permit; revocation. 
(a)  Upon the approval by the director of planning or his designee of an application for a permit under this article the permit shall be issued by the department of planning. 
(b)  In issuing or renewing a permit pursuant to this article, the planning director or his designee may require, as a condition of the permit, any or all of the following in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare: 
(1)  That hours of operation be restricted; 
(2)  That existing trees and other vegetation located along public street frontage or between the site of the operation and adjacent residential areas be preserved and protected; and 
(3)  That specific measures be taken to prevent excessive noise, illumination, dust or odor from affecting other properties or the occupants thereof. 
The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of any permit or the imposition of any permit condition to the city council within thirty (30) days of the action. 
(c)  In the event the director of planning or his designee finds that a proposed dredging or landfill operation may adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the general public or of occupants of adjacent properties, he may refer the application to the city council, which shall have the authority to impose any or all of the conditions of the permit as are set forth in this section. 
(d)  The violation of any of the provisions of this article, or the failure to maintain strict compliance with any of the conditions of a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be grounds for revocation of such permit by the planning director. Any person continuing any activities requiring a permit under this article after the revocation of such permit shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2003, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 2157, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 3418, 6-16-15)  
Secs. 6-155—6-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - BEACHES AND WATERWAYS ADVISORY COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2588, adopted June 13, 2000, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as a new Art. VIII, §§ 6-161—6-165, pertaining to the beaches and waterways advisory commission. Since Ch. already contained provisions dealing with that subject matter, the editor, at his discretion, has treated these new provisions as superseding the former provisions, which derived from Ord. No. 2585, adopted May 25, 2000. 
 
Sec. 6-161. - Established. 
There is hereby established the beaches and waterways advisory commission. 
(Ord. No. 2588, 6-13-2000)  
Sec. 6-162. - Composition; terms of members. 
The commission shall be comprised of eleven (11) members, with one member being appointed by city council from the residents of each of the city's seven (7) election districts, and four (4) members being appointed by city council from the residents of the city at large. Members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 2588, 6-13-2000; Ord. No. 2993, 6-26-07)  
Sec. 6-163. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the commission shall be to serve in an advisory capacity to city council with respect to beach and waterways-related issues. Specifically in furtherance of said purpose, it shall be the responsibility of the commission: 
(a)  To review issues referred to it by city council concerning access to, and the preservation, development and use of, the city's beaches and waterways, and to make recommendations to city council regarding such issues; and 
(b)  To serve as the city's local erosion advisory commission and carry out the responsibilities imposed on such local commissions pursuant to Section 10.1-711 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 2588, 6-13-2000)  
Sec. 6-164. - Bylaws. 
The commission shall be governed by its bylaws as approved by city council on May 23, 2000. Such bylaws may be amended, from time to time, as necessary; provided, however, that no such amendment shall be effective without the prior consent of city council. 
(Ord. No. 2588, 6-13-2000)  
Sec. 6-165. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2984, adopted June 12, 2007, repealed § 6-165, which pertained to termination and derived from Ord. No. 2588, 6-13-2000.  
Chapter 7 - BICYCLES AND OTHER WHEELED DEVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2848, adopted Oct. 26, 2004, amended Ch. 7 of the Code in its entirety as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Ch. 7, §§ 7-1—7-5.1, 7-6—7-11, 7-21—7-25, 7-29—7-31, 7-46—7-49.1, 7-50, 7-50.1, 7-51—7-52.1, 7-53—7-63, pertained to bicycles and mopeds and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 7-1—7-6, 7-8—7-19, 7-19.1, 7-20—7-27, 22-18, 22-251; Ord. No. 1004, adopted Nov. 5, 1979; Ord. No. 1055, §§ 7-28—7-31, adopted June 23, 1980; Ord. No. 1102, adopted Oct. 13, 1980; Ord. No. 1193, adopted July 6, 1981; Ord. No. 1253, adopted Feb. 1, 1982; Ord. No. 1584, adopted Feb. 3, 1986; Ord. No. 1714, adopted July 6, 1987; Ord. No. 1882, adopted June 19, 1989; Ord. No. 1896, adopted July 10, 1989; Ord. No. 1949, adopted Feb. 26, 1990; Ord. No. 2122, adopted April 28, 1992; Ord. No. 2339, adopted June 13, 1995; Ord. No. 2536, adopted May 25, 1999; Ord. No. 2545, adopted June 22, 1999; Ord. No. 2587, adopted June 13, 2000; Ord. No. 2648, adopted June 26, 2001; Ord. No. 2739, adopted March 4, 2003; Ord. No. 2772, adopted June 24, 2003; and Ord. No. 2828, 6-22-04. 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 21. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the terms "all-terrain vehicle," "bicycle," "electric personal assistive mobility device," "electric power-assisted bicycle," "golf cart," "highway," "low speed vehicle," "moped," "motor-driven cycle," "motorized scooter," "motorized skateboard," "vehicle," "wheelchair," and "wheel chair conveyance" are defined as set forth in Code of Virginia §§ 46.2-100 and 46.2-1993, as amended. Additionally, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless clearly indicated to the contrary: 
Electric powered utility cart: A wheeled, externally controlled, battery powered cart, used exclusively for the transportation of personal items or property and not for the conveyance of persons, and that is not classified as an all-terrain vehicle, as defined in Code of Virginia § 46.2-100. 
Resort area: The area, from and including, the sidewalk on the west side of Pacific Avenue to the Atlantic Ocean between Rudee Inlet and 42nd Street. 
Resort season: The time period from May 1st through September 30th. 
Riding: This term is used interchangeably throughout this Chapter with the term "operation". 
Surrey: A four-wheeled pedal-powered vehicle capable of seating two (2) or more persons. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 3535, 3-6-18)  
Sec. 7-2. - Violations of Chapter generally. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided, any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 7-3. - Inspections. 
A police officer at any time, upon reasonable cause to believe that a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, golf cart, low-speed vehicle, surrey or moped is unsafe and not equipped as required by this chapter or that the equipment is not in proper adjustment or repair, may require the person riding such wheeled device or vehicle to stop and submit the wheeled device or vehicle to an inspection and such test with reference thereto as may be appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
ARTICLE II. - POSSESSION, SALE, RENTAL AND REGISTRATION OF WHEELED DEVICES 
 
Sec. 7-4. - Violations of Article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this Article II shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 7-5. - Removing, altering, etc. identification numbers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, change, alter or mutilate the frame number of any bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motor-driven cycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, golf cart, low-speed vehicle, surrey or moped. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 7-6. - Dealer not to sell bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motor-driven cycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, golf cart, low-speed vehicle, surrey or moped without an identification number. 
No person engaged in the business of selling bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, motor-driven cycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter golf carts, low-speed vehicles, surreys or mopeds at retail shall sell any such wheeled device or vehicle unless the wheeled device or vehicle has an identifying number permanently stamped or cast on its frame. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 7-6.1. - Stickers required on mopeds, motorized skateboards and motorized scooters. 
Any person who offers for rent or lease any moped, motorized skateboard or motorized scooter shall affix to any such moped, motorized skateboard or motorized scooter, or verify that there is affixed, a permanent decal or sticker which states that the operation of mopeds, motorized skateboards or motorized scooters on highways and public vehicular areas by persons under the age of sixteen (16) for mopeds, or under the age of fourteen (14) (unless under the immediate supervision of a person who is at least eighteen (18) years old) for motorized skateboards or motorized scooters, is prohibited by Virginia law. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 7-7. - Record to be kept by dealers in secondhand bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, motor-driven cycles, motorized skateboards, motorized scooters, golf carts, low-speed vehicles, surreys or mopeds. 
Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling, exchanging or trading in used or secondhand bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, motor-driven cycles, motorized skateboards, motorized scooters, golf carts, low-speed vehicles, surreys or mopeds shall keep a record of all such transactions, including the make and frame number, and the name and address of the person from whom purchased or acquired or to whom sold and delivered, as the case may be, or each such wheeled device or vehicle purchased, sold or exchanged. Such records shall be open for police inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 7-8. - Dealers not to purchase secondhand bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, motor-driven cycles, motorized skateboards, motorized scooters golf carts, low-speed vehicles, surreys or mopeds from minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of buying, selling, exchanging or trading in used or secondhand bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, motor-driven cycles, motorized skateboards, motorized scooters, golf carts, low-speed vehicles, surreys or mopeds, to purchase any such secondhand wheeled device or vehicle from a person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 7-9. - Rental agencies to comply with equipment requirements; advertising prohibitions. 
No rental agency or other establishment shall rent or offer for rent any bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, golf cart, low-speed vehicle, surrey or moped, unless such wheeled device or vehicle is equipped with all safety equipment required by this chapter. No such agency or establishment shall rent or offer to rent any such wheeled device or vehicle which displays any signage or other advertising matter for use on the boardwalk or bicycle path east of Atlantic Avenue except for one (1) sign not exceeding one (1) square foot in area and displaying only the name and location of the rental agency or establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 3399, 4-7-15)  
Sec. 7-10. - Signs required at rental agencies. 
(a)  Mopeds. Each owner of a business intending to rent or lease mopeds to the public shall post a clearly legible sign in a prominent place on his premises where such sign will be seen and read by a reasonably observant customer. Such sign shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Operators must be sixteen (16) years or older. 
(2)  Valid identification is required of all customers. 
(3)  Customers must be familiar with and obey traffic laws. Violations will be prosecuted by police. 
(4)  Riding is prohibited on the Boardwalk and the adjacent grassy area and bicycle path, oceanfront parks and plazas, the beach, all city sidewalks; 
(5)  Riding is prohibited on Atlantic Avenue from May 1st through September 30th. 
(b)  Low-speed vehicles. Each owner of a business intending to rent or lease low-speed vehicles to the public shall post a clearly legible sign in a prominent place on his premises where such sign will be seen and read by a reasonably observant customer. Such sign shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Operators must be sixteen (16) years or older to operate. 
(2)  Valid driver's license is required of all customers. 
(3)  Customers must be familiar with and obey traffic laws. Violations will be prosecuted by police. 
(4)  Operation is prohibited on the boardwalk and the adjacent grassy area and bicycle path, oceanfront parks and plazas, the beach, and all sidewalks. 
(c)  Electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, motorized skateboards and motorized scooters. Each owner of a business intending to rent or lease electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles and motorized skateboards and motorized scooters to the public shall post a clearly legible sign in a prominent place on his premises where such sign will be seen and read by a reasonably observant customer. Such sign shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Operator must be fourteen (14) years or older unless under the immediate supervision of a person who is at least eighteen (18) years old. 
(2)  Valid identification is required of all customers. 
(3)  Customers must be familiar with and obey traffic laws. Violations will be prosecuted by police. 
(4)  Riding is prohibited on the boardwalk and adjacent grassy area and bicycle path, oceanfront parks and plazas, the beach and all sidewalks in the resort area. 
(5)  Riding is prohibited on Atlantic Avenue from May 1st through September 30th. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 7-11. - Restrictions on renting mopeds, low-speed vehicles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles motorized skateboards or motorized scooters. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner, manager, operator or employee of a business engaged in the rental of mopeds, low-speed vehicles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, motorized skateboards or motorized scooters to: 
(1)  Lease or rent a moped or low-speed vehicle to any person under sixteen (16) years of age. 
(2)  Lease or rent, or offer to lease or rent, a moped which produces speeds in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour on a level surface. 
(3)  Lease or rent, or offer to lease or rent, a low-speed vehicle which produces speeds in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour on a level surface. 
(4)  Lease, rent, offer to lease or rent an electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard or motorized scooter to any person under fourteen (14) years old unless such person is under the immediate supervision of a person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(5)  Require or accept as security or surety any operator's license, military identification card or other permit or pass issued by any state or federal agency. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Secs. 7-12—7-20. - Reserved.  
Secs. 7-21—7-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3260, § 1, adopted October 23, 2012, repealed §§ 7-21, 7-22, 7-24, 7-25, 7-29—7-31, which pertained to authority to register, application, fee, issuance of card and decal, replacement of mutilated, lost or stolen decal, records to be kept, disposition of fees and derived from Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06.  
Sec. 7-32. - Disposition of unclaimed bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, motor-driven cycles, motorized skateboards, motorized scooters, golf carts or mopeds in custody of police department. 
The disposition of unclaimed bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, motor-driven cycles, motorized skateboards, motorized scooters, golf carts, low-speed vehicles, surreys or mopeds in the custody of the police department shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article II of Chapter 27 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Secs. 7-33—7-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EQUIPMENT AND LOCAL OPERATING RULES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2952, adopted June 27, 2006, changed the title of Art. III of this chapter from "Equipment and Operating Rules" to "Equipment and Local Operating Rules." 
 
Sec. 7-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2952, adopted June 27, 2006, repealed former § 7-46 of the Code, which pertained to violations of article and derived from Ord. No. 2848, adopted Oct. 26, 2004.  
Sec. 7-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2952, adopted June 27, 2006, repealed former § 7-47 of the Code, which pertained to lights and reflectors and derived from Ord. No. 2848, adopted Oct. 26, 2004; and Ord. No. 2881, adopted June 14, 2005.  
Sec. 7-48. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2952, adopted June 27, 2006, repealed former § 7-48 of the Code, which pertained to brakes and derived from Ord. No. 2848, adopted Oct. 26, 2004.  
Sec. 7-49. - Safety equipment required, moped operators and passengers. 
(a)  Every person operating a moped on a public street or highway of the city shall wear a face shield, safety glasses or goggles approved by the superintendent of state police, or shall have his moped or gas-powered wheeled device equipped with safety glass or a windshield at all times while operating such vehicle; and any operator and any passengers thereon, if any, shall wear protective helmets of a type approved by the superintendent of the state police. 
(b)  Any person who knowingly violates this Section shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and shall be subject to a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 7-50. - Helmets required for riders of bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, motorized skateboards and motorized scooters fourteen years of age or younger. 
(a)  Every person fourteen (14) years or younger shall be required to wear a protective helmet which meets the standards promulgated by the Consumer Product Safety Commission Standards whenever riding or being carried on a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard or motorized scooter on any highway, street, sidewalk or bicycle path. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable by fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). However, with respect to any person riding or being carried on a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric-powered-assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard or motorized scooter, such fine shall be suspended (i) for first-time violators or (ii) for any violator who, subsequent to the violation but prior to imposition of the fine, purchases a helmet of the type required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 7-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2952, adopted June 27, 2006, repealed former § 7-51 of the Code, which pertained to mopeds and gas-powered wheeled devices not to be operated by persons under sixteen; speed limit; identification and sticker required; penalty and derived from Ord. No. 2848, adopted Oct. 26, 2004.  
Sec. 7-51.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2952, adopted June 27, 2006, repealed former § 7-51.1 of the Code, which pertained to special provisions for electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, and electric-powered wheeled devices and derived from Ord. No. 2848, adopted Oct. 26, 2004.  
Sec. 7-51.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2952, adopted June 27, 2006, repealed former § 7-51.2 of the Code, which pertained to special provisions for low-speed vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 2848, adopted Oct. 26, 2004.  
Sec. 7-51.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2952, adopted June 27, 2006, repealed former § 7-51.3 of the Code, which pertained to special provisions for all-terrain vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 2848, adopted Oct. 26, 2004.  
Sec. 7-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2952, adopted June 27, 2006, repealed former § 7-52 of the Code, which pertained to regulations pertaining to riding bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, electric-powered wheeled devices, gas-powered wheeled devices and mopeds on roadways and derived from Ord. No. 2848, adopted Oct. 26, 2004.  
Secs. 7-52.1, 7-52.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2952, adopted June 27, 2006, repealed former §§ 7-52.1, 7-52.2 of the Code, which pertained to overtaking and passing vehicles and left turns by bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, electric-powered wheeled devices, gas-powered wheeled devices and mopeds and derived from Ord. No. 2848, adopted Oct. 26, 2004.  
Secs. 7-53—7-57. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2952, adopted June 27, 2006, repealed former §§ 7-53—7-57 of the Code, which pertained to applicability of traffic regulations to riders; compliance with traffic signals and police directions; signals; use of seat required; carrying excess passengers; rider to keep one hand on handlebars and derived from Ord. No. 2848, adopted Oct. 26, 2004.  
Sec. 7-58. - Operation of other wheeled devices. 
Unless specifically authorized by a franchise or permit granted by city council, Code of Virginia, tit. 46.2, or this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any type of wheeled device or vehicle on any city street, in the Resort Area or at Town Center. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 3083, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 7-58.1. - Motorized scooters. 
(a)  In addition to all other regulations set forth by this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorized scooter in the area bounded by the east side of Arctic Avenue on the west, the Atlantic Ocean on the east, Rudee Loop to the south, and the north side of 42 nd Street to the north, unless the motorized scooters is rented from a fixed business location or owned by its operator or a licensee as set forth in section 7-58.2. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorized scooter upon any street with a speed limit in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 3598, 8-20-19; Ord. No. 3605, 11-12-19; Ord. No. 3630, 7-7-20)  
Sec. 7-58.2. - Franchise license requirement. 
No person or entity may offer motorized scooters or skateboards, or electric power-assisted bicycles, for hire unless the person or entity has a city license, the issuance of which shall be in response to a nonexclusive franchise solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 3605, 11-12-19)  
Sec. 7-59. - Regulations pertaining to riding on city sidewalks and bicycle paths other than the resort area. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a moped or motor-driven cycle on any sidewalk or designated bicycle route within the city; 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, riding or operating a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter or electric powered utility cart is permitted on the sidewalks and designated bicycle paths of the city; 
(c)  A person riding or operating a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, electric power-assisted bicycle or electric powered utility cart upon and along a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian, shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian, and shall dismount and walk the bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, electric power-assisted bicycle or electric powered utility cart when necessary to avoid physical contact with any person; and 
(d)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 3535, 3-6-18)  
Sec. 7-59.1. - Regulations pertaining to riding wheeled devices or vehicles in the resort area. 
(a)  During the resort season, it shall be unlawful for any person to ride an electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, moped, or motorized skateboard on Atlantic Avenue. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the prior subsection, motorized scooters may be operated on the trolley lanes of Atlantic Avenue if riders adhere to the 10 mph speed limit. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful at any time for any person to ride on any sidewalk in the resort area an all-terrain vehicle, a bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, motorized skateboard, skateboard, scooter, or any pedal-powered vehicle that is muscle-powered or any muscle-powered device. However, the use of roller blades and roller skates is permitted. A violation of this sub-section shall be punished by a civil penalty of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(d)  It shall be unlawful at any time to operate an electric powered utility cart on Atlantic Avenue or upon the sidewalks along Atlantic Avenue, unless a permit is issued by the city manager, or designee, to do so. An electric powered utility cart may be operated on any sidewalk in the resort area other than Atlantic Avenue and may cross Atlantic Avenue for the purpose of accessing the boardwalk or beach. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 3535, 3-6-18; Ord. No. 3596, 7-9-19; Ord. No. 3598, 8-20-19; Ord. No. 3630, 7-7-20)  
Sec. 7-59.2. - Regulations pertaining to riding on the beach or the boardwalk. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on the beach, upon sand dunes or on the boardwalk a motor vehicle, an all-terrain vehicle, a bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, motor-driven cycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, moped, scooter, skateboard or a pedal-powered vehicle that is muscle-powered or any other muscle-powered device, unless specifically authorized in a special event permit. 
(b)  The use of roller blades and roller skates on the boardwalk is permitted. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  The use of an electric powered utility cart on the beach and boardwalk is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2943, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 3535, 3-6-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2943, adopted May 23, 2006, stated that the provisions of subsection (c) shall expire on September 30, 2006. Said provisions pertained to the use of electric personal assistive mobility on the boardwalk permitted pursuant to a temporary permit authorized by the City Manager.  
Sec. 7-59.3. - Regulations pertaining to riding wheeled devices or vehicles on the grassy area or bicycle path adjacent to the boardwalk and oceanfront parks and plazas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate on the bicycle path adjacent to the boardwalk an all-terrain vehicle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motor-driven cycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, moped, electric powered utility cart, roller blades, roller skates, scooters or skateboards or a pedal-powered vehicle that is muscle-powered or any other muscle-powered device other than a bicycle as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to ride an all-terrain vehicle, bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motor-driven cycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, moped, electric powered utility cart, roller blades, roller skates, scooters or skateboards or a pedal-powered vehicle that is muscle-powered or any other muscle-powered device on the grassy area adjacent to the boardwalk and the oceanfront parks and plazas. Provided, however, that bicycles are allowed in the oceanfront plazas for the purpose of accessing the bicycle path adjacent to the boardwalk and electric powered utility carts are permitted in the oceanfront parks and plazas for purposes of accessing the boardwalk and beach. 
(c)  Surreys shall be permitted on the bicycle path and the oceanfront plazas subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Except as allowed by section 7-9, bicycles operated on the bicycle path shall not contain or convey any signage or other advertising matter unless expressly permitted pursuant to a franchise granted by the city council. 
(e)  For purposes of this section the term "oceanfront parks" refers to the grassy and non-grassy areas of the parks located at 7th, 13th, 17th, 24th, 25th, and 31st Streets. The term "oceanfront plazas" or "plazas" refers to the paved areas connecting Atlantic Avenue to the bicycle path. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 3399, 4-7-15; Ord. No. 3535, 3-6-18)  
Sec. 7-59.4. - Regulations pertaining to riding wheeled devices in Town Center. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate on any sidewalk or plaza in the Town Center an all-terrain vehicle, bicycle, electrical personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motor-driven cycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, moped, electric powered utility cart, roller blades, roller skates, scooters or skateboards, or a pedal-powered vehicle that is muscle-powered or any other muscle-powered device. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "Town Center" means the area bounded by and including the sidewalk on the south side of Virginia Beach Boulevard, the Norfolk Southern Corporation property line, the sidewalk on the east side of Independence Boulevard, and the sidewalk on the west side of Constitution Drive. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be punished by a civil penalty of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 2861, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 3535, 3-6-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2861, adopted Jan. 25, 2005 added new provisions to the Code as § 7-59.4 and renumbered former § 7-59.4 as § 7-59.5.  
Sec. 7-59.5. - General provisions applicable to Sections 7-59.1 through 7-59.5. 
(a)  For purposes of Sections 7-59.1 through 7-59.4, the term "scooter" is a muscle-powered device having two (2) or more wheels, a platform on which the rider stands, and a steering mechanism such as handlebars. 
(b)  The provisions of Section 7-59.1 through 7-59.4 shall not be applicable to the use of baby carriages, strollers or related modes of transportation of infants, or the use of wheelchairs and wheelchair conveyance used for the transportation of disabled persons or electrical personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles or motorized scooters equipped with a seat used for the transportation of disabled persons when such device has a state-issued placard for the disabled prominently displayed thereon. 
(c)  The prohibitions set forth in Sections 7-59.1 through 7-59.4 shall not be applicable to city employees or city contractors on officials business, or to employees of any franchise or permittee authorized to provide services at Town Center, or on the beach, boardwalk and adjacent bicycle path, oceanfront parks and plaza, while on duty, or when authorization is granted by the City Manager or his designee for special events. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2861, 1-25-05; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 3260, § 2, 10-23-12) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 7-59.4.  
Sec. 7-59.6. - Regulations pertaining to riding wheeled devices in city owned parking garages. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 7-59.5, it shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate in any parking garage owned by the city or a political subdivision, an all-terrain vehicle, bicycle, electrical personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motor-driven cycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, moped, roller blades, roller skates, scooters or skateboards, or a pedal-powered vehicle that is muscle-powered or any other muscle-powered device. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall be punished by a civil penalty of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(c)  The use of an electric powered utility cart in any parking garage owned by the city or a political subdivision is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 3202, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 3535, 3-6-18)  
Sec. 7-60. - Reckless riding; speed. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, low-speed vehicle or moped recklessly or at a speed faster than is reasonably proper, or in a manner so as to endanger the life, limb or property of the rider or of any other person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate roller blades, roller skates or any similar devices on wheels or runners whether such use is permitted or not, recklessly or at a speed faster than is reasonably proper, or in a manner so as to interfere with pedestrians or to endanger the life, limb or property of the rider or any other person. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 7-61. - Racing. 
(a)  Bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard or motorized scooter, low-speed vehicle or moped racing on the highways is prohibited except as authorized in this section. 
(b)  Bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, low-speed vehicle or moped racing on a highway shall not be unlawful when a racing event has been approved by the City Manager on any highway under the jurisdiction of the City. Approval of bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, low-speed vehicle or moped highway racing events shall be granted only under conditions which assure reasonable safety for all race participants, spectators and other highway users, and which prevent unreasonable interference with traffic flow which would seriously inconvenience other highway users. 
(c)  By agreement with the approving authority, participants in an approved bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, low-speed vehicle and moped highway racing event may be exempted from compliance with any traffic laws otherwise applicable thereto, provided that traffic control is adequate to assure the safety of all highway users. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 7-62. - Clinging to vehicles. 
No person riding upon any bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, low-speed vehicle, moped, roller skates, skateboards, toys, other devices on wheels or runners shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 7-63. - Parking of bicycles and other wheeled devices. 
(a)  Except as otherwise prohibited or restricted by an official traffic-control device, a person may park a bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, or moped on a sidewalk in such manner so as to not impede the normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic. 
(b)  Except as otherwise prohibited by this Code, a bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter, low-speed vehicle or moped may be parked on the roadway at any angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or abreast of another such wheeled device or vehicle, but in such manner so as not to (i) impede the normal and reasonable movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or (ii) obstruct the movement of a legally parked motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 7-64. - Use of earphones while operating a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter or moped. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard, motorized scooter or moped on the highways in the city while using earphones on or in both ears. 
(b)  For the purposes of this Section, "earphones" shall mean any device worn on or in both ears that converts electrical energy to sound waves or which impairs or hinders the person's ability to hear, but shall not include any prosthetic device that aids the hard of hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2952, 6-27-06)  
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF GOLF CARTS 
 
Sec. 7-65. - Golf cart operation, generally. 
No person shall operate a golf cart on or over any highway, bike path or sidewalk in the city except as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04)  
Sec. 7-66. - Designation of City highways for golf cart operation; posting of signs. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 46.2-916.2 of the Code of Virginia, city council may authorize by ordinance, the operation of golf carts on designated public highways within the City after (i) considering the speed, volume, and character of motor vehicle traffic using such highways, and (ii) determining that golf cart operation on particular highways is compatible with state and local transportation plans and consistent with the Commonwealth's statewide pedestrian policy. No City highway shall be designated for use by golf carts if such golf cart operations will impede the safe and efficient flow of motor vehicle traffic, or if the highway's posted speed limit is greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(b)  All requests made to have specific highways designated for golf cart use shall be directed to the Traffic Engineering Office of Public Works. 
(c)  Any City highway designated for golf cart operations shall be posted with signs indicating this designation. The organization, individual or entity requesting a highway designation allowing golf cart operations shall reimburse the City its actual cost for the installation and continued maintenance of such signs. 
(d)  The following City streets located in the specified neighborhoods are approved for golf cart operation in accordance with the provisions of this Article: 
(1)  Heron Ridge Estates—Couples Court, Heron Ridge Lane, Heron Ridge Drive, Lynx Drive, Lynx Court and Ryan Court. 
(2)  Chubb Lake West of Pleasure House Road—Beaufort Avenue, West Chubb Lake Avenue, Chubb Lake Avenue, Lauderdale Avenue (4800-5100 Blocks), Athens Boulevard, Creek Cove Court, Sunny Circle, Bradpointe Lane, Leatherneck Road, Lookout Road (4800-4900 Blocks), Bradford Point, Bayview Avenue, Guy Avenue, Ocean View Avenue (4900 Block), Lee Avenue (4800 Block), Zivo Court and Lake Drive (4800 Block); 
(3)  Lago-Mar—Atwoodtown Road, Costa Grande Drive, Camino Real South, Camino Court, Rota Circle, Santa Marta Court, Santa Clara Court, Cinta Court, Granada Court, San Jose Court, San Miguel Court, Sevilla Court, Acapulco Court, Casa Court, Estrella Court, Rio Grande Drive, Rio Grande Court, Pinon Court, Corrente Lane, Escorial Court, La Mirage Court, Los Conaes Way, Trevino Court, Rio Bravo Bend, Santiago Point, Toledo Place, Infanta Circle, Costa Grande Drive, Malaga Lane, Malaga Court, Alcon Court, Soria Circle, Tres Lane, Vaso Court, Toro Court, Amigo Court, Tono Court, Los Colonis Drive, Las Brisas Drive, Baja Court, Sonora Court, Morado Court, La Tierra Court, La Tierra Circle, Las Corrales Court, Brasileno Drive, Brasileno Court, Valiente Court, Esquiana Court, Verano Court, Verano Circle, Belleza Court, Torero Court, Entrada Drive, Ranchero Road, Cordova Court, San Marco Road, San Marco Circle and San Marco Court. 
(4)  Ashville Park—Ashville Park Boulevard (from Lubao Lane to 1868 Ashville Park Blvd.), Emelita Drive, Lubao Lane, Blythe Drive, Wilshire Drive, Benecia Drive, Camarillo Lane, Kittridge Drive, Aldea Circle and Keokirk Lane; 
(5)  Chesapeake Bay—East of Northampton Blvd.: Ocean View Avenue, Lauderdale Avenue, Pleasure Avenue, Guam Street, Lee Avenue, Cornet Avenue, Lake Drive, Fentress Avenue, Seaview Avenue, Mortons Road and Lee Court. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2920, 1-31-06; Ord. No. 3424, 8-4-15; Ord. No. 3566, 9-4-18)  
Sec. 7-67. - Limitations. 
Golf cart operations on designated city highways shall be in accordance with the following limitations: 
(1)  No person shall operate a golf cart on a city highway unless that highway is designated for golf cart operations and is posted with the required sign. 
(2)  No golf cart shall be driven across any highway at an intersection where the highway being crossed has a posted speed limit of more than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(3)  No person shall operate any golf cart on any designated city highway unless he has in his possession a valid driver's license. 
(4)  No golf cart shall be operated on any designated city highway without displaying a slow-moving vehicle emblem in conformity with Virginia Code section 46.2-1081. 
(5)  No person shall operate any golf cart on any designated city highway between sunset and sunrise, unless equipped with lights as required by section 21-141 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04)  
Sec. 7-68. - Exceptions. 
The limitations set forth in section 7-67(1) and (2) above shall not apply to golf carts being operated as follows: 
(1)  To cross a highway from one (1) portion of a golf course to another portion thereof or to another adjacent golf course; or to travel between a person's home and golf course if (i) the trip would not be longer than one-half mile in either direction, and (ii) the speed limit on the road is no more than thirty-five (35) miles per hour; 
(2)  To the extent necessary for city employees and city contractors to fulfill a governmental purpose, or as otherwise authorized by the city manager or his designee, provided the golf cart is not operated on a city highway with a posted speed limit over thirty-five (35) miles per hour; 
(3)  As necessary by employees of public or private two-year or four-year institutions of higher education if operating on highways within the property limits of such institutions, provided the golf cart is being operated on highways with speed limits of thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less. 
(Ord. No. 2848, 10-26-04)  
Secs. 7-69, 7-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SURREYS 
 
Sec. 7-71. - Use of surreys at resort area. 
(a)  A surrey that has a permit issued by the city manager or his designee may be operated on the resort area bike path or the connecting oceanfront plazas. Such operation shall be subject to the following restrictions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a surrey or any similar device on the resort area boardwalk or its adjacent grassy areas, in resort area parks, or on resort area sidewalks and streets from Rudee Inlet to 42nd Street and from the sandy beach to Parks Avenue. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a surrey in a manner that blocks traffic on the bicycle path, interferes with pedestrians, or endangers the life, limb or property of the operator or any other person. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person under fourteen (14) years of age to operate a surrey unless under the immediate supervision of a person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to provide or offer to provide a surrey for operation in the resort area that does not have a permit issued by the city manager. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store or park any surrey on city property without the written authorization of the city manager or his designee. 
(g)  The resort management office shall provide all surrey rental businesses the date and times that permitted boardwalk events will necessitate closing of the bike path. It shall be unlawful to provide rental surreys to customers during those designated time periods. 
(Ord. No. 2869, 5-10-05)  
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2247, adopted Oct. 12, 1993, made extensive changes to this chapter, in the process repealing a number of sections. Rather than including a separate editor's note for each section, the editor has retained the section catchline and a complete history note, along with a note stating that the section was repealed by Ord. No. 2247. Repeal of entire articles will be explained in a footnote to the article designation, with the sections within the article reserved. 
Cross reference— Permit to construct, alter or repair landings, docks and similar structures, § 6-136 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 12; smoke detectors, § 12-50 et seq.; housing and building maintenance code, ch. 16; license tax for contractors, § 18-75; mobile homes, ch. 19; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 28; soil removal and other land-disturbing activities, ch. 30; disposal of refuse and debris from construction, demolition, etc., operations, § 31-8; streets and sidewalks, ch. 33; installation and repair of underground utilities prior to street improvements, § 33-86 et seq.; street numbers for buildings, § 33-101 et seq.; swimming pools, ch. 34; water supply, ch. 37; zoning ordinance, app. A; subdivision ordinance, app. B; site plan ordinance, app. C. 
State Law reference— General authority of city relative to building regulations, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-15, 15.1-863, 15.1-864, 15.1-869. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term "building code" shall mean the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code adopted by section 8-26 of this chapter, and the term "division of permits and inspections" or "permits and inspections division" shall mean the permits and inspections division of the department of planning. 
(Ord. No. 2147, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93; Ord. No. 2399, 6-25-96)  
Sec. 8-2. - Notice of and order to abate violations of chapter and zoning ordinance. 
The building code administrator, the zoning administrator or any inspector assigned to the division of permits and inspections who has been given the duty to enforce building regulations set forth in this chapter, other than the regulations prescribed in the building code, and the zoning ordinance set forth in appendix A of this Code shall have the authority to serve a written notice of violation and to order the abatement of such violation. The building code administrator, zoning administrator and such inspector are each hereby granted the authority to issue a summons to the general district court to any person in the city who shall fail to obey a lawful order contained in such notice of violation. 
(Code 1965, § 8-3; Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93; Ord. No. 2399, 6-25-96; Ord. No 2470, 2-10-98) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, app. A.  
Sec. 8-3. - General penalty for violations of chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 8-3) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Sec. 8-4. - Requirements not covered by chapter. 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Sec. 8-5. - Building of setback lines. 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Sec. 8-6. - Contractor's registration and bond. 
(Code 1965, § 8-8; Ord. No. 1026, 2-25-80; Ord. No. 1100, 10-13-80) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Sec. 8-7. - Continuing work after stop order. 
(Code 1965, § 8-3) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Sec. 8-8. - Inspection required before reconnecting discontinued electrical service to commercial and industrial buildings and trailer lots. 
All commercial and industrial buildings and trailer lots to which electrical service has been discontinued, for any purpose, including changes of occupancy or use, other than nonpayment of electrical bills, shall be inspected and released to the power company by the department of planning prior to reconnection or transfer of service to a new customer. 
(Code 1965, § 8-21; Ord. No. 1079, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2147, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2399, 6-25-96)  
Sec. 8-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1924, adopted Oct. 2, 1989, repealed § 8-9, concerning maintenance of nonresidential buildings and commercial and industrial property units, as derived from Code 1965, §§ 19-25, 19-34 and 19-35.  
Sec. 8-10. - Unsafe, etc., structures. 
(Ord. No. 1853, 5-1-89; Ord. No. 2130, 5-12-92) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Secs. 8-11—8-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - VIRGINIA UNIFORM STATEWIDE BUILDING CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-26. - Adopted. 
The Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as amended, including all future amendments thereto and editions thereof, and all model building codes and portions of other model codes or standards which are, or may hereinafter be, referenced, adopted or incorporated therein, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into the Code of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(Code 1965, § 8-1; Ord. No. 1099, 10-13-80; Ord. No. 1641, 10-27-86)  
Sec. 8-27. - Violations—Provisions governing prosecutions; notice; etc. 
The provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall govern the prosecution of violations of such code; provided, that the building code administrator or any inspector assigned to the division of permits and inspections shall have the authority to serve a written notice of violation and to order the abatement of such violation; and provided further, that the building code administrator may request the city attorney to institute appropriate legal proceedings in cases of violations of the provisions of such code. The building code administrator and any such inspector are hereby granted the authority to issue a summons to the general district court to any person who fails to obey a lawful order contained in such notice of violation. 
(Code 1965, § 8-3; Ord. No. 1642, 10-27-86; Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93; Ord. No. 2399, 6-25-96; Ord. No 2470, 2-10-98)  
Sec. 8-28. - Same—Penalty. 
(Code 1965, § 8-3; Ord. No. 1643, 10-27-86) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93. 
State Law reference— Penalty for violation of Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-106.  
Sec. 8-29. - Fire districts. 
(Code 1965, § 8-6) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Sec. 8-30. - Requirements for drawings, specifications, etc., submitted with permit application. 
(Code 1965, § 8-8; Ord. No. 1026, 2-25-80; Ord. No. 1100, 10-13-80) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Sec. 8-31. - Permit fees—Building permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, enlarge, alter, repair or demolish any building or structure as defined in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code without first obtaining a building permit therefor and paying the permit fees set forth in this section. 
(b)  The minimum fee for any building permit shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). There shall be a fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the modification of an existing permit. 
(c)  For the construction of any building or addition thereto where the floor area is increased and for the installation or erection of any industrialized building unit, the fee shall be based on the floor area to be constructed, as computed from exterior building dimensions at each floor, as follows: 
(1)  Residential—living area—Thirty dollars ($30.00) plus seven dollars ($7.00) for each one hundred (100) square feet or fraction thereof. 
(2)  Residential—nonheated building area (residential accessory buildings and structures)—Thirty dollars ($30.00) plus four dollars ($4.00) for each one hundred (100) square feet or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Businesses/mercantile—building area—Thirty dollars ($30.00) plus eight dollars ($8.00) for each one hundred (100) square feet or fraction thereof. 
(4)  Institutional—building area—Thirty dollars ($30.00) plus eight dollars ($8.00) for each one hundred (100) square feet or fraction thereof. 
(5)  Assembly, churches, and government buildings—building area—Thirty dollars ($30.00) plus eight dollars ($8.00) for each one hundred (100) square feet or fraction thereof. 
(6)  Storage—building area—Thirty dollars ($30.00) plus four dollars ($4.00) for each one hundred (100) square feet or fraction thereof. 
(7)  Hazardous storage or occupancy—building area—Thirty dollars ($30.00) plus eight dollars ($8.00) for each one hundred (100) square feet or fraction thereof. 
(8)  Industrial—building area—Thirty dollars ($30.00) plus eight dollars ($8.00) for each one hundred (100) square feet or fraction thereof. 
(9)  Farm buildings—building area—Thirty dollars ($30.00) plus three dollars ($3.00) for each one hundred (100) square feet or fraction thereof. Farm buildings and structures shall be subject to the requirements of this section; provided, however, that farm buildings and structures not used for residential purposes shall not be subject to the technical requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(10)  Alterations, repairs, private piers, bulkheads, pools, elevators, commercial interior finish, miscellaneous structures and structures located in a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area or a Southern Rivers Watershed Area for which a permit fee is not otherwise prescribed by this section, including, but not limited to, patios and driveways—value of construction—Thirty dollars ($30.00) plus five dollars ($5.00) for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of value of construction or fraction thereof. 
(11)  Moving of buildings or structures: For the moving of any building or structure into, out of, through or within the city, the fee shall be calculated in accordance with subsection (c)(1). 
(12)  Demolitions: For the demolition of any building or structure, the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(13)  Signs: 
a.  Fees for the erection, painting, placing, replacing, repairing, hanging or rehanging of signs shall be based on the total surface area of all sign faces, and shall be as follows: 
1.  Single-face signs: 
4—32 square feet .....$46.00 
33—75 square feet .....69.00 
76—150 square feet .....115.00 
2.  Double-face signs: 
4—32 square feet .....$92.00 
33—75 square feet .....115.00 
76—150 square feet .....138.00 
b.  The fee for a permit for the repair of a billboard shall be in accordance with subsection (c)(10). 
c.  Fees for the erection, painting, placing, replacing, repairing, hanging or rehanging of temporary signs shall be in an amount equal to one-half of the fee chargeable for permanent signs of like size. 
(14)  Administrative fee: If any construction, alteration, repair, or other work requiring a permit under this article is commenced before a permit is secured and fee paid for same, an administrative fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be added to the fee due. Payment of such administrative fee shall not in any way relieve the violator of any criminal prosecution. 
(14.1)  There shall be a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the waiver of formal site plan review. 
(14.2)  There shall be a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for an Asbestos Removal Permit. 
(14.3)  There shall be a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a code verification letter. 
(15)  Tents: Tents and other temporary structures permit fee shall be Thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(16)  Reinspection fee: There shall be a minimum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) additional fee charged for each reinspection. 
(16.1)  DFU pre-inspection fee: There shall be a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee for pre-inspections for DFU disconnections. 
(17)  Appeal: The fee for submitting an appeal to the board of building code appeals shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Such fee shall be paid by the appellant. 
(17.1)  There shall be a review fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) for review of special uses or occupancy. 
(18)  Change of use/certificate of occupancy for existing structure(s): 
a.  The minimum fee for the inspection of any new construction or existing structure requested by the permit holder shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each inspection. 
b.  The minimum fee associated with a change of use or request for a certificate of occupancy for an existing structure or structures on the same property shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(19)  Application for septic tank soil evaluation: The fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) paid at the time of application. If the application is approved, the septic tank permit shall be issued with no additional fee. 
(20)  There shall also be a review fee in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for review of commercial plans. There shall be a review fee for a minor commercial plan of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(20.1)  There shall be a review fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for review of commercial plans at the counter. 
(20.2)  There shall be a review fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for review of any revision of a commercial plan. 
(21)  There shall also be a review fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for review of residential plans. 
(21.1)  There shall be a review fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for review of residential plans at the counter. 
(21.2)  There shall be a review fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for any revision to a residential plan. 
(22)  There shall also be a review fee in the amount of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for review of fire plans. 
(Code 1965, § 8-9; Ord. No. 1313, 8-2-82; Ord. No. 1443, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1864, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 2048, 4-2-91; Ord. No. 2318, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2528, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2755, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 2806, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 2877, 5-10-05; Ord. No. 3284, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3372, 9-16-14; Ord. No. 3410, § 1, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15; Ord. No. 3542, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18)  
Sec. 8-31.1. - Fences and walls. 
(a)  A permit shall be required for the construction, reconstruction, replacement or relocation of any fence or wall located within thirty (30) feet of a public right-of-way, except fences or walls used principally for agricultural or horticultural purposes in an AG Agricultural Zoning District. Any such fence or wall located upon more than one (1) lot shall require a separate permit for each such lot, except lots under common ownership. 
(b)  The fee for permits required by this section shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(Ord. No. 2046, 4-2-91; Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93; Ord. No. 2877, 5-10-05)  
Sec. 8-32. - Same—Plumbing permits. 
(a)  The fee for a permit for plumbing work, as required by the building code, shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) and, in addition thereto, the following: 
(1)  Each plumbing fixture, floor drain or tap: Six dollars ($6.00). 
(2)  Each house sewer connection: Thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(3)  Each house water connection: Thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(4)  On-site sanitary sewer collector lines: one building—thirty dollars ($30.00), two (2) or more buildings—fifty dollars ($50.00) for each building. 
(5)  On-site potable water distribution lines: one building—thirty dollars ($30.00), two (2) or more buildings—fifty dollars ($50.00) for each building. 
(6)  Public utilities ultra low flush toilet program: thirty dollars ($30.00) for the first three (3) toilets plus five dollars ($5.00) for each toilet over three (3). 
(b)  The fees prescribed in this section shall be in addition to the sewer and water connection fees and charges provided for in chapters 28 and 37 of this Code. 
(c)  On any plumbing work commended before a plumbing permit has been issued and the requisite fee paid therefore, an administrative fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per unit shall be added to the fee due. Payment of such administrative fee shall not in any way relieve the violator from such penalties as may be imposed by the courts. 
(Code 1965, § 8-15; Ord. No. 939, 4-23-79; Ord. No. 1313, 8-2-82; Ord. No. 1868, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 1884, 6-19-89; Ord. No. 2318, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2528, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2753, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 2806, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 2877, 5-10-05; Ord. No. 3410, § 1, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15)  
Sec. 8-33. - Same—Mechanical, life safety, elevator and gas permits. 
(a)  The minimum fee for the installation or replacement of mechanical/life safety systems or equipment shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) plus five dollars ($5.00) for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of value or fraction thereof. 
(b)  The minimum fee for the installation of gas outlets for a gas piping system shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) plus four dollars ($4.00) for each outlet. 
(c)  The minimum fee for the relocation of a gas meter shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(d)  For annual inspections of elevators and escalators, the fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  Annual safety test and inspection: 
a.  Tractor/cable elevator—$100.00. 
b.  Hydraulic elevator—$100.00. 
c.  Freight elevators—$100.00. 
d.  Escalator—$100.00. 
(2)  Five-year full rate load safety test and inspection: 
a.  Tractor/cable elevators—$300.00. 
(e)  On any mechanical, life safety, elevator or gas work commenced before a mechanical permit has been issued and the requisite fee paid therefore, an administrative fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per unit shall be added to the fee due. Payment of such administrative fee shall not in any way relieve the violator from such penalties as may be imposed by the courts. 
(Code 1965, §§ 8-10, 8-15; Ord. No. 939, 4-23-79; Ord. No. 1207, 7-13-81; Ord. No. 1868, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 2318, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2528, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2752, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 2877, 5-10-05; Ord. No. 3283, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3410, § 1, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15)  
Sec. 8-34. - Same—Electrical permits. 
(a)  The fee for a permit for electrical work, as required by the building code, shall be as specified in this section. 
(b)  There shall be charged a minimum fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) for each permit issued. 
(c)  For a permit issued for a temporary service, such as a trailer, house meter or meter loop added to an existing service, the fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(d)  For a permit for any special condition, such as and including temporary electrical release for construction purposes, buildings moved, swimming pools, carnivals, services relocated but not increased and the like, the fee shall be a minimum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). The fee for a permit for prefabricated buildings for out-of-city use shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(e)  For a permit issued for original construction, the following fees include all equipment outlets only if specifically listed on the application and installed by the permit holder before the final inspection, such fees being based on the maximum current carrying capacity of each set or subset of service conductors installed, to the nearest fifty (50) amperes: 
(1)  Single-phase: Thirty dollars ($30.00) plus twenty dollars ($20.00) for each additional fifty (50) amperes. 
(2)  Three-phase: Eighty dollars ($80.00) plus twenty dollars ($20.00) for each additional fifty (50) amperes. 
When services are increased or phases added, the fee shall be one-half the rate above, plus the added equipment fee. For fee purposes, the service-panel nameplate amperage rating shall be used. 
(f)  For each piece of equipment connected and for each circuit or feeder installed, extended, relocated or repaired, the fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) plus five dollars ($5.00) per circuit. 
(g)  On any electrical work commenced before an electrical permit has been issued and the requisite fee paid therefore, an administrative fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per unit shall be added to the fee due. Payment of such administrative fee shall not in any way relieve the violator from such penalties as may be imposed by the courts. 
(Code 1965, § 8-22; Ord. No. 939, 4-23-79; Ord. No. 1207, 7-13-81; Ord. No. 1868, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 2318, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2528, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2754, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 2877, 5-10-05; Ord. No. 3410, § 1, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15; Ord. No. 3499, 4-18-17)  
Sec. 8-35. - Exemptions from permit requirements—Ordinary repairs. 
(Code 1965, § 8-5) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Sec. 8-36. - Same—Minor construction. 
(Code 1965, § 8-5) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Sec. 8-37. - Technology fee. 
In addition to any fees otherwise required by this chapter, there shall be a fee in the amount of five dollars ($5.00) for permits issued pursuant to sections 8-31, 8-31.1, 8-32, 8-33, 8-34. Such fee shall be for the following purposes: 
(a)  To improve community access to general information about cases, applications, permits and inspections by providing online, user-friendly search and viewing tools; 
(b)  To facilitate communications with property owners, consultants and contractors through use of on-line checklist and activity tracking that automatically emails notifications and updates regarding permit status and other information not previously available on-line; 
(c)  To increase transparency and accountability in business operations by providing users the ability to track all transactions online; 
(d)  To enhance performance and revenue reporting by providing the ability to produce ad hoc reports on demand; and 
(e)  To improve and expand electronic document storage, management and retrieval by including scanned images as part of the on-line permit record. 
(Ord. No. 3231, 5-8-12, eff. 7-1-12)  
Sec. 8-38. - Waiver of permit fees. 
The City Manager or the building code official may waive the permit fees listed in sections 8-31 (Building), 8-31.1 (Fences and walls), 8-32 (Plumbing), 8-33 (Mechanical), 8-34 (Electrical), and 8-37 (Technology Fee) for any permit issued for repairs to an existing residential or commercial structure caused by a storm for which a declaration of local emergency has been issued, provided that the repairs are necessary to render the building or portion thereof habitable and the permit application is submitted within one hundred eighty (180) days of the declaration of local emergency. 
(Ord. No. 3465, 10-18-16; Ord. No. 3474, 12-6-16)  
Secs. 8-39—8-48. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 8-49. - Inspections under building code generally. 
(Code 1965, § 8-2) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Sec. 8-50. - Plumbing inspections. 
(Code 1965, § 8-2) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Sec. 8-51. - Electrical inspections—Generally. 
(Code 1965, § 8-2) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Sec. 8-52. - Same—Certificate of inspection. 
(a)  The certificate of inspection required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall be issued by the building code administrator or his or her authorized representative. One (1) copy of such certificate shall be furnished to the permit holder and one (1) copy shall be furnished to the Virginia Power Company. 
(b)  Whenever the building code administrator shall grant permission for the temporary use of electric power under the provisions of the building code, the temporary certificate of inspection shall be furnished to the owner of the premises concerned and shall contain a specific condition and order that such temporary use shall not permit any occupancy whatsoever of any building or structure covered by such temporary certificate. Notice of the issuance of such temporary certificate shall be given to the Virginia Power Company. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or permit to be connected any electrical wiring or equipment to any source of electric current or supply before receiving a written certificate from the building code administrator. 
(Code 1965, §§ 8-2, 8-21; Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93; Ord. No 2470, 2-10-98)  
Sec. 8-53. - Mechanical inspections—Generally. 
(Code 1965, § 8-2) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Sec. 8-54. - Same—Certificate of inspection for gas piping. 
The division of permits and inspections shall issue a certificate of inspection after a final inspection has determined that all gas piping on any premises has been found to be in compliance with the building code. One (1) copy of such certificate shall be furnished to the permit holder, and one (1) copy shall be furnished to the Virginia Natural Gas Company. 
(Code 1965, § 8-2; Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93)  
Sec. 8-55. - Same—Notification or request for inspection. 
(Code 1965, § 8-2) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Sec. 8-56. - Same—Service charge for additional inspections due to faulty work, premature inspection requests, etc. 
Whenever an inspector for the division of permits and inspections shall determine that inspections, in addition to those required in this division, are necessary owing to the failure of a contractor or other person to properly correct faulty work, or where a contractor or other person has requested an inspection before the work to be inspected has been completed to the degree required, or where the inspector cannot obtain reasonable access to the work to be inspected, he may assess a service charge of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each additional inspection visit. Such charge shall be chargeable to the holder of the permit covering such work and shall be paid to the city at the division of permits and inspections prior to final approval of such work. 
(Code 1965, § 8-2; Ord. No. 939, 4-23-79; Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93; Ord. No. 2528, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 3499, 4-18-17)  
Sec. 8-57. - Inspections in addition to those required by division. 
(Code 1965, § 8-2) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Secs. 8-58—8-68. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARD OF BUILDING CODE APPEALS 
 
Sec. 8-69. - Established. 
(a)  There is hereby established a board of building code appeals as provided for in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(b)  The board of building code appeals shall be a singular body of citizens selected by city council on the basis of their ability to render fair and competent decisions regarding the application of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, and shall to the extent possible, represent different occupations or professional fields relating to the construction industry. 
(Code 1965, § 8-7; Ord. No. 1644, 10-27-86; Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93; Ord. No 2470, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3614, § 1, 3-3-20) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create boards, § 3.05(b).  
Sec. 8-70. - Membership positions; terms; qualifications. 
(a)  The board of building code appeals shall consist of seven (7) members and up to three (3) alternates, who shall be appointed by city council. 
(b)  The term of office of members of the board shall be five (5) years. Members may, subject to the provisions of section 2-3 of this Code, be reappointed. 
(c)  Membership shall consist of: 
(1)  A registered design professional who is an architect; 
(2)  A registered design professional with structural engineering or architectural experience; 
(3)  An individual with mechanical or plumbing engineering experience; or a mechanical or plumbing contractor with at least ten (10) years' experience; 
(4)  An individual with electrical engineering experience; or an electrical contractor with at least ten (10) years' experience; 
(5)  A residential property manager having experience of at least five (5) years; 
(6)  Two (2) individuals having experience of at least five (5) years with an occupational or professional field related to the construction industry; 
(7)  Up to three (3) alternates having experience of at least five (5) years with an occupational or professional field related to the construction industry. 
(Code 1965, § 8-7; Ord. No. 1645, 10-27-86; Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93; Ord. No 2470, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3570, 10-16-18; Ord. No. 3614, § 1, 3-3-20) 
Cross reference— Limitation on terms of members of boards and commissions and application for appointment of such members, § 2-3.  
Sec. 8-71. - Removal of members. 
The continued or frequent absence of any member from meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the city council, render such member liable to removal from office upon resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 8-7; Ord. No. 1646, 10-27-86)  
Sec. 8-72. - Officers. 
The board shall elect from its membership a chairperson. The building code administrator shall select one (1) or more employees from the department of planning to serve as secretary of the board. The board shall conduct an organizational meeting each January, at which time it shall elect its chairperson. Additional meetings shall occur each April and September and at such other times as may be necessary to receive training and timely hear appeals. The secretary shall maintain a detailed record of all proceedings. 
(Code 1965, § 8-7; Ord. No. 1647, 10-27-86; Ord. No. 2147, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93; Ord. No. 2399, 6-25-96; Ord. No 2470, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3614, § 1, 3-3-20)  
Sec. 8-73. - Appeals, rules of procedure; meetings generally. 
Appeals to the board of building code appeals and rules governing the holding and conduct of meetings of the divisions of the board shall be in accordance with the provisions therefor set forth in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1965, § 8-7; Ord. No. 1647, 10-27-86; Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93; Ord. No 2470, 2-10-98)  
Sec. 8-74. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1649, adopted Oct. 27, 1986, repealed § 8-74 in its entirety. Prior to repeal, said section pertained to quorum requirements for the board of appeals and was derived from Code 1965, § 8-7.  
Sec. 8-75. - Appeals generally. 
(Code 1965, § 8-7; Ord. No. 1648, 10-27-86) 
Note— Repealed by Ord. No. 2247, 10-12-93.  
Secs. 8-76, 8-77. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1649, adopted Oct. 27, 1986, repealed §§ 8-76 and 8-77 in their entirety. Prior to repeal, said sections pertained to grant of variances and modifications, and decisions of the board of appeals, and were derived from Code 1965, § 8-7.  
Secs. 8-78—8-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - VIRGINIA BEACH HISTORICAL REGISTER 
 
Sec. 8-91. - Establishment; standards and procedures for inclusion. 
(a)  There is hereby established the Virginia Beach Historical Register (the "register") of buildings, other structures and sites located within the city. The register shall be maintained by the department of planning. 
(b)  Inclusion on the register shall be voluntary and shall impose no mandatory requirements upon the property or the owners thereof. The removal of a property from the register shall be granted upon request of the owner of such property. 
(c)  Applications for inclusion on the register shall be made to the director of planning or his designee, who shall review the information provided in such applications and shall report thereon to the historic preservation commission; provided, however, that buildings, other structures and sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places or on the Virginia Landmarks Register shall be included on the register upon request of the owner without referral to the historic preservation commission. 
(d)  The historic preservation commission shall approve or deny applications within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of submittal, and shall base its decision upon the following standards: 
(1)  The property's association with significant events in the history and development of the city; 
(2)  The property's association with persons who have made important contributions to the history of the city; 
(3)  The extent to which the property embodies principal or distinctive features of an architectural style that represents a specific period in the history of the city; 
(4)  Whether the property has yielded or is likely to yield artifacts and other materials important to understanding the city's historical background and context; and 
(5)  The age of the property, which shall, absent exceptional historic value, be no less than fifty (50) years. 
(e)  The director shall review each property on the register every ten (10) years and shall determine whether such property continues to meet the standards for inclusion on the register. In the event a property no longer, in the opinion of the director, meets such standards, the director shall refer the property to the historic preservation commission, which shall review the recommendation of the director and shall either continue or remove the property from the register. 
(Ord. No. 2565, 11-23-99; Ord. No. 3420, 6-16-15)  
Secs. 8-92—8-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2471, adopted Feb. 10, 1998, deleted the substantive provisions of Art. V, which pertained to the Virginia Tradesmen Certification Standards, and which derived from Ord. No. 2247, adopted Oct. 12, 1993. 
 
Secs. 8-111—8-130. - Reserved.  
Chapter 9 - CREATIVE DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to attract creative industries to the City, to encourage creative activities at existing venues, to attract new establishments at which creative activities are carried on, and to establish a framework for broadening economic development through creative endeavors. It is the intention of the City Council to encourage the growth of creative activities and organizations by facilitating and incentivizing the establishment and growth of businesses principally engaged in fields such as art, architecture, graphic design, fashion, film and other media, software, music, publishing, performing arts, culinary arts, advertising, sustainability and other fields in which creativity and originality are essential elements of the business. 
(Ord. No. 3402, 4-21-15)  
Sec. 9-2. - Establishment of districts; boundaries. 
There are hereby established the following Creative Districts within the City: 
(a)  The ViBe Creative District, which shall consist of all property designated on the map entitled "ViBe Creative District," dated April 21, 2105, which map is on file in the Cultural Affairs Office and Department of Planning. Such district is hereby declared an arts and cultural district and technology zone. 
(Ord. No. 3402, 4-21-15)  
Sec. 9-3. - Definitions. 
(a)  Administrator means the City Manager or such other person as he may designate to perform the duties of the Administrator under this chapter. The City Manager may designate such other persons to assist in the administration of this Article as he may deem appropriate. 
(b)  Creative market means an event or series of events held on private property in a Creative District and meeting the requirements set forth in Section 9-10. 
(c)  Creative merchant means a peddler or merchant that sells his or her wares or goods at one or more of the creative markets in a Creative District. 
(d)  Locally sourced shall be limited to produce that is grown, or meat, seafood or other animal products derived from poultry or livestock, raised within the Commonwealth of Virginia or within one hundred (100) miles of the location at which they are sold. 
(e)  Qualifying organization means: 
(1)  An individual, business or other entity that contributes to the spectrum of arts and cultural activities and venues available to the public by regularly presenting live performances of theatre, dance, music, or other imaginative work or producing or exhibiting physical works created by, or under the direction of one or more artists, that are intended for unique production or limited reproduction; 
(2)  A museum or historic site, the primary mission of which is education or historic preservation; 
(3)  A theater, including an art-house movie theater for art, independent and world films, art gallery, dance studio, music venue, performance space, art school or academy, including a culinary arts school or academy; or 
(4)  An individual, business or other entity that is principally engaged in one of more of the following fields or activities: 
A.  Architecture; 
B.  Marketing and advertising; 
C.  Culinary arts, including, but not limited to, artisans engaged in bread making, cheese making, charcuterie, confectionary, coffee roasting or similar practices, culinary institutes, and restaurants that (i) locally source no less than ten per cent (10%) of the food served at the establishment; (ii) are not one of a chain of restaurants having more than ten (10) establishments; and (iii) prepare food by hand or using traditional, non-industrialized methods. For purposes of this section, "locally" shall mean within the Commonwealth of Virginia or no farther than fifty (50) miles from the location of the subject establishment; 
D.  Design. including industrial, interior, graphic, web and fashion design; 
E.  Film and media, including radio, video animation and photography; 
F.  Publishing; 
G.  Software development; 
H.  Research and development of technology related to: (i) energy efficiency and renewable energy; (ii) water use efficiency; (iii) the reduction of waste, pollution and environment degradation; (iv) sustainable development; or (v) green building; 
I.  Historic preservation; 
J.  Craft breweries, craft distilleries or wine-tasting rooms; 
K.  Farmers' markets at which locally-sourced produce, meat and eggs, seafood, artisan breads and cheeses, hand-harvested honey, and other fresh, small-batch foodstuffs are the predominant items that are offered for sale; or 
L.  Antique markets at which the display of antiques covers at least fifty per cent (50%) of the display floor area. For purposes of this section, antiques shall include only works of art, furniture, decorative objects or similar items having special value by virtue of their age and uniqueness. 
A qualifying organization shall be physically located within a Creative District designated by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 3402, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3522, 12-5-17)  
Sec. 9-4. - Administration; eligibility. 
(a)  Upon application, the Administrator shall determine, in writing, whether the applicant shall be classified as a qualifying organization as defined in Section 9-3. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Administrator that it meets the requirements to be so classified. The determination of the Administrator that an applicant shall not be classified as a qualifying organization shall be appealable to the City Manager. No applicant shall be classified as a qualifying organization if the Commissioner of the Revenue determines that such applicant is delinquent in the payment of any taxes or fees payable to the City. 
(b)  A qualifying organization shall establish its eligibility to receive the incentives provided for in this chapter on an annual basis; provided, however, that in the event the Administrator has reason to believe that a qualified organization no longer meets the applicable requirements, such organization shall, upon request of the Administrator, provide such information as will enable the Administrator to determine whether the organization continues to meet the applicable requirements. 
(c)  A qualifying organization shall file an annual business license application with the Commissioner of the Revenue, pay any applicable business license taxes, and shall provide the Commissioner with certification from the Administrator that the organization meets the requirements for classification as a qualifying organization. The amount of gross receipts to be earned shall be set out in the license application and shall be subject to verification by the Commissioner by audit or inspection of documents. The qualifying organization shall also provide the Commissioner, upon request, with proof that no taxes or fees payable to the City are delinquent at the time of application. In the event any such taxes or fees are delinquent, the Commissioner shall so notify the Administrator, who shall decline to certify the applicant as a qualifying organization. 
(d)  A sponsor of a creative market shall file an application to the Administrator providing such information as will enable the Administrator to determine that the creative market meets the requirements of section 9-10. For the activity that is the creative market, the sponsor shall pay an annual business license tax of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to the commissioner of the revenue, and such license shall permit the sponsor to host up to twelve creative markets in a calendar year. It shall be the obligation of the sponsor to provide a list of the creative merchants for each creative market at least ten (10) days prior to each event to the commissioner of the revenue. Alternatively, the sponsor may affirm a previously provided list of creative merchants if that list has not changed. The commissioner of the revenue may use such list to confirm the status of a creative merchant for purposes of meals taxes, admissions taxes, or other health or regulatory concern. 
(e)  A creative merchant may sell his or her wares at the various creative markets of a Creative District without the need to acquire a peddler or itinerant merchant business license. However, any peddling or other business activities outside of a Creative District shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 18 of the City Code. 
(f)  Failure of a qualifying organization to pay in full by the due date any taxes or fees payable to the City shall result in the denial or revocation of such organization's qualifying status for the remainder of the current calendar year or until such taxes or fees are paid in full. 
(g)  The Administrator shall, after consultation with the Commissioner of Revenue, Real Estate Assessor or other appropriate officer, prescribe additional procedures for the implementation and administration of this chapter not provided for herein, to the extent such procedures are not inconsistent with this chapter or applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 3402, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3522, 12-5-17)  
Sec. 9-5. - Qualification. 
Upon determination by the Administrator that an applicant is a qualifying organization, such organization shall be qualified to receive the incentives provided for in this chapter; provided, however, that a qualifying organization to which a business license was issued prior to the effective date of the establishment of the Creative District in which it was located at the time of the issuance of such license shall not be eligible for the incentives set forth in Section 9-6 or 9-7. All such incentives shall be subject to annual appropriation by the City Council. If an organization ceases to be a qualifying organization during a year in which reimbursements, payments or exemptions apply, they shall be prorated for the months such organization was a qualifying organization. 
(Ord. No. 3402, 4-21-15)  
Sec. 9-6. - Reimbursements of business, professional and occupational license taxes. 
(a)  Qualifying organizations shall be entitled to a reimbursement of business, professional and occupational license taxes imposed by Chapter 18 for a period of ten (10) years immediately following the Administrator's determination pursuant to Section 9-4 or until such organization no longer qualifies for such reduction, whichever is the first to occur; provided, however, that in the event the Administrator's initial determination occurs with less than six (6) months remaining in the calendar year, a qualifying organization may elect to designate the following calendar year as the first year for purposes of obtaining the reimbursement; and provided further, that any qualifying organization eligible for the flat business license tax pursuant to section 18-207 may elect to defer receiving reimbursement as provided in this section until the first business license year after the expiration of its entitlement as provided in section 18-207. 
(b)  All business license tax reimbursements are subject to adjustment by the Commissioner of the Revenue based on actual gross receipts earned from qualifying activities. Any additional business license tax assessed due to such adjustments, or due to revocation of the tax rebate, shall be subject to collection and delinquency provisions set out in Chapter 18 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 3402, 4-21-15)  
Sec. 9-7. - Reimbursement of building code, zoning, etc. fees; eligibility for economic development incentive program awards and investment partnerships. 
(a)  The fee reimbursements provided for in subsections (b) through (d) shall apply to qualifying organizations for new construction, alterations and rehabilitation, provided that: (i) no less than one hundred per cent (100%) of the total cost of the construction is expended on facilities which will house or directly accommodate a qualifying organization; (ii) that the qualifying organization itself paid the fees for which reimbursement is sought; and (iii) the completed application for reimbursement, together with all other required materials, is submitted to the Administrator within the times set forth below. Fees reimbursed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid out by the City. 
(b)  Building code fees. Applications for reimbursement of permit and inspection fees under Chapter 8, Article 2 of the City Code shall be accompanied by material demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Administrator that the proposed construction meets the reimbursement criteria set forth in subsection (a). Such applications shall be submitted by no later than twelve (12) months after final inspection of the work performed. All building code fees shall be paid by the qualifying organization prior to receiving such reimbursement. 
(c)  Zoning ordinance fees. Applications for reimbursement of fees for applications for discretionary development approvals shall be submitted by no later than twelve (12) months after the date of the approval. All such fees shall be paid by the qualifying organization prior to receiving reimbursement. For purposes of this section, the term "discretionary development approvals" shall include changes of zoning district classification, conditional use permits, special exceptions granted by the City Council under the Alternative Compliance provisions of the zoning district in which the qualifying organization is located, and approvals of PD-H1 or PD-H2 land use plans. 
(d)  Subdivision and site plan fees. Applications for reimbursement of fees for subdivision and site plan review pursuant to the City's Subdivision Regulations (City Code Appendix B) or Site Plan Ordinance (City Code Appendix C) shall be submitted by no later than twelve (12) months after the date of approval of the preliminary or final subdivisions plat or site plan, as the case may be. All such fees shall be paid by the qualifying organization prior to receiving such reimbursement. 
(e)  Stormwater management review fees. Applications for reimbursement of fees incurred pursuant to the Stormwater Management Ordinance (City Code Appendix D) shall be submitted by no later than twelve (12) months after the date such fees are incurred. All such fees shall be paid by the qualifying organization prior to receiving such reimbursement. Stormwater management utility fees imposed pursuant to Chapter 32.5 of the City Code shall not be reimbursed pursuant to this section. 
(f)  Economic Development Incentive Program; investment partnerships. Qualifying organizations shall be eligible for awards pursuant to the Economic Development Incentive Program in accordance with the provisions of the Economic Development Investment Program Policy and Procedure. Qualifying organizations located within a Strategic Growth Area or Special Economic Growth Area shall also be eligible to participate in investment partnerships with the City or Virginia Beach Development Authority in accordance with the provisions of the Guidelines for Evaluation of Investment Partnerships for Economic Development, adopted by the City Council on January 14, 2014, and any future amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 3402, 4-21-15)  
Sec. 9-8. - Partial tax exemption for rehabilitated structures. 
(a)  Eligibility for exemption. To be eligible for the partial exemption from real estate provided by this section, a building or structure shall be no less than twenty (20) years of age at the time the application is made. Any such exemption shall only apply to buildings or structures that have been substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced for commercial or industrial use by a qualifying organization after the effective date of this section. The exemption shall apply only for such period as at least fifty per cent (50%) of the total floor area of the rehabilitated structure is occupied by a qualifying organization, as defined in Section 9-3. For purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Rehabilitation" shall mean the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient use of the property; and 
(2)  "Qualifying costs" shall include the costs of all work done to the structural components, heating, plumbing and electrical systems of the building, work done to update kitchens and bathrooms, work necessary for compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act, the installation of fire suppression systems and fire escapes, reasonable architectural and engineering fees, construction period interest, site work, landscaping elements and construction management costs, but shall not include acquisition costs. 
(b)  Application for exemption; base value. To qualify for a partial tax exemption pursuant to this section, the owner of such structure shall, at the same time an application is made for a building permit to rehabilitate such structure, file with the Administrator an application and construction plans. Among the other information supplied, the applicant shall estimate on the application form the qualifying costs of the rehabilitation project. Such application shall be filed prior to the commencement of any rehabilitation work for which an exemption is sought. No structure shall be eligible for such exemption unless all required building permit(s) have been issued. 
(c)  Review of application and plans. The Administrator shall review all applications, plans and other information submitted that relate to a rehabilitation project for which the exemption provided by this section is sought. If, after reviewing the application and plans for a proposed rehabilitation project, the Administrator determines in writing that the proposed project is eligible for the partial tax exemption provided for in this section, he shall notify the applicant that the project has been approved for the exemption, subject to compliance with the provisions of this section. The Administrator, on behalf of the City, and the owner of the structure shall thereafter enter into an agreement setting forth the terms and conditions pursuant to which the exemption provided for in this section is granted. 
(d)  Exemption for rehabilitated structures. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of the City Code, the exemption for rehabilitated structures shall be calculated and applied as set forth below: 
(1)  The assessment of the structure for the current tax year, prior to commencement of the rehabilitation, shall constitute the base value of the structure. The exemption shall be in an amount equal to the greater of the initial increase in assessed value of the structure above its base value resulting from the rehabilitation of the structure, as determined by the real estate assessor, or an amount equal to fifty (50) per cent of the qualifying costs of rehabilitating the structure; provided, however, that the amount of the exemption provided by this subsection shall not exceed the amount of the assessment of the structure at any time after its rehabilitation. 
(2)  The exemption shall run with the land for ten (10) years; provided, however, that if the Administrator determines that the criteria for the eligibility for the exemption no longer applies, the exemption shall cease as of the current tax year. The owner of the structure shall, upon request of the Administrator, furnish to the Administrator such information as is reasonably necessary for the Administrator to determine whether the rehabilitated property continues to meet the eligibility requirements of this section; provided, however, that the Administrator may consider all relevant information available to him in making such determination. 
(3)  No increase in assessment occurring after the first year of such rehabilitation exemption shall qualify for an increase in such exemption. In the event of a decrease in the property's assessed value after the first year of any rehabilitation exemption, the exemption shall be based on the difference in taxes computed on the base value and the decreased assessed value of the property. The applicant shall submit to the real estate assessor documentation of all qualifying costs incurred as a basis for the exemption, and shall execute an affidavit stating that all such costs were incurred as part of the project. 
(4)  By August 15 of each year for the duration of the exemption, the real estate assessor shall notify the city treasurer of the exemption and the amount to be credited to the property owner's tax bill. 
(Ord. No. 3402, 4-21-15)  
Sec. 9-9. - Live-work units. 
(a)  Live-work units shall be allowed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the City Zoning Ordinance and Oceanfront Resort District Form-Based Code. 
(Ord. No. 3402, 4-21-15)  
Sec. 9-10. - Creative market. 
(a)  Creative market is an event held on private property in a Creative District to support the goals of the District and those qualifying organizations listed in Section 9-3 of the City Code. 
(b)  Creative markets shall abide by the following criteria: 
(1)  Markets may be located indoor or outdoor on private property and shall not negatively impact the surrounding property owners; 
(2)  The market shall not occupy more than three thousand (3,000) square feet; 
(3)  Markets may be held up to twelve (12) times per year, and may last up to four (4) hours per market; 
(4)  Creative markets shall not be required to obtain a special event permit under Chapter 4 of the City Code; and 
(5)  There shall be no live music performed after 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 3522, 12-5-17)  
Chapter 10 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Election of councilmen, § 3.02:1. 
State Law reference— Elections, Code of Virginia, title 24.1. 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Establishment of precincts and polling places. 
There are hereby established in the city the following precincts and their respective polling places, as set forth below: 
Precinct 	Polling Place 
Alanton 	Alanton Elementary School 
Aragona 	Bayside Sixth Grade Campus 
Arrowhead 	Arrowhead Elementary School 
Avalon 	Woodstock Elementary School 
Baker 	Ebenezer Baptist Church 
Bayside 	Bayside Elementary School 
Bellamy 	Salem Middle School 
Blackwater 	Blackwater Fire Station 
Bonney 	Discovery Church 
Brandon 	Brandon Middle School 
Brookwood 	Brookwood Elementary School 
Buckner 	Green Run Baptist Church 
Cape Henry 	Research and Enlightenment Building (Edgar Cayce Library) 
Capps Shop 	Back Bay Christian Assembly 
Centerville 	Centerville Elementary School 
Chesapeake Beach 	Bayside Baptist Church 
Chimney Hill 	Rosemont Elementary School 
College Park 	College Park Elementary School 
Colonial 	Colonial Baptist Church 
Colony 	Lynnhaven Colony Congregational Church 
Corporate Landing 	Corporate Landing Middle School 
Courthouse 	Kellam High School 
Creeds 	Oak Grove Baptist Church 
Cromwell 	Salem United Methodist Church 
Culver 	Ocean Lakes High School 
Dahlia 	Green Run High School 
Dam Neck 	Corporate Landing Elementary School 
Davis Corner 	Bettie F. Williams Elementary School 
Eastern Shore 	Eastern Shore Chapel 
Edinburgh 	St. Aidan's Episcopal Church 
Edwin 	Kempsville Middle School 
Fairfield 	Kempsville Presbyterian Church 
Foxfire 	Wave Church 
Glenwood 	Glenwood Elementary School 
Great Neck 	All Saints Episcopal Church 
Green Run 	Green Run Elementary School 
Haygood 	Haygood United Methodist Church 
Hillcrest 	New Castle Elementary School 
Hilltop 	Freedom Fellowship Church 
Holland 	Holland Elementary School 
Homestead 	Providence Presbyterian Church 
Hunt 	Princess Anne Recreation Center 
Independence 	Water's Edge Church 
Indian Lakes 	Indian Lakes Elementary School 
Indian River 	San Lorenzo Spiritual Center 
Kings Grant 	St. Nicholas Catholic Church 
Kingston 	King's Grant Presbyterian Church 
Lake Christopher 	New Convenant Presbyterian Church 
Lake Joyce 	Morning Star Baptist Church 
Lake Smith 	Bayside Church of Christ 
Landstown 	Landstown Community Church 
Larkspur 	St. Andrews United Methodist Church 
Lexington 	Larkspur Middle School 
Linkhorn 	Virginia Beach Community Chapel 
Little Neck 	Lynnhaven United Methodist Church 
London Bridge 	London Bridge Baptist Church 
Lynnhaven 	Cape Henry Church 
Magic Hollow 	Virginia Beach Moose Family Center 
Malibu 	Malibu Elementary School 
Manor 	Providence Elementary School 
Mt. Trashmore 	Windsor Woods Elementary School 
Newtown 	Good Samaritan Episcopal Church 
North Beach 	Galilee Episcopal Church 
North Landing 	Hope Haven 
Ocean Lakes 	Ocean Lakes Elementary School 
Ocean Park 	Bayside Community Recreation Center 
Oceana 	The Gathering at Scott Memorial United Methodist Church 
Old Donation 	Calvary Baptist Church 
Pembroke 	Pembroke Elementary School 
Pinewood 	Lynnhaven Presbyterian Church 
Plaza 	Lynnhaven Elementary School 
Pleasant Hall 	Emmanuel Episcopal Church 
Point O'View 	Kempsville Church of Christ 
Red Wing 	Seatack Elementary 
Rock Lake 	Salem Elementary School 
Rosemont Forest 	Rosemont Forest Elementary School 
Roundhill 	Salem High School 
Rudee 	W.T. Cooke Elementary School 
Salem Woods 	Parkway Elementary School 
Sandbridge 	Tabernacle United Methodist Church 
Seatack 	Mount Olive Baptist Church 
Shannon 	Church of the Ascension 
Shelburne 	Christopher Farms Elementary School 
Shell 	Unity Church of Tidewater 
Shelton Park 	Shelton Park Elementary 
Sherry Park 	St. Matthews Catholic Church 
Sigma 	Red Mill Elementary School 
South Beach 	Contemporary Art Center of Virginia 
Stratford Chase 	Community United Methodist Church 
Strawbridge 	Strawbridge Elementary School 
Tallwood 	Tallwood Elementary School 
Thalia 	Thalia Elementary School 
Thoroughgood 	Independence Middle School 
Timberlake 	White Oaks Elementary School 
Trantwood 	Great Neck Baptist Church 
Upton 	Three Oaks Elementary School 
Village 	Thalia Lynn Baptist Church 
Windsor Oaks 	Windsor Oaks Elementary School 
Witchduck 	Bayside Presbyterian Church 
Wolfsnare 	Virginia Beach Christian Life Center 
Central Absentee 
Voter Precinct 	Agriculture/Voter Registrar Building 
 
(Code 1965, § 13-1; Ord. No. 1183, 5-18-81; Ord. No. 1284, 6-7-82; Ord. No. 1455, 6-4-84; Ord. No. 1529, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 1614, 7-7-86; Ord. No. 1741, 10-5-87; Ord. No. 1757, 1-11-88; Ord. No. 1761, 2-1-88; Ord. No. 1764, 3-14-88; Ord. No. 1810, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 1856, 5-1-89; Ord. No. 1878, 5-22-89; Ord. No. 2078, 7-2-91; Ord. No. 2110, 1-14-92; Ord. No. 2114, 3-10-92; Ord. No. 2182, 10-6-92; Ord. No. 2250, 1-4-94; Ord. No. 2266, 6-7-94; Ord. No. 2311, 3-14-95; Ord. No. 2346, 8-8-95; Ord. No. 2352, 10-24-95; Ord. No. 2437, 2-11-97; Ord. No. 2458, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 2488, 5-12-98; Ord. No. 2497, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 2539, 6-8-99; Ord. No. 2561, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 2573, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 2620, 2-27-00; Ord. No. 2630, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 2632, 5-1-01; Ord. No. 2642, 5-22-01; Ord. No. 2681, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 2686, 2-26-02; Ord. No. 2687, 3-12-02; Ord. No. 2780, 7-8-03; Ord. No. 2787, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 2803, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 2862, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 2892, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 2946, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 2970, 2-6-07; Ord. No. 2982, 6-5-07; Ord. No. 3007, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 3068, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 3097, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 3116, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 3190, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 3195, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 3224, 3-13-12; Ord. No. 3255, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 3290, 6-11-13; Ord. No. 3336, 3-25-14; Ord. No. 3380, 10-7-14; Ord. No. 3398, § 1, 3-17-15; Ord. No. 3426, 8-4-15; Ord. No. 3447, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3459, § 1, 8-16-16; Ord. No. 3473, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 3493, 3-21-17; Ord. No. 3537, 3-20-18; Ord. No. 3567, 9-4-18; Ord. No. 3583, 3-5-19; Ord. No. 3606, 1-7-20; Ord. No. 3612, 2-4-20) 
State Law reference— Duty of council to establish election districts and polling places, Code of Virginia, § 24.1-36.  
Sec. 10.1-1. - Satellite absentee voting. 
The general registrar may provide one or more locations in addition to the voter registrar's office wherein absentee voters may vote in person as provided by Code of Virginia § 24.2-707. Such location or locations shall be located within the city and approved by the local electoral board. The general registrar shall provide notice of such satellite absentee voting locations at the office of the voter registrar and at the voter registrar's website. Such notice will include information regarding what time the location is available for in-person absentee voting and other pertinent details. 
(Ord. No. 3380, 10-7-14)  
Sec. 10-2. - Map of precincts. 
(a)  The geographical boundaries of the precincts set forth in section 10-1 are hereby established as delineated on a certain map, revised, 1998, prepared by the public works department of the city and captioned "Election Precincts," which map is hereby approved. 
(b)  The clerk of the council shall endorse on the map referred to in subsection (a) above the date of the council's approval thereof and file the original map, with the minutes of the meeting at which such map was approved, in the records of his office, and shall cause exact copies thereof to be filed with the general registrar of the city, the clerk of the circuit court and the planning department. 
(Code 1965, § 13-2; Ord. No. 1183, 5-18-81; Ord. No. 1284, 6-7-82; Ord. No. 1455, 6-4-84; Ord. No. 1529, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 1614, 7-7-86; Ord. No. 1767, 3-28-88; Ord. No. 2078, 7-2-91; Ord. No. 2182, 10-6-92; Ord. No. 2266, 6-7-94; Ord. No 2476, 3-3-98)  
Chapter 10.5 - EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE AGENCIES AND VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1198, adopted June 8, 1981, amended the Code to add Ch. 39 thereto; in order to preserve alphabetical order of chapter titles, the editor has designated the provisions as Ch. 10.5, §§ 10.5-1—10.5-3. 
Cross reference— Department of emergency medical services, § 2-421 et seq.; license code, Ch. 18; traffic regulations for emergency vehicles, § 21-16; parking near ambulance or rescue squad station entrance, § 21-364(a)(5); calling an ambulance without cause, § 23-8. 
 
Sec. 10.5-1. - Definitions. 
Agency means any person engaged in the business, service or regular activity, whether or not for profit, of transporting persons who are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless, or of rendering immediate medical care to such persons. 
Emergency medical service vehicle means any vehicle, vessel, aircraft or ambulance that holds a valid emergency medical services vehicle permit issued by the Office of Emergency Medical Services that is equipped, maintained or operated to provide emergency medical care or transportation of patients who are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless. 
(Ord. No. 1189, 6-8-81; Ord. No. 2764, 6-3-03)  
Sec. 10.5-2. - Permit required. 
(a)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 32.1-111.14, as amended, it shall be unlawful for any individual or organization to operate an emergency medical services agency, or any emergency medical services vehicle in the city for emergency transport purposes or nonemergency transport purposes, without first being granted a permit to do so by the city council. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) above shall not be applicable to the department of emergency medical services, any volunteer rescue squad formally recognized by such department as a provider of emergency medical services within the city, any government operated emergency medical services agency providing service under the authority of a mutual aid agreement or a memorandum of understanding with the city, any lifeguard service operating on the public beaches of the city pursuant to a contract with the city, or Virginia Beach Emergency Response System agencies, including but not limited to, the Virginia Beach Police Department, the Virginia Beach Fire Department or the Virginia Beach Parks and Recreation Department. 
(c)  All permits issued pursuant to subsection (a) above and in effect on January 1, 1985, shall expire on June 30, 1985. Applications for renewal permits shall be accepted beginning thirty (30) days prior to June 30, 1985. Any permit issued for the first time shall be valid from the date issued until the thirtieth day of June the calendar year after the issuance date. Applications for renewal of such permits shall be accepted beginning thirty (30) days prior to the thirtieth day of June of the year of expiration and, if issued, shall be valid for a period of two years. However, any permit issued under this section may be revoked or suspended at any time by city council for failure of the permit holder, his agents, and/or employees to comply with all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations, policies and procedures. 
(d)  The number of ambulances, prescribed areas of operation, prescribed levels of care rendered, fixed charges and fees for services delivered, required limits of liability insurance coverage and other rules and regulations not inconsistent with the laws of the commonwealth shall be prescribed for under said permit. 
(Ord. No. 1189, 6-8-81; Ord. No. 1471, 7-9-84; Ord. No. 1502, 12-10-84; Ord. No. 1954, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 2406, 7-2-96; Ord. No. 2764, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 3432, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 10.5-3. - Contracts with the city. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to contract with any private permitted agency for transportation to be rendered upon call of the city for transportation of bona fide indigents or persons certified by the department of social services to be public assistance recipients. 
(Ord. No. 1189, 6-8-81)  
Chapter 11 - FARMER'S MARKET[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General duty of department of agriculture to maintain, operate and supervise the farmer's market, § 2-349. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to operate markets, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-880. 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the word "market" shall mean the Virginia Beach Farmer's Market, as established by section 11-2, and the term "domestic products" shall mean food, nursery, crafts and other goods authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1965, § 36-1; Ord. No. 1363, 3-21-83)  
Sec. 11-2. - Compliance with chapter, etc. 
Every person selling or offering farm or domestic products for sale in the market shall observe, comply with and be bound by this chapter and all other provisions of this Code and all other laws, ordinances and resolutions relating to the sale or offering for sale of farm and domestic products, as well as the rules and regulations provided for in section 11-7. 
(Code 1965, § 36-8; Ord. No. 1363, 3-21-83)  
Sec. 11-3. - Violations of chapter. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The superintendent of the market or any police officer may order any person to remove products offered or displayed for sale or intended to be offered or displayed for sale by such person, and any vehicle used in connection therewith, from the market or the vicinity of the market, when such person is found violating the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to section 11-7. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order. 
(Code 1965, § 36-7)  
Sec. 11-4. - Established; name; location. 
There is hereby established a market, to be known and designated as the "Virginia Beach Farmer's Market", to be located on a certain tract of land containing eleven (11) acres, more or less, situate at the intersection of Princess Anne and Landstown Roads. 
(Code 1965, § 36-3)  
Sec. 11-5. - Appointment of superintendent and assistants. 
The director of the department of agriculture shall appoint a superintendent of the market and such assistants as he may deem necessary. The superintendent shall be immediately responsible to the director of the department of agriculture. 
(Code 1965, § 36-9; Ord. No. 1021, 1-21-80)  
Sec. 11-6. - General duties of superintendent. 
The superintendent of the market shall preserve peace and order in the market and shall be charged with the supervision of maintaining the market in a sanitary condition at all times. 
(Code 1965, § 36-10)  
Sec. 11-7. - Rules and regulations governing use. 
The division of markets of the department of agriculture is hereby authorized to adopt rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, governing the use of the market, which rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1965, § 36-3)  
Sec. 11-8. - Tenant's agreement. 
No person shall sell or offer for sale any articles in the market until he has signed an agreement to abide by the market rules and regulations. 
(Code 1965, § 36-4)  
Sec. 11-9. - Rental charges and periods generally. 
(a)  The city manager shall establish and adjust all rental periods as well as all rents, fees and other charges applicable to the farmer's market. The revenues received by the city from those offering or selling farm or domestic products on the farmer's market shall be used to maintain and operate the market. 
(b)  All rent payments, fees and other charges attributable to those offering or selling farm or domestic products on the market shall be collected as rents and paid no later than the end of the rental period. 
(c)  No charges will be made to individuals invited by the market staff to participate in promotional events. 
(d)  Special signs will be provided to market tenants at a rate established by the city manager. 
(Code 1965, § 36-5; Ord. No. 1021, 1-21-80; Ord. No. 1363, 3-21-83)  
Sec. 11-10. - Record and disposition of rents and income; accounting for receipts and expenses. 
The superintendent of the market shall keep a correct record of all rents and income received by him for stalls, spaces or places and shall pay over the same to the city treasurer. He shall give an accounting of all receipts and expenses to the director of finance bimonthly or as the director of finance may deem necessary. 
(Code 1965, § 36-11; Ord. No. 1021, 1-21-80)  
Sec. 11-11. - Maintenance responsibilities of tenants. 
Every tenant of the market shall keep the space, place or stall assigned to him in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and shall dispose of his refuse in a manner and at the place designated by the superintendent of the market. 
(Code 1965, § 36-6)  
Chapter 12 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8; housing code, Ch. 16; parking near fire hydrants, within fire lane, near driveway entrance to fire station or at any place so as to block fire department connections, § 21-356; parking near scene of fire, § 21-369; calling fire-fighting apparatus without cause or malicious activation of fire alarm in public building, § 23-8; use of commercial-type incinerators for burning solid waste, § 31-4; water supply, Ch. 37; use of fire hydrants, § 37-22; use of water for private fire protection systems, § 37-23. 
State Law reference— Fire protection, Code of Virginia, title 27; authority of city to make regulations for purpose of guarding against danger of fire, § 15.1-15. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Destruction of buildings to prevent spread of fire. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance relating to the destruction of buildings or other structures to prevent the spread of fire, or to recovery of damages in regard thereto by the owner, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 12-2. - Liability for expenses incurred in fighting certain fires. 
Any person who negligently, carelessly or intentionally sets any woods or marshes on fire, or sets fire to any stubble, brush, straw, or any other substance capable of spreading fire on lands, whereby the property of another is damaged or jeopardized, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor, and shall be liable for the full amount of all expenses incurred in fighting or extinguishing such fire. 
(Code 1965, § 16-4; Ord. No. 3585, 5-7-19) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-88.  
Sec. 12-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3208, adopted November 22, 2011, repealed § 12-3, which pertained to open burning prohibited; exceptions and derived from § 16-19 of the 1965 Code; Ord. No. 1664, 12-22-86; Ord. No. 2289, 8-23-94.  
Sec. 12-4. - Open burning. 
(a)  Open burning, where permitted by the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, shall be constantly monitored until the fire is extinguished. Fire extinguishing equipment shall be available for immediate use. 
(b)  The fire chief shall prohibit open burning, otherwise lawful, when smoke may cause reduced visibility on any highway, or when emissions or odors may constitute a hazard or nuisance. The fire chief shall order the extinguishing by the permit holder or other responsible person, or by the fire department, of any fire which creates such a hazard or nuisance, or if adjacent property is considered to be endangered. 
(Code 1965, § 16-18; Ord. No. 2289, 8-3-94; Ord. No. 3208, 11-22-11; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1144.  
Sec. 12-5. - Fires on beaches. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to set fire to or to procure another to set fire to any wood, brush, logs, leaves, grass, debris or other flammable material at any time on any sand beach of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 16-15; Ord. No. 1366, 4-11-83; Ord. No. 1789, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 2289, 8-23-94) 
Cross reference— Beaches generally, Ch.6. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-872.  
Sec. 12-6. - Fires on streets. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to burn, or cause to be burned, any substance of any kind on any of the streets of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 16-16) 
Cross reference— Streets, Ch.33. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-872.  
Secs. 12-7—12-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 12-7—12-9 were deleted in their entirety by Ord. No. 1789, adopted June 20, 1988. Said sections pertained to extinguishing open fires before leaving unattended, testing of underground tanks for storage of flammable liquids, and removal thereof when no longer used, and were derived from Code 1965, §§ 16-13, 16-14 and 16-17.  
Secs. 12-10—12-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF FIRE PROTECTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Mandatory retirement age for firefighters, § 2-81; use, operation, etc., of device to automatically initiate call and deliver prerecorded message to telephone number of city public safety services, § 23-9. 
State Law reference— Local fire departments and fire companies, Code of Virginia, § 27-6.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12-21. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby created a fire department, which shall be composed of the fire companies located throughout the city, headed by a fire chief. The fire chief is appointed as the coordinator of emergency management under the direction of the city manager in the emergency operations plan. The fire department is an all-hazards response agency and is a fundamental component to emergency services, disaster planning, and emergency management. 
(Code 1965, § 2-57; Ord. No. 1097, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create departments, § 3.05(b).  
Sec. 12-21.1. - Functions. 
The fire department, under the direction of the fire chief, shall be responsible for preventing, suppressing, controlling, limiting, and extinguishing accidental or intentionally destructive fires on land and water. The fire department shall be responsible for controlling and supervising the provision of services that protect life and property that include, but are not limited to, hazardous, combustible, radiological, and explosive materials, including gas leaks; rescues at accidents of any nature involving injuries and/or entrapments; technical rescues involving rope rescue, trench, aircraft, and confined space incidences; situations involving an imminent danger or actual occurrences of fire, explosion, and structural collapse; and maritime incidents that involve fire, a technical rescue, and hazardous materials. The fire department shall also support the emergency management coordination of the city and specifically assist in evacuation activities, search and rescue of disaster victims, and any other emergency response activities, as needed. The fire marshal shall investigate the causes of fires; prosecute alleged arson, threats to burn, threats to bomb, post-blast investigations or other related criminal acts; and enforce the Virginia Statewide Fire Code and related codes as incorporated and/or amended. The police department bomb squad personnel (also known as "Hazardous Device Technicians") shall be under the supervision and control of the police special operations bomb squad commander while engaged in render safe operations, device inspection, and recovery of hazardous devices. During fire incidents and fire investigations of alleged arson, threats to burn, threats to bomb, post-blast explosive device investigations, police bomb squad personnel will work in cooperation with the fire chief. In cooperation with the department of emergency medical services, fire department personnel shall be under the supervision and control of the fire chief and the emergency medical services chief when engaged in emergency medical services involving the treatment and/or transport of patients, pursuant to sections 2-422 and 2-423 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15; Ord. No. 3481, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 12-22. - Departmental rules and regulations. 
The fire chief, with the approval of the city manager, shall make rules and regulations concerning the operation of the fire department, the conduct of the officers, employees and members thereof and, their uniforms, equipment, training and procedures. 
(Code 1965, § 2-60; Ord. No. 1097, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 12-23. - Composition and service areas of fire companies generally. 
(a)  The fire companies shall consist of such officers, employees, volunteers and members as shall be provided by the city manager or the fire chief. 
(b)  The fire companies shall serve such areas as shall be designated by the fire chief. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2-58, 2-59; Ord. No. 1097, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 12-24. - Composition and rules and regulations of volunteer fire companies. 
Each volunteer fire company within the city shall consist of such officers and members as are provided for in its bylaws and the provisions of this article, except that no position shall be in conflict with the rules and regulations established by the city manager and the fire chief. No rules or regulations of any volunteer fire company shall conflict with rules and regulations established pursuant to section 12-22. 
(Code 1965, § 2-61; Ord. No. 1097, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15) 
Cross reference— Issuance of vehicle license plate or decal to members of volunteer fire companies, § 21-79. 
State Law reference— Volunteer fire companies, Code of Virginia, § 27-8 et seq.  
Sec. 12-25. - Fire marshal, deputies and assistants. 
(a)  The fire chief or his designee shall be the fire marshal. 
(b)  Within the fire department, there shall be appointed by the fire marshal such deputies and assistants as may be necessary. These deputies and assistants shall have the same powers and perform the same duties as the fire marshal, at his direction or in his absence. The fire marshal shall be responsible for the enforcement of the fire prevention code referenced by section 12-41 of this Code, this chapter, and related laws of the city and state, and for the investigation and prosecution of all cases of alleged arson and other fire-related incidents suspected to involve criminality. 
(c)  In making such investigations, the fire marshal may issue a summons directed to the sheriff of the city commanding him to summon witnesses to attend before the fire marshal, or his authorized designee, at such time and place as he may direct. Any such officer to whom the summons is delivered shall forthwith execute it and make return thereof to the fire marshal at the time and place named therein. Any witnesses on whom such summonses are served may be compelled by the fire marshal to attend and give evidence and shall be liable in like manner as if the summonses had been issued by a magistrate in a criminal case. They shall be sworn by the fire marshal before giving evidence and their evidence shall be reduced to writing by him or under his direction and subscribed by them, respectively. 
(d)  The fire marshal and his deputies and assistants, before entering upon their duties, shall respectively take an oath before any officer authorized to administer oaths, faithfully to discharge the duties of such office. A certificate of the oath shall be returned to and preserved by the clerk of circuit court. 
(e)  The fire marshal and his deputies and assistants shall have the authority to arrest, to procure and serve warrants of arrest and to issue summonses in the manner prescribed by law, for violations of chapter 12 of the City Code and fire safety and related ordinances and laws of the city and state. The authority granted in this section shall not be exercised until such person has satisfactorily completed a training course for fire marshals and their assistants, which course shall be approved by the Virginia Fire Services Board. 
(f)  The fire marshal and his designated deputies and assistants shall have the same powers as a sheriff, police officer, or law enforcement officer. The investigations of all alleged offenses pursuant to Title 27 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, shall be the responsibility of the fire marshal or his designee. The police powers granted in this section shall not be exercised by the fire marshal or any deputy or assistant until such person has satisfactorily completed a course designed for fire marshals with police powers and approved by the Virginia Fire Services Board. In addition, such person with police powers shall continue to exercise those police powers only upon participation in and satisfactory completion of in-service and advanced courses as shall be required and approved by the Virginia Fire Services Board. 
(Code 1965, § 2-62; Ord. No. 1677, 4-13-87; Ord. No. 2064, 5-14-91; Ord. No. 2289, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2721, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 12-25.1. - Right of entry to investigate releases of hazardous material, hazardous waste, or regulated substances. 
The fire marshal shall have the right to enter upon any property from which a release of any hazardous material, hazardous waste, or regulated substance, as defined in Code of Virginia, section 10.1-1400 or section 62.1-44.34:8, has occurred or is reasonably suspected to have occurred and which has entered into the ground water, surface water or soils of the county, city or town, in order to investigate the extent and cause of any such release. If, in undertaking such an investigation, the fire marshal makes an affidavit under oath that the origin or cause of any such release is undetermined and that he has been refused admittance to the property, or is unable to gain permission to enter the property, any magistrate of the city may issue an investigation warrant to the fire marshal authorizing him to enter such property for the purpose of determining the origin and source of the release. If the fire marshal, after gaining access to any property pursuant to such investigation warrant, has probable cause to believe that the release was caused by any act constituting a criminal offense, he shall discontinue the investigation until a search warrant has been obtained or consent to conduct the search has otherwise been given. 
(Ord. No. 2289, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 12-26. - Background investigations of applicants for employment. 
In order to determine if any past criminal conduct of any applicant for employment with the department of fire protection would be compatible with the nature of the position under consideration, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  Each such applicant shall furnish a classifiable set of fingerprints to the department of police. 
(2)  The chief of police and members of the department of police acting in his name, and the fire chief or an investigator designated by the fire chief within the fire department, are authorized to conduct a field investigation and directed to conduct criminal record checks on each such applicant. 
(3)  The chief of police or a member of the police department acting on his behalf, or an investigator designated by the fire chief within the fire department, shall prepare a factual summary of the background investigation and criminal records check of each firefighter applicant and transmit such summary to the fire chief for the purpose of determining the fitness of the applicant. 
(4)  Background investigations and records checks include records of all arrests and dispositions as an adult. Records of arrests and dispositions, while an applicant was considered a juvenile, shall be transmitted only when authorized by court order, court rule, court decision, federal regulation or state statute authorizing such dissemination. 
(5)  Criminal history records and information shall include arrest and disposition data on file in the national crime information center, the federal bureau of investigation, the department of defense and all other federal, state and local law-enforcement agencies. 
(6)  Any applicant who is denied employment on the basis of the investigation summary referred to in this section may inspect that summary for the purpose of clarifying, explaining or denying the accuracy of its contents. 
(7)  The chief of police and members of the police department shall make no other dissemination to the fire chief regarding the fitness of firefighter applicants, except in the official summary report referred to in this section. 
(8)  Use of criminal history record information disseminated to the fire chief shall be limited to the purpose for which it was given and may not be disseminated further. 
(Code 1965, § 2-57.1; Ord. No. 1098, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15) 
State Law reference— Dissemination of criminal history record information, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-389.  
Sec. 12-27. - Authority of chief or other officer in charge when answering alarm or extinguishing fire. 
(a)  While the fire department or any volunteer fire company in the city is in the process of answering an alarm of fire or operating at an emergency incident where there is imminent danger or the actual occurrence of fire or explosion or the uncontrolled release of hazardous materials which threaten life or property and returning to the station, the fire chief or other officer in charge of such department or company at that time shall have the authority to maintain order at the emergency incident or its vicinity, including the immediate airspace, direct the actions of the firefighters at the incident, keep bystanders or other persons at a safe distance from the incident and emergency equipment, facilitate the speedy movement and operation of emergency equipment and firefighters, cause an investigation to be made of the origin and cause of the incident and, until the arrival of a police officer, direct and control traffic, in person or by deputy, and facilitate the movement of traffic. The fire chief or other officer in charge shall display his firefighter's badge or other proper identification. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, this authority shall extend to the activation of traffic-control signals designated to facilitate the safe egress and ingress of emergency equipment at a fire station. 
(b)  Any person refusing to obey the orders of the fire chief or his deputies or other officer in charge at the time, given pursuant to this section, shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. The fire chief or other officer in charge shall have the power to make arrests for violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1965, §§ 16-1, 22-20; Ord. No. 2289, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15; Ord. No. 3509, 6-20-17, eff. 7-1-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 27-15.1.  
Sec. 12-27.1. - Service charge for non-emergency calls for service to which the fire department and/or department of emergency medical services are required to respond. 
There is hereby established a service charge of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) to be paid by each residential owner upon the sixth and any subsequent non-emergency calls to which fire and/or emergency medical service departments are required to respond within a twelve month period. 
There is hereby established a service charge of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to be paid by each business, nursing home, intermediate care facility or any other healthcare entity upon the sixth and any subsequent non-emergency calls to which the fire and/or emergency medical services are required to respond within a twelve month period. 
For the purpose of this code section, a non-emergency call is defined as a call for service that is not related to a fire or life, safety, or medical emergency, as determined by the department or departments responding to the call. 
(Ord. No. 3486, 2-21-17)  
Sec. 12-28. - Interference with firefighters, equipment, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to assault or injure any firefighter who is in the performance of official duties. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel of any fire department emergency vehicle or other fire fighting or rescue equipment, or to interfere with a firefighter in the discharge of his duty, or to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any fire department operation. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, deface or render inoperable any fire department emergency vehicle or fire fighting equipment or apparatus without lawful authority. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 16-2; Ord. No. 2289, 8-23-94) 
Cross reference— Obstructing or interfering with city officers generally, § 23-7.  
Sec. 12-28.1. - Impersonating firefighter, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully impersonate, with the intent to make another believe he is, a firefighter, fire marshal or fire chief. A first offense conviction is a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2289, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2708, 6-25-02; Ord. No. 3293, 6-11-13, eff. 7-1-13)  
Sec. 12-29. - Loitering about fire or EMS stations 
(a)  No person shall loiter about any fire or EMS station unless he is a member or employee of the fire department or EMS department whose duties require his presence there. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 16-3; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 12-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2880, adopted May 24, 2005, repealed former § 12-30 of the Code, which pertained to authority of the department to furnish copies of records, and fees therefor.  
Secs. 12-31—12-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 12-41. - Adopted. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, Chapter 9, Title 27, the fire department is designated and authorized to enforce that certain code known as the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, as promulgated by the Board of Housing and Community Development of the Commonwealth of Virginia, save and except such portions as may be modified or amended in this article, of which code a copy has been and is now filed in the office of the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 16-5; Ord. No. 1768, 4-4-88; Ord. No. 2289, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 12-42. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, as used in the fire prevention code adopted by section 12-41, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
(1)  Wherever the words "name of jurisdiction" are used, they shall mean this city. 
(2)  Wherever the term "fire official" is used, it shall mean the chief of the fire department of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
(3)  Wherever the term "legal counsel of the municipality" is used, it shall mean the city attorney of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 16-6; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 12-43. - Amendments. 
(a)  As authorized by Code of Virginia, § 27-97, the following provisions are enacted and made more restrictive than the 2009 Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code: 
(1)  Overcrowding: It shall be a Class I misdemeanor for any person to permit (i) overcrowding; (ii) the obstruction of aisles, passageways or other means of egress, including obstruction caused by people standing in aisles, passageway or other means of egress; or (iii) admittance of any person beyond the approved occupant load. In addition thereto, the code official, upon finding overcrowded conditions or obstruction in aisles, passageways or other means of egress, or upon finding any condition which constitutes a hazard to life and safety, shall cause the occupancy, performance, presentation, spectacle or entertainment to be stopped until such a condition or obstruction is corrected. The structure may be evacuated or the addition of any further occupants prohibited until the approved occupant load is reestablished or the obstruction has been removed. 
(2)  Operator responsibility: The operator or the person responsible for the operation of an assembly or educational occupancy shall check egress facilities before such building is occupied to determine compliance with this section. If such inspection reveals that any element of the required means of egress cannot be accessed, is obstructed, locked, fastened or otherwise unsuited for immediate utilization, admittance to the building shall not be permitted until necessary corrective action has been completed. 
(Code 1965, 16-16; Ord. No. 1789, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1814, 10-24-88; Ord. No. 1984, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 2289, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2797, 1-13-04; Ord. No. 2889, 6-28-05; Ord. No. 3208, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 12-43.1. - Shipbuilding, repair and lay-up. 
Shipbuilding, repair and lay-up facilities shall be in conformance with National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet 312 (2006 edition) which is hereby adopted and incorporated herein, of which a copy has been and is now filed with the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2289, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 3208, 11-22-11)  
Sec. 12-43.2. - Fireworks and pyrotechnic displays unlawful; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section it shall be unlawful for any person to transport, manufacture, assemble, store, sell, offer or display for sale, or to buy, use, possess, ignite or explode any firecracker, torpedo, sky rocket, sparkler, or other substance or device that contains any explosive or flammable compound or substance, and is intended or commonly known as fireworks, and which explodes, rises into the air or travels laterally, fires projectiles or discharges sparks into the air. 
(b)  The provision of this section shall not be applicable to (1) any organization or group of individuals which has been granted a permit by the fire official for the public or private display of fireworks or pyrotechnics, provided that such fireworks are stored, handled, transported and used in compliance with the terms and conditions of such permit; or (2) any federal, state or local government animal or fowl management agency agents acting within the scope of their lawful duties. Such agents shall provide the fire marshall's office with at least twenty-four (24) hours notice of intent to possibly employ pyrotechnic tactics. 
(c)  The fire marshal or any law enforcement officer shall be authorized to seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all fireworks offered or exposed for display or sale, stored or held in violation of this section. 
(d)  Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2289, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 3084, 5-26-09)  
Sec. 12-43.3. - Accumulations of waste. 
(a)  Accumulations of wastepaper, wood, hay, straw, weeds, litter or combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind shall not be permitted to remain upon any roof or in any court, yard, vacant lot, alley, parking lot, open space, beneath a grandstand, pier, wharf or other similar structure. All weeds, grass, vines or other growth, when same endangers property or is liable to be fired, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the property. 
(b)  All combustible rubbish, oily rags or waste material, when kept within a building, shall be stored in approved containers. Storage shall not produce conditions that, in the opinion and judgement of the code official, will tend to create a nuisance or a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 2289, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 12-43.4. - Storage of combustible or flammable materials. 
The storage of combustible or flammable materials shall be confined to approved storage areas. Combustible or flammable materials shall not be stored under interior or exterior stairwells unless the area under the stairwell is protected by an approved fire suppression sprinkler system.  
Sec. 12-43.5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3208, adopted November 22, 2011, repealed § 12-43.5, which pertained to filling stations; attendant required and derived from Ord. No. 2289, 8-23-94.  
Sec. 12-44. - Appeal from action or decision under code. 
Whenever an application for a permit has been disapproved or not granted or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted in this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning in such code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant or person aggrieved may appeal such refusal or decision to the board of building code appeals. 
(Code 1965, § 16-7; Ord. No. 2289, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 12-45. - New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits. 
The city manager, the fire chief and the building code administrator shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire prevention code adopted in this article. The fire chief shall post such lists in a conspicuous place in his or her office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Code 1965, § 16-8; Ord. No 2470, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 12-46. - Modifications. 
The fire chief shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted in this article, upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his duly authorized agent, when there practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of such code, provided, that the spirit of such code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. Such modifications shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. The particulars of such modifications, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire chief thereon shall be entered upon the records of the fire department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1965, § 16-9; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 12-47. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
In the event of conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted in this article and the provisions of any other ordinance of the city, the more stringent provisions shall prevail. 
(Code 1965, § 16-10)  
Sec. 12-48. - Availability of copies. 
Copies of the fire prevention code adopted in this article may be obtained at the office of the fire department during regular business hours. 
(Code 1965, § 16-11; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 12-49. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted in this article, or who fails to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order or made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therefor, shall, for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The imposition of one penalty for any violation of the fire prevention code adopted in this article shall not excuse the violation or permit it to be continued and all persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The imposition of a penalty for a violation of the fire prevention code adopted in this article shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1965, § 16-12)  
Sec. 12-49.1. - Permits and inspections fees. 
Fees for permits or inspections required by this article or the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code are hereby levied in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Annual fire inspection fee .....$50.00 
However, each business premise located within a structure shall be inspected independently of other areas located in the structure. This fee shall not be levied for the inspection of City or Virginia Beach City Public School facilities. 
(2)  Re-inspection fee for second re-inspection and every subsequent inspection to demonstrate compliance with the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code .....50.00 
No fee shall be charged for any necessary first re-inspection. This fee shall not be levied for the inspection of City or Virginia Beach City Public School facilities. 
(3)  Liquid- or gas-fueled vehicles or equipment in assembly buildings/Motor vehicle display - permit fee per event site (other than dealership) .....50.00 
(4)  Fire watch fee (valid for seven (7) days) - required no less than forty-eight (48) hours or by the first business day after the failure of a fire protection system .....25.00 
An exception to this permit requirement may be granted by the fire marshal or his designee for delays encountered in obtaining equipment required for repairs. 
(5)  Open burning/Bonfire - permit fee per event site .....50.00 
(6)  Open flames and candles/Removing paint with torch - permit fee per site .....50.00 
(7)  Open burning/Land clearing pit burn - permit fee per month per pit burner .....50.00 
(8)  Assembly or education occupancies: 
a.  Annual permit fee for facilities with fifty (50) to ninety-nine (99) persons .....50.00 
b.  Annual permit fee for facilities with one hundred (100) to five hundred (500) persons .....100.00 
c.  Annual permit fee for facilities with five hundred (500) or more persons .....150.00 
d.  ABC inspection fee .....50.00 
e.  Recalculation of occupancy load fee .....50.00 
(9)  Aviation facilities/Airports, heliports and helistops - annual permit fee .....100.00 
(10)  Floor finishing/Bowling establishments - annual permit fee for refinishing/resurfacing with flammable liquids .....100.00 
(11)  Fruit and crop ripening or coloring processes - annual permit fee .....100.00 
(12)  Dry cleaning plant (flammable or non-flammable chemicals) - annual permit fee .....100.00 
(13)  Combustible dust-producing operations/Dust explosion hazard - annual permit fee for any process creating dust explosion hazard .....100.00 
(14)  Spraying or dipping/Application of flammable finishes - annual permit fee for the use or handling of more than one (1) gallon per day .....100.00 
(15)  Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging fee - per location .....50.00 
(16)  HPM facilities/Hazardous production - annual permit fee for the use, storage or handling of any hazardous production material .....100.00 
(17)  Lumber yard/woodworking plant - annual permit fee for storage exceeding one hundred thousand (100,000) board feet .....100.00 
(18)  Organic coatings - annual permit fee for production of greater than one (1) gallon per day .....100.00 
(19)  Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies - annual permit fee for tents greater than nine hundred (900) square feet or air supported structures .....50.00 
(20)  Waste handling/Wrecking yard, junk yard or waste material plant: 
a.  Annual permit fee .....100.00 
b.  Annual permit fee for facilities with waste material greater than two thousand five hundred one (2,501) cubic feet .....100.00. 
(21)  Cutting and welding: 
a.  Annual permit fee for all welding .....50.00 
b.  Annual permit fee for use of greater than two hundred (200) pounds calcium carbide .....100.00 
c.  Annual permit fee for use of greater than two thousand (2,000) feet cubic flammable compressed gas .....100.00 
d.  Annual permit fee for use of greater than five (5) pounds carbide in acetylene generator .....100.00 
(22)  Aerosol products - annual permit fee for storage or display of greater than five hundred (500) pounds of level 2 or 3 aerosols .....50.00 
(23)  Cellulose nitrate film: 
a.  Annual permit fee for storage twenty-six (26) or more pounds .....50.00 
b.  Annual permit fee for any manufacturer using cellulose nitrate .....50.00 
(24)  Combustible fibers - annual permit fee for storage of greater than one hundred (100) cubic feet .....50.00 
(25)  Compressed gas storage: 
a.  Annual permit fee for storage greater than seven hundred fifty (750) cubic feet of flammable gas .....50.00 
b.  Annual permit fee for storage of amounts greater than six thousand (6,000) cubic feet of non-flammable gas .....50.00 
c.  Annual permit fee for storage of amounts greater than two hundred (200) cubic feet of corrosive gas .....50.00 
d.  Annual permit fee for storage of any amount of toxic or highly toxic gas .....50.00 
(26)  Hazardous materials/Corrosives (storage and handling): 
a.  Annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of amounts greater than one thousand (1,000) pounds of solids .....50.00 
b.  Annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of amounts greater than fifty-five (55) gallons of liquids .....50.00 
(27)  Cryogenic fluids: 
a.  Annual permit fee for production or sale of any amount .....100.00 
b.  Annual permit fee for storage of greater than five hundred (500) gallons of non-flammable, non-toxic cryogenic liquids .....50.00 
c.  Annual permit fee for storage of greater than ten (10) gallons of liquid oxygen .....50.00 
d.  Annual permit fee for storage of greater than ten (10) gallons of flammable cryogenic liquids .....50.00 
e.  Annual permit fee for storage of greater than ten (10) gallons of cryogenic oxidizer .....50.00. 
(28)  Explosives/ammunition and blasting agents - annual permit fee for storage, manufacturing, possession, sale or any other disposition of any amount .....50.00 
(29)  Explosives/Fireworks/pyrotechnics: 
a.  Permit fee per display for outside aerial display .....450.00 
b.  Permit fee for proximate audience .....250.00 
c.  Permit fee for storage or sales .....50.00 
(30)  Flammable and combustible liquids: 
a.  Annual permit fee for storage, use, handling or processing .....50.00 
b.  Temporary AST permit fee .....50.00 
c.  Service station or repair garage permit fee .....50.00 
d.  UST closure or temporary out of service permit fee .....50.00 
(31)  Flammable solids - annual permit fee for storage of amounts greater than one hundred (100) lbs. .....50.00 
(32)  Highly toxic and toxic solids and liquids: 
a.  Annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of any amount of highly toxic solids or liquids .....50.00 
b.  Annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of amounts greater than one hundred (100) pounds of toxic solids .....50.00 
c.  Annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of amounts greater than ten (10) gallons of toxic liquids .....50.00 
(33)  LP-gas/Liquified petroleum gases - annual permit fee for storage and use of LP-gas .....50.00 
(34)  Hazardous materials/Organic peroxides: 
a.  Annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of any amount of class I or II .....50.00 
b.  Annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of amounts greater than ten (10) pounds of class III solids and one (1) gallon of class III liquids .....50.00 
(35)  Hazardous materials/Liquid and solid oxidizers: 
a.  Annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of any amount of class III or IV .....50.00 
b.  Annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of amounts greater than one hundred (100) pounds of class II solids or ten (10) gallons of class II liquids .....50.00 
c.  Annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of amounts greater than five hundred (500) pounds of class I solids or fifty-five (55) gallons of class I liquids .....50.00 
(36)  Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging/Pesticides - annual permit fee for use, storage, or handling of any amount subject to regulation under the Statewide Fire Prevention Code .....50.00 
(37)  Hazardous materials/Pyrophoric material - annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of any amount .....50.00 
(38)  Unstable liquid or solid (reactive) materials: 
a.  Annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of any amount of class III or IV .....50.00 
b.  Annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of amounts greater than fifty (50) pounds of class II solids and five (5) gallons of class II liquids .....50.00 
(39)  Water reactive material: 
a.  Annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of any amount of class III .....50.00 
b.  Annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of amounts fifty (50) pounds or greater of class II solids .....50.00 
c.  Annual permit fee for use, storage or handling of amounts ten (10) gallons or greater of class II liquids .....50.00 
The fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be used to defray the cost of enforcement and appeals under the Statewide Fire Prevention Code. The city manager or his designee may waive any of these fees for permits required in the performance of a contract with the City of Virginia Beach, provided that a written waiver is filed with the fire department along with a copy of the contract. 
(Ord. No. 2696, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 2737, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 3014, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3124, 4-13-10; Ord. No. 3208, 11-22-11; Ord. No. 3348, 5-13-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKE DETECTORS 
 
Sec. 12-50. - Where required. 
In accordance with the authorities specified in section 15.1-29.9, Code of Virginia, smoke detectors shall be installed in the following structures: 
(a)  Any buildings containing one or more dwelling units. 
(b)  Hotels or motels providing overnight sleeping accommodations to one or more persons. 
(c)  Rooming houses, group homes, dormitories and other public lodgings regularly used to provide overnight sleeping accommodations. 
(Ord. No. 1226, 9-28-81; Ord. No. 1477, 8-13-84)  
Sec. 12-51. - Definitions. 
(a)  Smoke detectors shall mean mechanical devices powered by batteries or alternating current capable of sounding an audible alarm upon sensing visible or invisible products of combustion meeting the specifications as contained in that pamphlet known as Underwriter's Laboratories Fire Protection Equipment Directory, date January 1981, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Owner shall mean one or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested: 
(1)  All or part of the legal title to the property, or 
(2)  All or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises, and the term includes a mortgage in possession. 
(c)  Managing authority shall mean an individual responsible for the management or maintenance and upkeep of property for said owners, recognized either by agreement or contract for such services. 
(d)  Dwelling unit shall mean a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
(Ord. No. 1226, 9-28-81; Ord. No. 2064, 5-14-91).  
Sec. 12-52. - Installation requirements. 
(a)  The smoke detectors installed must be capable of sensing visible or invisible products of combustion and, when activated, the detectors shall provide an alarm suitable to warn the occupants of the building. Smoke detectors installed in dwelling units of said buildings need only sound or alarm suitable to warn occupants within the individual dwelling unit. 
(b)  Appropriate permits as required must be secured for the installation of the smoke detectors powered by alternating current; however, no fee will be charged for the permit. 
(c)  The smoke detectors shall be installed in locations specified in applicable sections of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1226, 9-28-81; Ord. No. 1477, 8-13-84)  
Sec. 12-53. - Responsibilities of owner/tenant. 
(a)  The owner of a multi-family residential building containing four (4) or more dwelling units shall provide smoke detectors as required by section 12-52(c) in hallways, stairwells and other public or common areas, and shall maintain them in good working order. 
(b)  The owner of a dwelling unit, which is rented or leased in any building containing any one or more dwelling units, shall furnish the tenant at the beginning of each tenancy and at least annually thereafter with written certification that all smoke detectors required by section 12-52(c) are present, have been inspected and are in good working order. 
(c)  The tenant shall be responsible for reasonable care of the smoke detector in accordance with section 55-248.16, Code of Virginia, and for the interim testing and battery replacement, and for providing written notice to the owner requesting the repair of any malfunctioning smoke detector. In accordance with section 55-248.13, Code of Virginia, the owner shall be obligated to provide and pay for service of any malfunctioning smoke detector. Such service, or replacement of the unit, must occur within five (5) days of receipt of written notice from the tenant that a smoke detector is. malfunctioning. 
(d)  The owner of a dwelling unit, which is rented or leased in any building containing one or more dwelling units shall provide written notification to the tenant of the responsibilities and duties proposed by subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  In those instances where responsibilities for maintenance and upkeep of dwelling units has been transferred from the owner(s) to a managing authority, the managing authority shall be charged with the responsibility imposed by this section in addition to the owner(s). 
(Ord. No. 1226, 9-28-81; Ord. No. 2064, 5-14-91)  
Sec. 12-54. - Enforcement. 
The fire marshal, or his duly authorized representatives, are authorized to administer and enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 1226, 9-28-81; Ord. No. 2064, 5-14-91)  
Sec. 12-55. - Article not exemption from compliance with code. 
Nothing in this article shall excuse any owner for the required buildings from compliance with all other applicable provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code in chapter 8 of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach pertaining to buildings and building regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1226, 9-28-81)  
Sec. 12-56. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2064, adopted May 14, 1991, deleted former § 12-56, relative to compliance upon sale or rental, which derived from Ord. No. 1477, adopted Aug. 13, 1984.  
Chapter 13 - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Taking glass containers on beach or adjacent streets, § 6-6; defrauding restaurants and other food establishments, § 23-34; barred or locked premises upon which food or drink is served, § 23-53; food regulations at public swimming pools, § 34-66; tax on purchase of food at restaurants, § 35-136 et seq. 
State Law reference— Food and drink generally, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-361 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - FOOD SERVICE MANAGER'S CERTIFICATION 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to require certification of supervisory personnel of food service establishments, so that supervisory personnel shall have knowledge of safe techniques for storage, preparation, display and service of foods with the underlying purpose of preventing foodborne illness and protecting the public health and so that supervisory personnel shall have knowledge to train employees under their supervision regarding same. 
(Ord. No. 1774, 5-2-88)  
Sec. 13-2. - Rules and regulations for administration and enforcement. 
The director of public health or his/her designee is responsible for the enforcement of this article. The director of public health is hereby authorized to make and adopt such rules and regulations as he/she may deem necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article, which rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with or an enlargement of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1774, 5-2-88)  
Sec. 13-3. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article. 
(a)  Food means any raw, cooked, or processed, edible substance, ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption. 
(b)  Health authority means the director of the department of public health or his authorized representative. 
(c)  Food service manager means the certificate holder, individuals having supervisory or management duties and any other person working in a food service establishment who may be in charge of its food handling operation. 
(d)  Foodborne illness means an incident in which two (2) or more persons experience a similar illness, usually gastrointestinal in nature, after ingestion of a common food, and epidemiological analysis implicates the food as the source of the illness. 
(e)  Food service establishment means any place where food is prepared or provided and intended for individual portion service, and includes the site at which individual portions are provided. The term includes any such place, regardless of whether consumption is on or off the premises and regardless of whether or not there is a charge for the food. The term also includes retail food stores, mobile food units, and pushcarts. The term does not include private homes where food is prepared or served without compensation for individual family consumption, the location of food vending machines and supply vehicles. 
(f)  Prepackaged means contained in bottle, can, carton, secure wrapping or other types of containers and includes both hermetically and nonhermetically sealed packaging. 
(g)  Temporary food service establishment means a food service establishment that operates at a fixed location for a period of not more than fourteen (14) consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. 
(h)  Risk assessment means an evaluation of the potential for a foodborne illness to occur in a food service establishment based on a hazard analysis of the food. 
(Ord. No. 1774, 5-2-88)  
Sec. 13-4. - Food service manager; responsibility; certification. 
(a)  After May 1, 1989, no person shall operate a food service establishment unless its food handling operation is under the immediate control of a person holding a valid food service manager's certification. This shall require that a certified food manager be present during a minimum of eight (8) hours of operation per operating day in each food service establishment. The manager must be a full-time employee of the food service establishment in question. 
(b)  The food service manager shall be responsible for training of food service personnel in sanitary food-handling procedures. Written documentation of a training program and training records of individual employees shall be available upon request by the health department. 
(c)  In order to obtain a food service manager's certificate, a person shall apply to the Virginia Beach Health Department and show proof of having successfully completed a course in food protection which shall be approved by the health authority or a valid certificate of registration from the food protection certification program of the educational testing services center for occupational and professional assessment and payment of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(d)  Such certificates shall be issued in the name of an individual only and shall be valid for a period of five (5) years after the date of issuance. 
(e)  A food service manager's certificate shall be renewed for a five-year period upon payment of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to the Virginia Beach Health Department, and: 
(1)  Completing a refresher course in food protection which shall be approved by the health authority; or 
(2)  Take and pass the food protection certification program test of the educational testing services center for occupational and professional assessment. 
(f)  The health authority may require certified supervisory personnel to successfully complete additional training as specified by the health authority, or will require additional on-site coverage by certified food managers up to all hours of operation, when: 
(1)  The employing food service establishment has repeated or persistent violations of critical health code requirements and effective corrective action has not been taken over a reasonable period of time, as determined by the health authority; or 
(2)  The employing food service establishment is suspected with reasonable cause by the health authority as the source of a foodborne illness; 
(3)  Establishments maintaining a score of less than eighty (80) averaged over three (3) inspections. 
All costs associated with required training or testing shall be the responsibility of the food service establishment or the individual food service manager. 
(Ord. No. 1774, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 1823, 12-19-88; Ord. No. 3538, 4-3-18)  
Sec. 13-5. - Proof of certification. 
Each certified food service operator shall display his/her certificate in a prominent location in the establishment or carry it upon his/her person when on duty, as directed by the health authority. 
(Ord. No. 1774, 5-2-88)  
Sec. 13-6. - Certificate not transferable. 
A food service operator's certificate is not transferable from one person to another. 
(Ord. No. 1774, 5-2-88)  
Sec. 13-7. - Exemptions. 
Food service establishments that serve, sell or distribute only prepackaged foods and beverages are exempt from the provisions of this article. Temporary food service establishments that operate at a fixed location for a period of time of not more than fourteen (14) consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration may be exempted by the health authority. The health authority may also grant additional exemptions to this article on the basis of a risk assessment of a food service establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1774, 5-2-88)  
Sec. 13-8. - Penalty for violation. 
Any owner or operator of a food service establishment found to be in violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day that such a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1774, 5-2-88)  
Sec. 13-9. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1774, 5-2-88)  
Secs. 13-10—13-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2964, adopted November 28, 2006, repealed §§ 13-16—13-22, which pertained to food handler's card for restaurant employees and derived from Ord. No. 999, §§ 20-206—20-210, 10-8-79. 
 
Secs. 13-16—13-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STREET VENDORS FOOD PRODUCTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Street vendors generally, § 33-6; peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 26; license tax for peddlers of food products, §§ 18-94—18-97. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-36. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 13-37. - Peddling ice cream, sandwiches, etc., in business areas. 
No person shall peddle ice cream, ice confectioneries, candies, confections, bottled soft drinks, hot dogs or wrapped sandwiches from a cart, wagon, truck, automobile, basket or tray in any business area within the city. For the purpose of this section, the term "business area" shall mean an area within three hundred (300) feet of two (2) or more retail businesses. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-167, 20-191)  
Secs. 13-38—13-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLES USED FOR SALE OF ICE CREAM, ETC.[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 21. 
 
Sec. 13-46. - Definition. 
For the purpose of this division, the word "vehicle" shall mean a vehicle operated or used for dispensing or selling ice cream or other ice confectioneries, candies or confections therefrom. 
(Code 1965, § 18-23)  
Sec. 13-47. - Compliance with division. 
No vehicle shall be operated or used for dispensing or selling ice cream or other ice confectioneries, candies or confections therefrom, except in compliance with the conditions set out in the following sections of this division. 
(Code 1965, § 18-24)  
Sec. 13-48. - Insurance. 
Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating a vehicle as a vendor of ice cream or ice confectioneries, candies or confections on the streets or public ways of the city shall, before any vehicle is operated, secure and file with the city clerk a policy of liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in the stats, in form to be approved by the city attorney, indemnifying such person, in the sum of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to one person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to more than one person for the same accident for which the owner, operator or driver of such vehicle may be held liable, and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for property damage. 
(Code 1965, § 18-22)  
Sec. 13-49. - Required signs and clearance lamps. 
In addition to the requirements of chapter 21 of this Code and title 46.1 [46.2] of the Code of Virginia, each motor vehicle used by vendors of ice cream and other ice confectioneries, candies and confections in dispensing or selling such products on the streets of the city shall have the following equipment on and in operation: 
(1)  Yellow signs with black letters indicating "Frequent Stops", on the front and back of the vehicle, which shall be readable at a distance of one hundred (100) feet therefrom, such signs to be placed on the uppermost portion of the vehicle body. 
(2)  Yellow signs with black letters indicating "Caution Children", on the front and back of the vehicle, which shall be readable at a distance of one hundred (100) feet therefrom, such signs to be placed on the uppermost portion of the vehicle body. 
(3)  Three (3) amber clearance lamps, across the top of the vehicle, spaced evenly, not less than eight (8) inches nor more than fourteen (14) inches apart, designed in such a manner as to show amber light to the front only, such lights to be visible at a distance of five hundred (500) feet therefrom. 
(4)  Three (3) red clearance lamps across the top of the rear of the vehicle, spaced evenly, not less than eight (8) inches nor more than fourteen (14) inches apart, designed in such a manner as to show red light to the rear only, such lights to be visible at a distance of five hundred (500) feet therefrom. 
(Code 1965, § 18-20)  
Sec. 13-50. - Operation between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. prohibited. 
No vehicle governed by this division shall be operated on the streets of the city between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day. 
(Code 1965, §§ 18-25, 20-168, 20-192)  
Sec. 13-51. - Manner of stopping for dispensing or selling products. 
When stopping to dispense or sell products, the driver or operator of a vehicle governed by this division shall pull such vehicle to the curb of the street or shoulder of the road or public way and cut off the motor of such vehicle, except when the operation of the motor is necessary for producing the product, and shall not be within one hundred (100) feet of any intersection. 
(Code 1965, § 18-28)  
Sec. 13-52. - Stopping on certain streets prohibited. 
The driver or operator of a vehicle governed by this division shall not stop such vehicle, to dispense or sell products therefrom, on any street or public way having a speed limit above twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(Code 1965, § 18-26)  
Sec. 13-53. - Parking on street prohibited when operator not available to dispense products. 
No vehicle governed by this division shall be parked on any street when the operator of such vehicle is not available to dispense products therefrom. 
(Code 1965, § 18-27)  
Sec. 13-54. - Use of bell to attract customers. 
A bell shall be the only noise-making device that may be used on a vehicle governed by this division for the purpose of attracting customers. Reasonable use of such bell shall be made when the vehicle is in motion or while stopped. Continuous ringing of the bell for more than three (3) seconds at a time is prohibited. 
(Code 1965, § 18-29)  
ARTICLE IV. - PERMIT AND RELATED REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 13-60. - Food service establishments permit required. 
Beginning July 1, 1996, as a prerequisite to operation, the owner or operator of every food service establishment regulated by the department of public health shall, on an annual basis, obtain a permit for each such establishment from the department, and pay a permit fee in the amount of forty dollars ($40.00). To obtain a food service establishment permit, an applicant must demonstrate that his or her establishment has undergone the annual assessment as provided by section 13-61 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2387, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 3538, 4-3-18)  
Sec. 13-61. - Annual assessment of food service establishments. 
Beginning July 1, 1996, every food service establishment regulated by the department of public health shall, on an annual basis, be assessed by the department prior to the issuance of any permit. Such assessment shall include an evaluation of the food service and its operation and a determination of the frequency of inspections required for the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2387, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 13-62. - Penalty for operation without permit. 
Any owner or operator of a food service establishment regulated by the department of public health which is found guilty of operating without the permit required by section 13-60 of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2387, 5-14-96)  
Chapter 14 - GAMBLING 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Gambling device. A "gambling device" includes: 
(1)  Any device, machine, paraphernalia, equipment or other thing, including books, records and other papers, which are actually used in an illegal operation or activity; 
(2)  Any machine, apparatus, implement, instrument, contrivance, board or other thing, including but not limited to, those depending upon the insertion of a coin or other object for their operation, which operates, either completely automatically or with the aid of some physical act by the player or operator, so that, depending upon elements of chance, it may eject something of value or determine the prize or other thing of value to which the player is entitled; provided, that the return to the user of nothing more than additional chances or the right to use such machine is not deemed something of value within the meaning of this subparagraph; and provided further, that machines that only sell or entitle the user to items of merchandise of equivalent value that may differ from each other in composition, size, shape or color, shall not be deemed gambling devices within the meaning of this subparagraph. 
Such devices are no less gambling devices if they indicate beforehand the definite result of one or more operations but not all the operations, nor are they any less gambling devices if, apart from their use or adaptability as such, they also sell or deliver something of value on a basis other than chance. 
Illegal gambling. The making, placing or receipt of any bet or wager in the city of money or other thing of value, made in exchange for a chance to win a prize, stake or other consideration or thing of value, dependent upon the result of any game, contest or other event the outcome of which is uncertain or a matter of chance, whether such game, contest or event occurs or is to occur inside or outside the limits of this city, shall constitute illegal gambling. 
Operator. The term "operator" includes any person, firm or association of persons who or which conducts, finances, manages, supervises, directs or owns all or part of an illegal gambling enterprise, activity or operation. 
Other thing of value. The term "other thing of value" includes, but is not limited to, the purchase of a product, internet access or other thing, which purchase credits the purchaser with free points or other measureable units that may be (i) risked by the purchaser for an opportunity to win additional points or other measurable units that are redeemable by the purchaser for money or (ii) redeemed by the purchaser for money, and but for the free points or other measurable units, with regard to clauses (i) and (ii), the purchase of the product, Internet access, or other thing (a) would be of insufficient value in and of itself to justify the purchase or (b) is merely incidental to the chance to win money. 
(Ord. No. 3189, 6-28-11, eff. 7-1-11) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325.  
Sec. 14-2. - Illegal gambling generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who illegally gambles shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. If an association or pool of persons illegally gamble, each person therein shall be guilty of illegal gambling. 
(Code 1965, § 23-22; Ord. No. 1003, 11-5-79) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-326.  
Sec. 14-3. - Winning by fraud. 
If any person, while gambling, cheats or by fraudulent means wins or acquires for himself or another money or any other valuable thing, such person shall be fined no less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) times the value of such winnings. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-327.  
Sec. 14-4. - Permitting gambling to continue in one's premises. 
If the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person in control of any place or conveyance knows, or reasonably should know, that it is being used for illegal gambling, and permits such gambling to continue without having notified a law-enforcement officer of the presence of such illegal gambling activity, such person shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, §§ 23-23, 23-24) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-329.  
Sec. 14-5. - Aiding or abetting operation of illegal gambling activity. 
Any person, other than those specified in other sections of this chapter, who knowingly aids, abets or assists in the operation of an illegal gambling enterprise, activity or operation shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1463, 7-2-84) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-330.  
Sec. 14-6. - Illegal possession of gambling device. 
A person is guilty of illegal possession of a gambling device when such person manufactures, sells, transports, rents, gives away, places or possesses, or conducts or negotiates any transaction affecting or designed to affect ownership, custody or use of, any gambling device, while believing or having reason to believe that such device is to be used in the advancement of any unlawful gambling activity. Illegal possession of a gambling device shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-331.  
Sec. 14-7. - Forfeiture of money, gambling devices, etc., seized from illegal gambling enterprise. 
All money, gambling devices, office equipment and other personal property used in connection with an illegal gambling enterprise or activity, and all money, stakes and things of value received or proposed to be received by a winner in any illegal gambling transaction, which are lawfully seized by any law-enforcement officer or which shall lawfully come into such officer's custody, shall be forfeited to the city by order of the court in which a conviction under this chapter is obtained. Such court shall order all money so forfeited to be paid over to the city and, by order, shall make such disposition of other property so forfeited as the court deems proper, including the award of such property to any city or state agency or charitable organization for lawful purposes; or, in case of the sale thereof, the proceeds therefrom to be paid over to the city. Such forfeiture shall not extinguish the rights of any person, without knowledge of the illegal use of such property, who is the lawful owner or who has a lien on the same which has been perfected as provided by law. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-336.  
Sec. 14-8. - Certain acts not deemed "consideration" in prosecution under chapter. 
In any prosecution under this chapter, no consideration shall be deemed to have passed or been given because of any person's attendance upon the premises of another; his execution, mailing or delivery of an entry blank; his answering of questions, verbally or in writing; his witnessing of a demonstration or other proceeding; or any one or more thereof, where no charge is made to, paid by, or any purchase required of him in connection therewith. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-332.  
Sec. 14-9. - Exceptions from chapter—Contests of speed or skill. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any contest of speed or skill between men, animals, fowl or vehicles, where participants may receive prizes or different percentages of a purse, stake or premium dependent upon whether they win or lose, or dependent upon their position or score at the end of such contest. 
(b)  Any participant who, for the purpose of competing for any such purse, stake or premium offered in any such contest, knowingly and fraudulently enters any contestant other than the contestant purported to be entered or knowingly and fraudulently enters a contestant in a class in which such contestant does not belong, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-333.  
Sec. 14-10. - Same—Games of chance in private residences. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to make it illegal to participate in a game of chance conducted in a private residence, provided such private residence is not commonly used for such games of chance and that there is no operator, as defined in section 14-1. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-334.  
Sec. 14-11. - Same—Bingo games and raffles permitted by law. 
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any bingo game or raffle conducted pursuant to and in accord with the provisions of sections 18.2-340.1 through 18.2-340.12 of the Code of Virginia and article IV of chapter 4 of this Code.  
Sec. 14-12. - Immunity of witness testifying in prosecution under chapter; compulsory testimony. 
No witness, called by the city or by the court, giving evidence in any prosecution under this chapter, shall ever be prosecuted for the offense concerning which such witness testifies. Such witness shall be compelled to testify and for refusing to do so may be punished for contempt. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-337.  
Chapter 15 - HOTELS AND SIMILAR ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Housing code generally, ch. 16; license tax for boarding houses and tourist homes, § 18-64; license tax for hotels, motels, etc., § 18-85; defrauding hotels, motels, etc., § 23-34; tax on transients obtaining board or lodging, § 35-158 et seq. 
State Law reference— Hotels, Code of Virginia, title 35.1. 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings, respectively, except in cases where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Lodging place means any bed and breakfast, campground, condominium, hotel, inn, motel, rooming house, time share business, tourist cabin, tourist camp, tourist home or similar establishment within the city which offers lodging, for compensation, to any transient. 
Public safety officer means any police officer, the fire marshal, and any deputy or assistant appointed by the fire marshal pursuant to section 12-25 of this Code. 
Transient means any person who, for a period of time not exceeding thirty (30) consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging in any lodging place. 
(Code 1965, § 35A-5; Ord. No. 1378, 6-20-83; Ord. No. 2589, 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 15-2. - Violations of chapter. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 35A-4; Ord. No. 1378, 6-20-83; Ord. No. 2589, 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 15-3. - Numbering of rooms. 
Whenever a lodging place has individual sleeping or living room units, each unit shall be numbered or designated in a plain, conspicuous manner. Such number or designation shall be placed on the outside of the outer door of each unit, and no two (2) units shall bear the same number. 
(Code 1965, § 35A-4; Ord. No. 1378, 6-20-83; Ord. No. 2589, 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 15-4. - Rate advertisements. 
Except in those instances where the same rates apply to all units, apartments and/or rooms in a lodging place at all times, without regard to seasons, no person shall display or cause to be displayed in the city any sign or signs, which may be seen from a public highway or street, which sign or signs include, in dollars and cents, a statement relating to the rates charged for accommodations at a lodging place, unless such sign or signs include, in letters and figures of similar size and prominence, the following additional information: 
(1)  The total number of units, apartments or rooms in the lodging place and the actual number thereof available for rental and occupancy at each rate quoted. 
(2)  Whether the rates quoted are for single or multiple occupancy, where such fact affects the rates charged. 
(3)  The dates during which such rates are in effect, where such dates affect the rates charged. 
The rates displayed on such sign or signs shall in each instance coincide with the rates posted in the units, apartments and/or rooms of the lodging place and such sign or signs shall not have thereon rates for any accommodations not offered to the public or any false, untrue, misleading, deceptive or fraudulent statement, representation or information relating to rates. 
(Code 1965, § 35A-4.1; Ord. No. 1378, 6-20-83; Ord. No. 2589, 6-27-2000) 
Cross reference— Advertising, Ch. 3.  
Sec. 15-5. - Guest register generally. 
(a)  Every person conducting any lodging place in the city shall at all times keep and maintain therein a guest register, in which shall be inscribed, electronically, or with indelible ink, the name and valid home address of each guest or person renting or occupying a room or camping space therein, as well as the vehicle description and license plate information of any vehicle being used by such guest. Such register shall be signed by the person renting a room or camping space, or by someone signing by his or her authority. The proprietor of such lodging place, or his or her agent, shall thereupon enter or write, electronically, or with indelible ink, opposite such name so registered, the number of each room or camping space assigned to and occupied by such guest, together with the date(s) and time(s) when such room or camping space is rented. Until all of the aforesaid entries have been made in such register, no guest shall be suffered or permitted to occupy any room in such lodging place. When the occupant of a room or camping space so rented vacates and surrenders the same, it shall be the duty of the proprietor of the lodging place, or his or her agent, to enter into such registry the time the room was surrendered by the occupant and maintain for one year, a record of the date(s) when such room or camping space was vacated and surrendered. 
(b)  The guest vehicle parking area of every lodging place shall be accessible at any and all reasonable times to any public safety officer in the performance of his or her duties. 
(Code 1965, § 35A-2; Ord. No. 1378, 6-20-83; Ord. No. 1933, 10-30-89; Ord. No. 2589, 6-27-2000; Ord. No. 3438, 4-5-16)  
Sec. 15-6. - False registration by guests 
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, or cause to be written, or knowingly permit to be written, in any guest register in any lodging place in the city, any other or different name or designation than the true name of the person registered therein, or the name by which such person is generally known, or to enter false information regarding any vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 35A-3; Ord. No. 1378, 6-20-83; Ord. No. 1933, 10-30-89; Ord. No. 2589, 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 15-7. - Maximum occupancy. 
It shall be unlawful for any person conducting or managing any lodging place in the city to permit any room or space to be occupied in excess of the maximum occupant load for such room or space, as established by the fire marshal in accordance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2245, 8-10-93; Ord. No. 2589, 6-27-2000)  
Chapter 16 - HOUSING AND BUILDING MAINTENANCE CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, ch. 12; hotels and similar establishments, ch. 15; mobile homes, ch. 19; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 28; swimming pools, ch. 34; water supply, ch. 37; zoning ordinance, app. A; subdivision ordinance, app. B. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate the light, ventilation, sanitation, etc., of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-869. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Title. 
The provisions of this chapter shall constitute and be designated the "Virginia Beach Building Maintenance Code" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1965, § 19-2; Ord. No. 1652, 10-27-86; Ord. No. 1922, 10-2-89) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1922, adopted Oct. 2, 1989, amended § 16-1 by changing the title of ch. 16 from "Virginia Beach Housing and Property Maintenance Code" to "Virginia Beach Building Maintenance Code." In order to maintain the alphabetical arrangement of chapters used herein, the editor has entitled ch. 16 as the "Housing and Building Maintenance Code."  
Sec. 16-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this article: 
Code enforcement administrator means the code enforcement administrator of the department of housing and neighborhood preservation or his designee. 
Dwelling unit means a building or structure or part thereof that is used for a home or residence by one (1) or more persons who maintain a household. 
Owner means the person or entity shown as such on the current real estate assessment books or current real estate assessment records of the city. 
Residential rental dwelling unit means a dwelling unit that is leased or rented to one (1) or more tenants and that is subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2884, 6-14-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1923, adopted Oct. 2, 1989, repealed § 16-2, definitions, as derived from Code 1965, § 19-1, and Ord. No. 1653, adopted Oct. 27, 1986. Ord. No. 2884, adopted June 14, 2005, added new provisions as § 16-2.  
Sec. 16-3. - Purpose of chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards and requirements for the maintenance of housing and other structures in the city, in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code for Existing Structures, and in the event any law or other ordinance of the city requires higher standards or more stringent requirements than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such law or other ordinance shall prevail, except to the extent that such law or other ordinance shall conflict with such code or any provision thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 19-3; Ord. No. 1654, 10-27-86; Ord. No 2467, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 16-3.1. - Adoption of state building code. 
The Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code for Existing Structures, including all future amendments thereto and editions thereof, and all model codes and standards or portions thereof which are, or may hereafter be, referenced, adopted, or incorporated therein, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into this chapter, as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1657, 10-27-86; Ord. No 2467, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 16-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1659, adopted Oct. 27, 1986, repealed § 16-4, which section pertained to conflict of ch. 16 provisions with other ordinances and was derived from Code 1965, § 19-23.  
Sec. 16-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1887, adopted July 3, 1989, repealed § 16-5, pertaining to effect of chapter on private agreements and derived from § 19-22 of the 1965 Code.  
Sec. 16-6. - Rules and regulations for administration and enforcement of chapter. 
The director of housing and neighborhood preservation is hereby authorized to make and adopt such rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for the administration and enforcement of this chapter, which rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with or an enlargement of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 19-10; Ord. No. 1922, 10-2-89)  
Sec. 16-7. - Police powers for enforcement of chapter. 
The director of housing and neighborhood preservation, the code enforcement administrator and all inspectors of the department of housing and neighborhood preservation are hereby invested with such police powers as are necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 19-13; Ord. No. 1655, 10-27-86; Ord. No. 1922, 10-2-89; Ord. No 2467, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 16-8. - Obstructing or interfering with enforcement of chapter. 
No person shall obstruct or interfere with the director of housing and neighborhood preservation, the code enforcement administrator or any inspector of the department of housing and neighborhood preservation in the enforcement of this chapter or in any matter relating thereto. 
(Code 1965, § 19-24; Ord. No. 1655, 10-27-86; Ord. No. 1922, 10-2-89; Ord. No 2467, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 16-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 16-9, pertaining to inspection of dwellings and rooming units and derived from Code 1965, § 19-14, was repealed by Ord. No. 1659, adopted Oct. 27, 1986.  
Sec. 16-10. - Local planning authority inspections for Veterans Administration. 
The director of housing and neighborhood preservation may conduct local planning authority inspections for the Veterans Administration. The fee for each such inspection conducted shall be thirty dollars ($30.00); provided, however, that there shall be charged an additional fee in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00) in the event repairs or corrections are required and have not been completed by the time of reinspection. 
(Code 1965, § 19-10.1; Ord. No. 1656, 10-27-86; Ord. No. 1922, 10-2-89)  
Sec. 16-11. - Violations of chapter generally. 
(a)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided herein, any owner or any other person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(2)  Additionally, if the violation concerns a residential unit and if the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in order to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six (6) months of the date of conviction. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five (5) years after a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five (5) to ten (10) years of a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter after having been at least twice previously convicted shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than ten (10) days and a fine of not less than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), either or both. No portion of the fine imposed for such third or subsequent offense committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter shall be suspended. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided, each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  (1)  Any owner or any other person who violates any provision of this chapter relating to the removal or the covering of lead-based paint which poses a hazard to the health of pregnant women and children under the age of six (6) years who occupy the premises shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court convicts pursuant to this subsection and sets a time by which such hazard must be abated, each day the hazard remains unabated after the time set for the abatement has expired shall constitute a separate violation. 
(2)  Upon a reasonable showing to the court by a landlord that such landlord is financially unable to abate the lead-based paint hazard, the court shall order any rental agreement related to the affected premises terminated effective thirty (30) days from the entry of the court order. For purposes of the preceding sentence, termination of the rental agreement shall not be deemed noncompliance by the landlord. 
(3)  As used in this subsection, the term "landlord" means the owner, lessor or sublessor of a dwelling unit or the building of which such dwelling unit is a part; and "landlord" also means a manager of the premises who fails to disclose the name of such owner, lessor or sublessor. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, conviction of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the institution of legal proceedings to restrain, correct or abate such violation or any other remedy at law or in equity. 
(Code 1965, § 19-25; Ord. No. 1658, 10-27-86; Ord. No. 1888, 7-3-89; Ord. No. 2248, 10-12-93; Ord. No. 2608, 8-22-00; Ord. No. 2884, 6-14-05)  
Sec. 16-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2884, adopted June 14, 2005, repealed former § 16-12 of the Code in its entirety, which pertained to certificates of compliance and inspections of certain dwellings and dwelling units and derived from Ord. No. 1886, adopted July 3, 1989; Ord. No. 2049, adopted April 2, 1991; Ord. No. 2248, adopted Oct. 12, 1993; and Ord. No. 2289, adopted Aug. 23, 1994.  
Sec. 16-12.1. - Establishment of rental inspection districts. 
(a)  The city council may, by ordinance, designate one (1) or more areas of the city as rental inspection districts after holding a public hearing thereon. Notice of the hearing shall be published once per week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation. The city council shall, prior to designating any such district, make the following findings: 
(1)  There is a need to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the occupants of dwelling units inside the designated rental inspection districts; 
(2)  The residential rental dwelling units within the designated rental inspection districts are either (a) blighted or in the process of deteriorating, or (b) the residential rental dwelling units are in the need of inspection by the code enforcement administrator to prevent deterioration, taking into account the number, age and condition of residential rental dwelling units inside the rental inspection districts; and 
(3)  The inspection of residential rental dwelling units inside the rental inspection districts is necessary to maintain safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants and other residents living in the rental inspection districts. 
(b)  The city council may, by ordinance, designate individual residential rental dwelling units located outside of a designated rental inspection district as subject to the provisions of this article, based upon a finding that: 
(1)  There is a need to protect the public health, welfare and safety of the occupants of that individual dwelling unit; 
(2)  The individual residential rental dwelling units are either blighted or in the process of deteriorating; or 
(3)  There is evidence of violations of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants in such individual dwelling units. 
(c)  A map showing the rental inspection districts described in this section shall be available for public inspection in the department of housing and neighborhood preservation. 
(Ord. No. 2884, 6-14-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2884, adopted June 14, 2005, repealed former § 16-12.1 of the Code in its entirety and added new provisions to the Code as § 16-12.1. Former § 16-12.1 pertained to certificates of exemption and derived from Ord. No. 1889, adopted July 3, 1989; and Ord. No. 2289, adopted Aug. 23, 1994.  
Sec. 16-12.2. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to residential rental dwelling units located within the districts designated by the city council pursuant to section 16-12.1(a) and to such other individual residential rental dwelling units as the city council may designate pursuant to section 16-12.1(b). 
(b)  The following definitions shall apply to the sections regarding residential rental dwelling units and certificates: 
(1)  Dwelling unit is a building or structure or part thereof that is used for a home or residence by one or more persons who maintain a household. 
(2)  Owner is the person shown on the current real estate assessment books or current real estate assessment records. 
(3)  Residential rental dwelling unit is a dwelling unit that is leased or rented to one (1) or more tenants. However, a dwelling unit occupied in part by the owner thereof shall not be construed to be a residential rental dwelling unit unless a tenant occupies a part of the dwelling unit which has its own cooking and sleeping areas and a bathroom. 
(Ord. No. 2884, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 3230, 5-8-12)  
Sec. 16-12.3. - Notification. 
(a)  After the designation of a rental inspection district or the designation of an individual residential rental dwelling unit, the code enforcement administrator shall make reasonable efforts to notify all owners of residential rental dwelling units located within the designated rental inspection districts and to the owners of individual residential rental dwelling units so designated, or their managing agents, of the adoption of the designation ordinance. Such notification shall also include information concerning, and an explanation of, the provisions of this article and the responsibilities of the owner pursuant to such provisions. No initial inspection of any residential rental dwelling unit shall be conducted until written notice of such inspection has been provided to the owner of such unit. The mailing of said notice by the code enforcement administrator shall be deemed sufficient notice for purposes of authorizing initial inspections pursuant to this article 
(b)  The owner of any residential rental dwelling unit located within an inspection district shall, no later than sixty (60) days after the date of adoption of the ordinance, notify the code enforcement administrator in writing of any property that is used as a residential rental dwelling unit. Such notice and information shall be submitted on a form provided by the code enforcement administrator. Any owner who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this subsection after having been given notice pursuant to subsection (a) hereof shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). Such civil penalty shall be in lieu of all other penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2884, 6-14-05)  
Sec. 16-12.4. - Inspection and certificate required. 
(a)  Initial inspection. The code enforcement administrator may, in conjunction with written notification pursuant to section 16-12.3, inspect the dwelling units in the designated rental inspection districts to determine whether the units are used as residential rental property and whether such units are in compliance with the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants of such property. 
(b)  Periodic inspections. Following the initial inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit, the code enforcement administrator may inspect any residential rental dwelling unit in a rental inspection district that is not otherwise exempted a maximum of once per calendar year. 
(c)  Follow-up inspections. Upon the initial or periodic inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit, the code enforcement administrator may require the owner of the dwelling unit to submit to such follow-up inspections of the dwelling unit as the code enforcement administrator deems necessary, until such time as the dwelling unit is brought into compliance with the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants. 
(d)  Certificate. All residential rental dwelling units located within the residential rental districts established by city council shall be required to obtain a certificate indicating that the residential rental dwelling unit is in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2884, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 3230, 5-8-12)  
Sec. 16-12.5. - Exemptions. 
(a)  If, upon the initial or a periodic inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit for compliance with the Uniform Statewide Building Code, the code enforcement administrator determines that there are no violations of the Uniform Statewide Building Code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants of such residential rental dwelling unit, he shall provide to the owner of such residential rental dwelling unit an exemption from the rental inspection ordinance for a minimum of four (4) years. 
(b)  Upon the sale of a residential rental dwelling unit, the code enforcement administrator may perform a periodic inspection within a reasonable time after the consummation of such sale. 
(c)  If a newly-constructed residential rental dwelling unit has been issued a certificate of occupancy within the four (4) years prior to the designation of the area as a rental inspection district, an exemption shall be granted for a minimum period of four (4) years from the date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  The code enforcement administrator may revoke any such exemption above if the residential rental dwelling unit becomes in violation of the Uniform Statewide Building Code during the exemption period. 
(Ord. No. 2884, 6-14-05)  
Sec. 16-12.6. - Multi-family developments. 
(a)  If a multi-family development contains more than ten (10) residential rental dwelling units during the initial and annual inspections, the code enforcement administrator shall inspect a maximum of ten (10) percent of the number residential rental dwelling units, but not less than two (2) units. 
(b)  If, upon inspection of a sampling of dwelling units, the code enforcement administrator determines that there are violations of the Uniform Statewide Building Code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants of such multi-family development, the code enforcement administrator may inspect as many dwelling units as he deems reasonably necessary to enforce the building code. 
(Ord. No. 2884, 6-14-05)  
Sec. 16-12.7. - Issuance of certificate; fees. 
(a)  There shall be a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the initial inspection and one reinspection on rental dwelling units in rental inspection districts created by city council. If subsequent follow-ups are required, there shall be charged a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per dwelling unit for each subsequent unit follow-up. No follow-up shall be performed, nor any certificate be issued, until all fees have been paid. 
(b)  No fee shall be required for those rental dwelling units participating in the following: 
(1)  The HUD Housing Choice Voucher program administered by the city; 
(2)  A program that provides ongoing rental subsidies from the city; or 
(3)  A program that requires more stringent inspection requirements than those referenced above due to prior funding or requirements imposed by the department of housing and neighborhood preservation. 
(Ord. No. 2884, 5-14-05; Ord. No. 3017, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3062, 12-9-08)  
Sec. 16-12.8. - Effect on existing law. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit, impair, alter or extend the rights and remedies of persons in their relationship of landlord and tenant as such rights and remedies exist under applicable law. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve or exempt any person from otherwise complying with all applicable laws, ordinances, standards and regulations pertaining to the condition of buildings and other structures. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the authority of the code enforcement administrator to perform housing inspections in accordance with applicable law. 
(d)  The city council may amend any provisions of sections 16-2, 16-12.1, 16-12.2, 16-12.3, 16-12.4, 16-12.5, 16-12.6, 16-12.7, 16-12.8 or 16-12.9 after holding a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be published once per week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(Ord. No. 2884, 6-14-05)  
Sec. 16-12.9. - Violation; penalty. 
Except as provided in section 16-12.3, any person failing to comply with the requirements of this article shall be subject to the penalties established in section 16-11, provided, however, that the code enforcement administrator may take such further and additional action as is allowed by law in order to obtain compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2884, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 3230, 5-8-12)  
Secs. 16-13—16-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1659, adopted Oct. 27, 1986, repealed §§ 16-12—16-16 in their entirety. Prior to repeal, said sections pertained to permitting partial compliance with chapter in hardship cases; failure to comply with chapter not constituting violation in certain cases; abatement of nuisances generally; general procedure to correct violations; and immediate correction of violations in emergencies; and were derived from Code 1965, §§ 19-9, 19-11, 19-12, 19-15—19-18 and 19-20. A new § 16-12 was subsequently added by Ord. No. 1886, adopted July 3, 1989.  
Sec. 16-17. - Shutting off or discontinuing provided utilities. 
The owner shall not shut off or cause to be discontinued the provided utilities for any occupied dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, except in cases of temporary emergency and where such interruption of such utilities is necessary while in the actual process of making repairs. 
(Code 1965, § 19-74)  
Secs. 16-18—16-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LEAD-BASED PAINT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— See the editor's footnote to articles IV—VI. 
 
Sec. 16-31. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Lead-based paint. The term "lead-based paint" shall mean any paint or similar substance which, when dry, contains in excess of one-half of one (0.5) percent lead by weight. 
Substance. The term "substance" shall include, but not be limited to, lead-bearing putty, ceramics, plumbing, sealers, paint and similar items. 
Surfaces. The term "surfaces" shall include, but not be limited to, window sills, window frames, walls, doors, door frames, ceilings, stairs, handrails and other appurtenances of a building. 
(Ord. No. 1925, 10-2-89)  
Sec. 16-32. - Use prohibited; removal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or apply, or to cause to be used or applied, any lead-based paint or substance to an interior surface, or to an exterior surface accessible to children, of any dwelling, dwelling unit or other building or facility occupied or used by children. 
(b)  Existing interior and exterior surfaces in dwellings and dwelling units or other buildings or facilities which are used or occupied by children and which contain lead-based paint or other substances shall be removed or covered with a covering approved by the code enforcement administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1925, 10-2-89; Ord. No 2467, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 16-33. - Reports of lead poisoning. 
Every public health official, physician or director of a laboratory, hospital or other treatment facility who diagnoses or reasonably suspects the existence of lead poisoning in any person shall, within twenty-four (24) hours, so notify the code enforcement administrator. Such notification shall include the name and address of the individual affected and, if such individual is a minor, the name and address of the parents. 
(Ord. No. 1925, 10-2-89; Ord. No 2467, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 16-34. - Federal regulations. 
The provisions of section 570.608 of volume 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations shall apply with respect to any residential structure constructed or rehabilitated with federal assistance. 
(Ord. No. 1925, 10-2-89)  
ARTICLE III. - UNSAFE STRUCTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— See the editor's footnote to arts. IV—VI. 
 
Sec. 16-35. - Regulated. 
(a)  This section is adopted pursuant to the powers vested in the City of Virginia Beach by section 15.2-906 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(b)  Upon determination by the code enforcement administrator that any building, wall or any other structure, or portion thereof, might endanger the public health or safety of other residents of the city, such building, wall or structure shall be declared unsafe. 
(c)  (1)  Except as set forth in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code for Existing Structures, notice that a building, wall or structure has been declared unsafe shall be sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last-known address of the owner and published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city, once a week for two (2) successive weeks; provided, however, that the second publication shall not be sooner than one (1) calendar week after the first publication. In addition thereto, notice shall be mailed to all holders of current mortgages or deeds of trust upon the property as shown by the records of the clerk of the circuit court. 
(2)  Such notice shall state with reasonable particularity the defects or other conditions of the building, wall or structure which render it unsafe and shall specify the period of time within which repairs or corrections shall be made or the building, wall or structure, or a portion or portions thereof, demolished and removed. Such period of time shall not be less than is reasonably required by the exercise of due diligence for the required repairs or corrections to be made, or for the building, wall or structure, or portion or portions thereof, to be demolished and removed. 
(d)  In the event the owner of a building, wall or structure who has been served with the notice provided for in subsection (c) hereof shall fail to comply with the terms of such notice within the time specified therein, the code enforcement administrator, through his or her own agents or employees, shall be authorized to order the building, wall or structure, or portion thereof, to be repaired, or to be demolished and the debris removed, at the cost of the owner. Such cost shall include an administrative fee in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). For the purposes of this section, repair may include maintenance work to the exterior of a building to prevent deterioration of the building or adjacent buildings. No building, wall or structure, or portion thereof, shall be repaired or demolished by order of the code enforcement administrator for at least thirty (30) days following the later of the return of the receipt or newspaper publication as provided for in subsection (c) hereof. 
(e)  Any person who shall fail to comply with a notice provided for in subsection (c) hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the provisions of section 16-11 hereof. Any violation of the provisions of this section may also be enjoined by the circuit court at the suit of the code administrator. 
(f)  All costs and expenses incurred by the city for repairing or demolishing a building, wall or structure pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of property and may be collected as real estate taxes and levies are collected. Any such charges which remain unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in sections 58.1-3940 et seq., and 58.1-3965 et seq. of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(g)  For purposes of this section, the term "code enforcement administrator" shall mean the official of the department of housing and neighborhood preservation and his or her respective assistants and deputies. 
(Ord. No. 2248, 10-12-93; Ord. No. 2350, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 2442, 4-29-97; Ord. No. 2467, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 3015, 5-13-08)  
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES HARBORING ILLEGAL DRUG ACTIVITY 
 
Sec. 16-36. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in this Article shall have the following meanings, unless the content clearly indicates otherwise: 
Affidavit: The affidavit prepared by the chief of police or his designee in accordance with subdivision (b)(1) of section 16-37 hereof. 
Controlled substance: Illegally obtained controlled substances or marijuana, as defined in section 54.1-3401 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
Corrective action: The taking of steps which are reasonably expected to be effective to abate drug blight on real property, such as removal, repair or securing of any building, wall or other structure. 
Drug blight: A condition existing on real property which tends to endanger the public health or safety of residents of the city and is caused by the regular presence on the property of persons under the influence of controlled substances or the regular use of the property for the purpose of illegally possessing, manufacturing or distributing controlled substances. 
Owner: The record owner of real property. 
Property: Real property. 
(Ord. No. 2349, 9-12-95)  
Sec. 16-37. - Buildings and other structures harboring illegal drug activity regulated. 
(a)  This section is adopted pursuant to the powers vested in the city by section 15.2-907 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(b)  The city may undertake corrective action with respect to property which has been determined to be the situs of drug blight in accordance with the procedures described herein: 
(1)  The chief of police or his designee shall execute and forward to the director of housing and neighborhood preservation an affidavit, citing this section and section 15.2-907 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, to the effect that (i) drug blight exists on the property and in the manner described therein; (ii) the city has used diligence without effect to abate the drug blight; and (iii) the drug blight constitutes a present threat to the public's health, safety or welfare. 
(2)  The director of housing and neighborhood preservation or his designee shall then send a notice to the owner of the property, to be sent by regular mail to the last address listed for the owner on the city's assessment records for the property, together with a copy of such affidavit, advising that (i) the owner has up to thirty (30) days from the date thereof to undertake corrective action to abate the drug blight described in such affidavit and (ii) the city will, if requested to do so, assist the owner in determining and coordinating the appropriate corrective action to abate the drug blight described in such affidavit. 
(3)  If appropriate corrective action is not undertaken during such thirty-day period, the director of housing and neighborhood preservation or his designee shall send by regular mail an additional notice to the owner of the property, at the address stated in the preceding subdivision, stating the date on which the city may commence corrective action to abate the drug blight on the property, which date shall be no earlier than fifteen (15) days after the date of mailing of the notice. Such additional notice shall require that the property, if occupied, be vacated and secured as a hazard to the public health and safety, and also reasonably describe any other corrective action contemplated to be taken by the city. Upon receipt of such notice, the owner shall have a right, upon reasonable notice to the city, to seek equitable relief, and the city shall initiate no corrective action while a proper petition for relief is pending before a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  If the owner of such property refuses or fails to take timely corrective action pursuant to this section, and the city undertakes corrective action with respect to the property after complying with the provisions of subsection (b), the costs and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property and may be collected by the city as taxes and levies are collected. 
(d)  Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property has been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property with the same priority as liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in articles 3 (§ 58.1-3940 et seq.) and 4 (§ 58.1-3965 et seq.) of chapter 39 of title 58.1, Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(e)  If the owner of such property takes timely corrective action pursuant to this section, the city shall deem the drug blight abated, shall close the proceeding without any charge or cost to the owner, and the director of housing and neighborhood preservation or his designee shall promptly provide written notice to the owner that the proceeding has been terminated satisfactorily. The closing of a proceeding shall not bar the city from initiating a subsequent proceeding if the drug blight recurs. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge or waive any rights or remedies of an owner of property at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No 2349, 9-12-95; Ord. No 2468, 1-13-98)  
ARTICLE V. - DEFACEMENT OF STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 16-38. - Removal or repair of defaced structures. 
The city manager or his designee may require the owner of any building, wall, fence or other structure which has been defaced to remove or repair the defacement, where such defacement is visible from any public right-of-way in accordance with the procedures described herein: 
(1)  The city manager or his designee shall send a notice to the owner of the property by regular mail to the last address listed for the owner on the city's assessment records for the property advising that the owner has seven (7) days from the date of the notice to remove or repair the defacement. 
(2)  If the owner fails to remove or repair the defacement within the time prescribed in the notice, the city manager or his designee may have such defacement removed or repaired by his agents or employees at the expense of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2465, 12-6-97)  
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSING AND BUILDING MAINTENANCE CODE 
 
Sec. 16-39. - Spot blight abatement. 
(a)  The City of Virginia Beach, in accordance with Code of Virginia sections 36-49.1:1 et seq. may acquire or repair any blighted property, as defined in (b) below, by exercise of the powers of eminent domain provided in title 25.1 of Code of Virginia, and further, shall have the power to hold, clear, repair, manage, or dispose of such property for purposes consistent with this section. In addition, the city may recover the cost of any repair or disposal of such property from the owner, or owners of record at their last known address as contained in the records of the treasurer or the current real estate tax assessment records. 
(b)  "Blighted property" means any individual commercial, industrial, or residential structure or improvement that endangers the public's health, safety, or welfare because the structure or improvement upon the property is dilapidated, deteriorated, or violates minimum health and safety standards, or any structure or improvement previously designated as blighted under the process for determination of "spot blight". 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall make a preliminary determination that a property is blighted in accordance with this section. The city manager or his designee shall notify the owner, or owners of record as determined in (a) above, specifying the reasons why the property is considered blighted. The owner or owners shall have thirty (30) days from the date the notice is sent within which to respond in writing with a spot blight abatement plan to address the blight within a reasonable time. A spot blight abatement plan is a written plan prepared by the owner or owners of record of the real property to address spot blight. 
(d)  If the owner or owners of record fail to respond within the thirty-day period with a written spot blight abatement plan that is acceptable to the city manager or his designee, the city council may, by ordinance, declare the property blighted. 
(e)  No spot blight abatement plan shall be effective until notice has been sent to the property owner or owners of record and an ordinance has been adopted by city council. Written notice to the property owner shall be sent by regular mail to the last address listed for the owner on the locality's assessment records for the property, together with a copy of any spot blight abatement plan prepared by the city. 
(f)  If the repair or other disposition of the property is approved, the city manager or his designee may carry out the approved plan to repair or acquire and dispose of the property in accordance with the approved plan, the provisions of this section, and applicable law. 
(g)  If the ordinance is adopted by city council, the city shall have a lien on all property so repaired or acquired under an approved spot blight abatement plan to recover the cost of (i) improvements made by the city to bring the blighted property into compliance with applicable building codes and (ii) disposal, if any. The lien on such property shall bear interest at the legal rate of interest, six (6) percent per annum. The lien authorized by this section may be recorded as a lien among the land records of the Virginia Beach Circuit Court, which lien shall be treated in all respects as a tax lien and enforceable as such. City council may recover its costs of repair from the owner or owners of record of the property when the repairs were made at such time as the property is sold or disposed of by such owner or owners. If the property is acquired by the city through eminent domain, the cost of repair may be recovered when city council sells or disposes of the property. In either case, the costs of repair shall be recovered from the proceeds of any such sale. 
(h)  If the blighted property is occupied for personal residential purposes, city council, in approving the spot blight abatement plan, shall not acquire by eminent domain such property if it would result in a displacement of the person or persons living in the premises. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to acquisitions, under an approved spot blight abatement plan, by the city of property which has been condemned for human habitation for more than one year. In addition, if the city is exercising the powers of eminent domain in accordance with title 25.1 of Code of Virginia, it may provide for temporary relocation of any person living in the blighted property provided the relocation is within the financial means of such person. 
(i)  In lieu of the acquisition of blighted property by the exercise of eminent domain and in lieu of the exercise of other powers granted in subsections (a) through (g), city council by ordinance, may declare any blighted property to constitute a nuisance, and thereupon abate the nuisance pursuant to Code of Virginia section 15.2-900 or section 15.2-1115. Such ordinance shall be adopted only after written notice by certified mail to the owner or owners of the property at the last known address of such owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records. If the owner does not abate or remove the nuisance and the city abates or removes the nuisance at its expense, the costs of the removal or abatement shall be a lien on the property and such lien shall bear interest at the legal rate of interest, six (6) percent per annum, beginning on the date the removal or abatement is completed through the date on which the lien is paid. 
(j)  The provisions of this section shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to any remedies for spot blight abatement that may be authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 2613, 9-12-2000; Ord. No. 2963, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 3096, 7-14-09)  
ARTICLE VII. - STORAGE OF VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 21. 
 
Sec. 16-40. - Open storage of inoperable vehicles on residential, commercial or agricultural property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, for any person, firm or corporation to keep, except within a fully enclosed building or structure or otherwise shielded or screened from view, on any property zoned for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes, any vehicle, which is inoperable. As used in this Section, notwithstanding any other provisions of the law, general or special, "shielded or screened from view" means not visible by someone standing at ground level from outside of the property on which the subject vehicle is located. The placing, draping or securing of a tarpaulin or other nonrigid cover, over and around an inoperable vehicle shall not be sufficient to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  As used in this Section, an "inoperable vehicle," shall mean any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, as defined in Code of Virginia, section 46.2-100: 
(1)  Which is not in operating condition; or 
(2)  Which for a period of sixty (60) days or longer has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle; or 
(3)  On which there are displayed neither valid license plates nor a valid inspection decal. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be given a notice that the keeping of such inoperable vehicle constitutes a violation which must be abated within seven (7) days from the date of such notice. The notice shall (1) reasonably describe the subject inoperable vehicle; (2) state that any owner of such inoperable vehicle or any owner of property upon which such inoperable vehicle is located may appeal the decision that the vehicle is in violation of this section by a written notice of appeal with the code enforcement administrator of the department of housing and neighborhood preservation within seven (7) days from the date of the notice; (3) state that failure to comply with the requirements of this Section may result in the removal and disposal of the vehicle ; (4) state that such removal and disposal shall be at the expense of the owner of such inoperable vehicle or the owner of the property upon which such vehicle is located; and (5) state that an administrative fee in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such inoperable vehicle or the owner of the property upon which such vehicle is located and may be collected as taxes and levies are collected. 
(d)  Service of the notice provided for in subsection (c) shall be by first-class mail, personal delivery or posting in a conspicuous place. The owner shall, for purposes of this Section, be defined as the owner of the inoperable vehicle, or if the owner of the inoperable vehicle cannot be ascertained or readily located, the owner of the property. The Code Enforcement Administrator and inspectors of the Department of Housing and Neighborhood Preservation are hereby authorized to deliver or post such notices. 
(e)  Failure of any person to place such inoperable vehicle into a fully enclosed structure, to screen or shield such vehicle from view as set forth in subsection (a) above, or to remove such vehicle, or render such vehicle operable within the time prescribed in subsection (c) above shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. In addition to any penalties imposed hereunder, code enforcement administrator or his designee may institute legal action to enjoin the continuing violation and may request that the Chief of Police or his designee remove and dispose of such inoperable vehicle as provided in subsections 16-41(c)—(h). 
Should the cost of removal and disposal exceed the proceeds of sale as outlined in subsection (e) above, the additional cost of any such removal and disposal shall be chargeable to the owner of the inoperable vehicle or of the property and may be collected by the city as taxes and levies are collected; and every cost authorized by this section with which the owner of the property has been assessed shall constitute a lien against the property from which the inoperable vehicle was removed, the lien to continue until actual payment of such costs has been made to the city. 
(f)  The owner or his agent may, at any time from the date of removal, up to and including the twentieth day of storage, claim such vehicle upon payment of towing, preservation and storage charges. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any business duly licensed to deal in the buying, selling, storing or disassembling of motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers, or the temporary storage of motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers awaiting repairs, or any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which is designed or used primarily for agricultural or horticultural purposes and which is kept upon a farm or other property principally used for such purposes. 
(h)  Any owner of an inoperable vehicle or owner of property upon which such vehicle is located aggrieved of a decision made pursuant to this section may appeal such decision as set forth in subsection (c) above. The Code Enforcement Administrator or his designee shall schedule a hearing of such appeal on a date not later than ten (10) business days after the filing of the appeal; provided, however, that such hearing may, at the discretion of the Code Enforcement Administrator or his designee, be rescheduled for good cause shown. Enforcement proceedings otherwise permitted under this Section shall be stayed during the pendency of such appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3018, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 16-41. - Removal, storage and sale of certain unattended vehicles—Generally. 
(a)  Any law enforcement officer or other uniformed employee of the police department as authorized by the Chief of Police or designee may have removed for safekeeping any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part or combination thereof if: 
(1)  It is left unattended or has been involved in an accident on a public highway or other public property and impedes the flow of traffic; 
(2)  It is illegally parked; 
(3)  It is left unattended for more than ten (10) days either on public property or on private property without the permission of the property owner, lessor or occupant; 
(4)  It is immobilized on a public highway by weather conditions or other emergency situation; 
(5)  It is left abandoned on a public highway or other public property. For the purposes of this section, it shall be presumed that a vehicle or part thereof is abandoned if (a) it lacks either a current license plate, or a current county, city or town license decal, or a valid state safety inspection decal; and (b) it has been in a specific location for four (4) days without being moved; or 
(6)  It is designated for removal by the code enforcement administrator as provided by Section 16-40(e). 
(b)  No vehicle shall be moved from private property under the provisions of subsection (a)(3) of this section without the written request of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof. Further, the person at whose request a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is removed from privately owned property pursuant to this section shall indemnify the city against any loss or expense incurred by reason of the removal, storage or sale. 
(c)  Each removal under this Section or Section 16-40 shall be reported immediately to the Chief of Police, who shall give notice to the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer and to the department of motor vehicles as promptly as possible. The owner of such vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay to the city all reasonable costs incidental to the removal, storage and locating the owner of the vehicle, trailer or semitrailer. Should such owner fail or refuse to pay the costs or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be unknown and unascertainable, after a diligent search has been made and after notice to him at his last known address and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the Department of Motor Vehicles in Virginia against the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, the chief of police may, after holding the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer twenty (20) days and after due notice of sale, dispose of the same at public sale and the proceeds from the sale shall be forwarded by the chief of police to the city treasurer. 
(d)  If no claim has been made by the owner for the proceeds of a sale under this Section, the remaining funds may be deposited to the general fund or any special fund of the city. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the city within three (3) years from the date of such sale, and if timely application is made therefor, the city shall pay the same to the owner, without interest or other charges. No claim shall be made nor shall any suit, action or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds after three (3) years from the date of such sale. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, any abandoned vehicle which is inoperable and whose fair market value is determined to be less than the cost of its restoration to an operable condition, may be disposed of to a demolisher, without title and without notification procedures, by the city or by the person on whose property or in whose possession the vehicle is found. The demolisher, on taking custody of the inoperable abandoned vehicle shall notify the department as provided by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1205. 
(f)  Any personal property found in any unattended or abandoned motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer may be sold incident to the sale of such vehicle pursuant to this section. 
(g)  In enforcing this section the police department shall not utilize any tow truck service which is not in full compliance with the requirements of article IV of chapter 21. 
(h)  The chief of police is authorized to adopt, with the approval of the city manager, additional requirements for towing services related to the safety and convenience of persons whose vehicles are towed in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3242, 6-26-12)  
Sec. 16-41.1. - Parking of commercial vehicles. 
(a)  "Commercial vehicle" is defined as a loaded or empty motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer designed or regularly used for carrying freight, merchandise, or more than ten (10) passengers, including buses, but not school buses. 
(b)  Parking of a commercial vehicle in residential or apartment zoning districts shall be prohibited, except that: 
(1)  One commercial vehicle of one ton or less in carrying capacity and which does not exceed seven (7) feet in height or twenty (20) feet in length may be parked on any lot where there is located a main building owned or occupied by a resident of the premises; 
(2)  Commercial vehicles during the normal conduct of business or in the delivery or provision of service to a residential area are allowed; 
(3)  The parking of semitrailers for commercial or industrial storage is permitted on bona fide construction sites. 
(c)  Violations of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. In addition to any penalties imposed hereunder, the code enforcement administrator or his designee may institute legal action to enjoin the continuing violation. 
(Ord. No. 3175, 5-10-11) 
Note— This section will take effect on July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 16-41.2. - Parking and storage of recreational equipment. 
(a)  "Recreational equipment" is defined as any equipment, used for transporting people or property in connection with recreation and designed for temporary occupancy, including, but not limited to, jet skis, boats and similar recreational equipment, trailers, campers, motor homes or similar vehicles or racing vehicles, off road vehicles or the trailer or other device used to haul or move such equipment. 
(b)  In AG-2 zoning districts, no such equipment shall be parked or stored in any required yard adjacent to a street nor closer than three (3) feet to any lot line. 
(c)  Where the principal use of a building is residential, recreational equipment shall be stored only as a use accessory to a permitted principal use, and subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Such equipment shall be parked or stored on any lot only within a building or behind every plane of a structure that is substantially parallel to and facing the public right-of-way. 
(2)  On through lots, such equipment may also be parked or stored on the portion of the lot that is clearly and physically the rear of the lot provided that it is substantially screened from the public right-of-way with a six-foot solid fence or equivalent vegetation or landscaping. 
(3)  On corner lots, such equipment may also be parked or stored on the portion of the lot that is clearly and physically the rear of the lot and behind the plane of the house parallel and closest to the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Where the principal use of a building is commercial, business, or industrial, recreational equipment may be parked or stored as an accessory use, provided the limitations and requirements of the zoning district are met. 
(e)  Such equipment may be parked entirely within a driveway for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours during loading or unloading. For purposes of this section, the term "driveway" shall include any portion of a lot, surfaced or otherwise, that constitutes an approved parking area or provides access to an approved parking area. 
(f)  No recreational equipment shall be parked in any public street or public right-of-way for more than three (3) hours. 
(g)  No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes except in locations lawfully established for such use. 
(h)  Violations of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. In addition to any penalties imposed hereunder, the code enforcement administrator or his designee may institute legal action to enjoin the continuing violation. 
(Ord. No. 3175, 5-10-11) 
Note— This section shall take effect on July 1, 2011.  
ARTICLE VIII. - WORKFORCE HOUSING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 16-42. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply only to the sale or rental of workforce housing approved by the city council pursuant to the provisions of article 21 of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07)  
Sec. 16-43. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide eligibility requirements, pricing standards and program procedures concerning initial sales, subsequent transfers and rentals of workforce housing units developed pursuant to the provisions of article 21 of the city zoning ordinance as part of the city's workforce housing program. It is the intention of the city council to establish such standards and procedures as a means of achieving the city's vision for housing and neighborhoods, as stated in Chapter 8 of the Comprehensive Plan - "Housing and Neighborhood Plan." 
(b)  The creation of developments containing workforce housing as an integrated component thereof will advance the city's goal of providing diverse, high-quality and affordable housing in desirable neighborhoods. Allowing a greater mix of incomes within neighborhoods increases the affordability of housing and reduces the isolation of income groups. Further, mixed-income developments are beneficial in the long run because they broaden housing opportunities, increase residents' access to nearby employment and provide a better land use arrangement to accommodate alternative, cost-effective transportation systems. 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3171, 5-10-11)  
Sec. 16-44. - Definitions; explanatory material. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Where explanatory material is provided, such terms shall be construed in a manner consistent with such material: 
Affordable. Housing is generally considered affordable if no more than approximately thirty (30) percent of the annual gross income of the purchaser or renter is spent on direct housing costs. For purchasers, such costs include mortgage principal, interest, taxes and homeowner's insurance, mortgage insurance premiums, mandatory homeowners' association dues and condominium fees, but do not include utilities or other related housing costs. With respect to rentals, such costs include rent payments and an allowance for tenant-paid utilities other than cable television and telephone service but do not include other related housing costs. 
Annual gross income. Income from whatever source derived and before taxes and withholdings. Included in the calculation of gross income are base salary, overtime, part-time employment, bonuses, commissions, dividends, interest, royalties, pensions, military housing allowance, Veterans Administration compensation, alimony, child support, public assistance, sick pay, social security benefits, unemployment compensation, income from trusts, and other income from business activities or investments. 
Appreciation. The workforce housing program uses a shared appreciation model to recapture the workforce housing discount, plus a fixed percentage of a unit's appreciation in value. 
Area median income (AMI). The Area Median Income for the Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, Virginia Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) published annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and adjusted for household size. Pricing of workforce housing units and end-user qualifications are partially based on this published data. The initial sales price of workforce housing units is based on the ratio of housing payments relative to the AMI. Additionally, the end user's income qualifications are based on the AMI, adjusted for household size. 
City. The City of Virginia Beach or such other entity as the city council may designate as its agent in discharging the duties and performing the acts prescribed or contemplated by this article. 
Developer. The developer of workforce housing who sells a workforce housing unit pursuant to the provisions of this article. The term includes other persons or entities, such as homebuilders, who purchase workforce housing units for the purpose of selling such units pursuant to the provisions of this article, but does not include any person who resells a workforce housing unit pursuant to section 16-49. 
Director. The director of the department of housing and neighborhood preservation or his designee. 
Discounted sales price. The consideration paid to the developer for a workforce housing unit; provided, however, that in the case of a resale, the discounted sales price is the difference between the initial sales price and the amount of funds provided by the city, as evidenced by a promissory note, to help buy down the eligible buyer's first mortgage. 
Eligible buyer. A household whose workforce housing application has been approved and who meets the requirements of section 16-46. Such requirements include, among other things, the household's gross annual income, financial assets, and location in which an adult, non-dependent household member lives and works. In order to qualify to purchase a workforce housing unit, a household's annual gross income must generally be between eighty (80) percent and one hundred twenty (120) percent of AMI. 
Eligible renter. A household whose workforce housing application has been approved and who meets the requirements of section 16-51. Such requirements include, among other things, the household's gross annual income, financial assets, and location in which an adult, non-dependent household member lives and works. In order to qualify to rent a workforce housing unit, a household's annual gross income must generally be between forty (40) percent and ninety (90) percent of AMI or, where the building contains an elevator, between forty (40) percent and one hundred (100) percent of AMI. 
End user. An eligible buyer or eligible renter that is, or will be, occupying a workforce housing unit as its principal residence. 
Equity sharing agreement. An agreement between the city and eligible buyer in which the eligible buyer agrees to share the net appreciation with the city upon the resale of the workforce housing unit 
Gross appreciation. The difference between the resale price of a workforce housing unit received by an eligible buyer upon resale of the unit to a third party and the initial sales price that the eligible buyer paid for the unit. 
Household. One or more persons living in, or intending to live in, the same workforce housing unit. 
Initial sale. The original sale of a workforce housing unit to an eligible buyer. 
Initial sales price. The consideration paid for the workforce housing unit by the eligible buyer. 
Net appreciation. The amount of the resale price of a workforce housing unit, less the total amount of: (i) the original principal amount of the first mortgage loan on the unit, (ii) the principal amount of the workforce housing deed of trust note and of any VHDA-held second deed of trust note if VHDA also holds the first deed of trust on the unit, (iii) closing costs actually paid by the eligible buyer in connection with the purchase of the unit, (iv) the eligible buyer's down payment, (v) the appraised value of any capital improvements approved by the director of housing and neighborhood preservation or, where the first deed of trust is insured by the FHA, the cost of such capital improvements, and (vi) the reasonable and customary sales commission paid by the eligible buyer. 
Resale price. The sales price of the workforce housing unit that the eligible buyer receives upon the sale of the workforce housing unit to a third party. 
Shared net appreciation. The amount of the net appreciation owed to the city by the purchaser of a workforce housing unit, which shall be equal to the proportional share represented by the city's investment in the original purchase of the unit as evidenced by the equity sharing agreement. For example, if the amount of the workforce housing deed of trust note equals twenty-five (25) percent of the initial sales price of the unit, the amount of shared net appreciation owed to the city will be twenty-five (25) percent of the net appreciation of the unit. Subject to the provisions set forth in subsections (e) and (f) of Section 16-49 regarding first deeds of trust insured by the Federal Housing administration (FHA), the amount of the shared net appreciation and principal amount of the workforce housing deed of trust note is repaid to the city upon resale of the unit. 
Workforce housing or workforce housing unit. Dwellings or dwelling units, whether single-family dwellings, duplexes, semi-detached dwellings, townhouses or multiple-family dwelling units, approved by the city council pursuant to article 21 of the city zoning ordinance. Such housing is generally affordable to households with working members who live or work in the City of Virginia Beach. 
Workforce housing application. An application submitted to the city that provides the necessary information to determine if a household qualifies for the workforce housing program. Participation in the program is contingent upon approval of this application. 
Workforce housing deed of trust. A deed of trust securing the repayment of the loan made by the city to an eligible buyer, representing the workforce housing discount, plus the shared net appreciation of the unit. 
Workforce housing discount. The difference in sales price between the fair market value of a workforce housing unit and the reduced sales price necessary to make such unit affordable to a household at a targeted income level. 
Workforce housing revolving fund. A fund administered by the department of housing and neighborhood preservation for the recapture of workforce housing discounts, fees and shared net appreciation from the sale of workforce housing units. Funds are reinvested in the workforce housing program for the purpose of preserving or creating affordable housing. 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3055, 10-28-08; Ord. No. 3213, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 3261, 10-23-12)  
DIVISION 2. - SALE AND OWNERSHIP OF WORKFORCE HOUSING 
 
Sec. 16-45. - Initial sales of workforce housing units. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to purchase workforce housing units offered for initial sale as follows: 
(1)  The city shall have an exclusive right to purchase any workforce housing unit, not to exceed a total of one-third ( 1/3 ) of the workforce housing units for sale within a development, by so notifying the developer of the unit within thirty (30) days from the date on which the city is notified that the workforce housing unit is available for initial sale. If the city does not timely exercise its right to purchase the unit, it may be sold to an eligible buyer. 
(2)  Any workforce housing unit the city has not elected to purchase shall be offered for sale exclusively to eligible buyers for a period of sixty (60) days from the date on which the city's right to purchase the unit expires or from the date the city issues the certificate of occupancy; whichever is later. Upon the expiration of such time, any such unit not sold to the city or to an eligible buyer may be offered for sale without restriction, provided, that when such a unit is sold, the developer shall pay to the city the lesser of the difference between either the actual sales price or the sales price of comparable sold workforce housing units in the same development, and the price as reduced by the amount of the workforce housing discount, less any additional sales commission actually paid by the developer up to a maximum of two (2) percent of the sales price and any closing cost assistance actually paid on behalf of the buyer up to a maximum of three (3) percent of the purchase price. 
(b)  The procedure for initial sales of workforce housing units to be purchased by an eligible buyer shall be as follows: 
(1)  A developer who has reached an agreement with an eligible buyer to sell a specific workforce housing unit to such eligible buyer as an initial sale shall notify the city that the developer and eligible buyer have reached an agreement regarding the purchase of the unit. The city shall, either before or after it receives such notification, verify the eligible buyer's continued eligibility under section 16-46. 
(2)  In the event the eligible buyer continues to meet such requirements, the developer and city shall enter into an agreement pursuant to which the developer agrees to sell the unit to the eligible buyer at a price incorporating the workforce housing discount (the "discounted sales price"). The developer shall not be entitled to receive any portion of the monies representing the workforce housing discount. 
(3)  The city and eligible buyer shall also enter into an agreement pursuant to which the city will finance, by means of a workforce housing deed of trust, the difference in value between the fair market value of the workforce housing unit and the discounted sales price. Such agreement shall further provide, among other things, that that the city shall have the right to repurchase the unit upon resale, or to assign such right to an eligible buyer, in accordance with the provisions of section 16-49. 
(4)  The workforce housing deed of trust shall: (i) subject to the provisions set forth in subsections (e) and (f) of Section 16-49 regarding first deeds of trust insured by the Federal Housing administration (FHA), secure repayment to the city of the workforce housing discount, plus the shared net appreciation; (ii) carry a zero percent interest rate; (iii) be subordinate only to the lender's first deed of trust or, in the event the property is financed by means of first and second deeds of trust held by the Virginia Housing Development Authority (VHDA), to such deeds of trust; and iv) provide that the eligible buyer shall make no payments of principal on the indebtedness secured by the workforce housing deed of trust until the eligible buyer sells or otherwise divests his or her interest in the workforce housing unit. 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3055, 10-28-08; Ord. No. 3213, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 3261, 10-23-12; Ord. No. 3316, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 16-46. - Eligibility requirements for buyers of workforce housing units. 
(a)  In order to be deemed an eligible buyer of a workforce housing unit, a household shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  At least one adult, non-dependent member of the household to be shown on the deed of trust note as a borrower or other obligor shall, at the time of application to the workforce housing program, live or work full-time in the City of Virginia Beach, or must have a bona fide offer of full-time employment within the City of Virginia Beach commencing within three (3) months of the time of application; 
(2)  No member of the household shall own or have a controlling interest in any other real property; 
(3)  The household's combined annual gross income shall, at the time of application, be between eighty (80) percent and one hundred twenty (120) percent of area median income, adjusted for household size; and 
(4)  The net worth of the household shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the sales price of the workforce housing unit being financed. The following items shall not be included in determining the net worth of a household: 
a.  The present value of insurance policies, retirement plans, furniture, automobiles or household goods; 
b.  The portion of the household's liquid assets used for the down payment and to pay closing costs, up to a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the purchase price; and 
c.  Any income-producing assets needed as a source of income to meet the minimum qualifying requirements for eligible buyer status. 
(b)  A household shall, in addition to the foregoing requirement, qualify for a mortgage loan from a mortgage lender acceptable to the city. The city may deny eligible buyer status to any household if it determines that such mortgage loan contains deceptive, predatory or abusive terms. 
(c)  Once determined to be an eligible buyer, a household must continue to meet the requirements of subsection (a) through the time of signing a sales contract. A household shall be required to certify its continued qualification as an eligible buyer at signing of a sales contract and at any prior time requested by the city. 
(d)  Workforce housing units shall be made available by the city for purchase only by eligible buyers who have qualified for a mortgage loan in accordance with subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3055, 10-28-08; Ord. No. 3316, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 16-46.1. - Occupancy requirements. 
(a)  Workforce housing units shall be owned and occupied as the principal residence of the eligible buyer at all times. No interest in any workforce housing unit shall be leased, sold or otherwise transferred by the eligible buyer owning such unit, nor shall the owner of any workforce housing unit permanently vacate such unit, except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The owner of a workforce housing unit, other than the city or developer, shall annually certify his or her compliance with the provisions of subsection (a) on a form provided by the department of housing and neighborhood preservation. 
(Ord. No. 3055, 10-28-08)  
Sec. 16-47. - Workforce housing pricing. 
(a)  Workforce housing shall be priced so as to be affordable for purchase by a household with a gross annual income between eighty (80) percent and one hundred twenty (120) percent of area median income, adjusted for household size. Semi-annually, the housing advisory board shall establish maximum sales prices for workforce housing units based upon current area median income, prevailing mortgage interest rates in the area, real estate tax rates, homeowner's insurance rates, housing ratios, mortgage insurance premiums, condominium and homeowners' association fees and other costs and fees as dictated by the housing market, and the size of targeted households. In determining whether to grant approval pursuant to article 21 of the city zoning ordinance of a proposed development that includes workforce housing, the city council shall determine whether the proposed pricing of the workforce housing within such development meets the requirements of this section. 
(b)  The department of housing and neighborhood preservation shall make available to prospective developers of workforce housing a spreadsheet planning tool to assist in determining if a specific development meets the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3092, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 3213, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 3503, 5-16-17)  
Sec. 16-48. - Workforce housing discount. 
(a)  All initial sales of workforce housing units shall be at a price that incorporates a workforce housing discount, as defined in section 16-44. The workforce housing discount shall be sufficient to bring the sales price of a workforce housing unit within a price range that is affordable to households with annual gross incomes between eighty (80) percent and one hundred twenty (120) percent of area median income, adjusted for household size The actual amount of the workforce housing discount applicable to a specific workforce housing unit shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
(b)  The baseline amount of the workforce housing discount shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the undiscounted sales price; provided, however, that if the undiscounted sales price of a workforce housing unit is affordable by a household with a gross annual income between eighty (80) percent and one hundred twenty (120) percent of area median income, adjusted for household size, the required workforce housing discount may be less than twenty-five (25) percent. The chart below illustrates the required discount applied to a WFH Unit given the affordability of an equivalent market rate unit: 
Affordability Range of Market Units (as a Percent of AMI) 		Required Workforce Housing Discount 
From 	To 	
0% 	80% 	1% 
81% 	90% 	5% 
91% 	100% 	10% 
101% 	110% 	20% 
111% 	120% 	25% 
 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b), workforce housing units in excess of the minimum number required under Section 2106 of the City Zoning Ordinance may be discounted at a lesser rate than provided in subsection (b) so long as such units are sold at a price meeting the requirements of subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3055, 10-28-08; Ord. No. 3163, 4-12-11)  
Sec. 16-49. - Resale of workforce housing units. 
(a)  Prior to offering a workforce housing unit for resale, the owner shall notify the city of the owner's intent to sell the unit. The city shall notify the unit owner of its intention to purchase the unit within thirty (30) days from the date on which the owner's notice of intent to sell was received by the city. In the event the city determines to purchase the unit upon resale, it shall have the right to assign the contract to an eligible buyer. 
(b)  The city shall tender to the unit owner an offer to purchase such unit at its fair market value. The fair market value shall be determined by appraisal. Such appraisals shall be performed by licensed Virginia real estate appraisers selected by the city as follows: 
The city and workforce housing unit owner shall attempt to agree upon an appraiser, who shall determine the fair market value of the workforce housing unit as of the date of the actual or anticipated sale. If the parties are unable to agree upon an appraiser within ten (10) days, the parties shall each have an appraisal made by an appraiser of its choice to establish the fair market value. If the two competing appraisals are within ten (10) percent of each other, the midpoint between the two shall be considered the fair market value. If the two appraisals are not within ten (10) percent of each other, the parties shall agree on a third appraiser, and such appraiser's valuation shall be controlling as to fair market value. If the parties cannot agree on a third appraiser, the city shall have the right to appoint a qualified appraiser and such appraisal shall be controlling as to fair market value. The parties shall share equally in the cost of joint appraisals and shall be solely responsible for the cost of any other appraisals. 
(c)  In the event the city decides not to purchase or assign its right to purchase the unit, it shall so notify the owner in writing, who shall thereafter have the right to sell the unit to any other person or entity. In such event, the provisions of this section shall not thereafter apply to any subsequent resale of the unit. 
(d)  In the event the city purchases or assigns its right to purchase a workforce housing unit from the owner of such unit, it shall make such unit available for sale to another eligible buyer for a period of at least ninety (90) days. The city shall notify the eligible buyers on its prescreened list of the availability of the unit. 
(e)  In the event an eligible buyer enters into a contract to purchase the unit within the ninety-day period, the city shall determine whether such eligible buyer continues to so qualify. If such eligible buyer continues to meet the eligibility requirements of section 16-46, the owner of the unit shall enter into a contract with the city and, if applicable, the city's assignee, to purchase the unit at the fair market value thereof, as determined pursuant to subsection (b). The contract shall further provide that: (i) the amount of the workforce housing discount, plus the shared net appreciation of the unit, shall be repaid to the city upon resale of the unit, provided that where the first deed of trust on the property is insured by the FHA, the owner shall be permitted to recover, at a minimum, original purchase price, sales commission, cost of capital improvements, and any accrued negative amortization if the property was financed with a graduated payment mortgage, and (ii) that the city shall have the right to repurchase the unit, or to assign such right to an eligible buyer, in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(f)  At settlement, the principal amount of the outstanding workforce housing deed of trust note, plus the shared net appreciation of the unit, as defined in section 16-44, shall be repaid to the city from the proceeds of the resale of the unit, provided that where the first deed of trust on the property is insured by the FHA, the owner shall be permitted to recover, at a minimum, original purchase price, sales commission, cost of capital improvements, and any accrued negative amortization if the property was financed with a graduated payment mortgage. All such monies shall be deposited into the workforce housing revolving fund. 
(g)  Subject to the availability of funding, the city shall finance a portion of the purchase price equal to the amount of the new workforce housing discount by means of a note secured by a workforce housing deed of trust. 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3055, 10-28-08; Ord. No. 3213, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 3261, 10-23-12)  
Sec. 16-49.1. - Same—Exceptions. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 16-49, the following transfers of workforce housing units shall be allowed: 
(a)  A transfer of a workforce housing unit to the surviving joint tenant by devise, descent or operation of the law, on the death of a joint tenant; 
(b)  A transfer of a workforce housing unit where the spouse becomes an owner of the workforce housing unit and the transferee is a person who occupies or will occupy the workforce housing unit; 
(c)  A transfer of a workforce housing unit resulting from a decree of dissolution of marriage, legal separation or from an incidental workforce housing unit settlement agreement by which the spouse becomes an owner of the workforce housing unit and the transferee is a person who occupies or will occupy the workforce housing unit; and 
(d)  A transfer to an inter vivos trust in which the owner is and remains the beneficiary of the trust and the occupant of the workforce housing unit. 
(Ord. No. 3055, 10-28-08)  
Sec. 16-50. - Restrictions on refinancing, etc. of workforce housing units. 
(a)  No owner of a workforce housing unit shall: 
(1)  Refinance such unit or encumber the unit with any other mortgage loan, home equity loan or similar instrument without the prior written approval of the director. Such approval shall be requested no later than thirty (30) days prior to the date of settlement of the proposed refinancing or loan. The owner or prospective lender shall provide any information required by the director, including, but not limited to, an appraisal of the unit performed by a licensed Virginia real estate appraiser and based on the sales prices of comparable properties that have recently sold. Such appraisal shall be subject to the approval of the director. In addition, the owner or prospective lender shall be charged a reasonable transaction fee to cover the administrative expenses associated with processing the request; 
(2)  Make any payments of principal on the second mortgage loan secured by the workforce housing deed of trust until the unit is resold by the owner; or 
(3)  Refinance such unit with a loan having a total loan-to-value ratio greater than the owner's proportional share of the initial purchase price. The loan-to-value ratio is the ratio of the principal amount of the refinancing loan to the fair market value of the unit. 
(b)  The workforce housing deed of trust shall not be subordinated to any other mortgage or encumbrance, except a valid purchase money first deed of trust recorded against the property. 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3055, 10-28-08)  
DIVISION 3. - RENTAL OF WORKFORCE HOUSING 
 
Sec. 16-51. - Eligibility requirements for renters of workforce housing units; verification. 
(a)  In order to be deemed an eligible to rent a workforce housing unit, a household shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  At least one adult, non-dependent member of the household occupying the unit shall, at the time of application to the workforce housing program, live or work full-time in the City of Virginia Beach, or must have a bona fide offer of full-time employment within the City of Virginia Beach commencing within three (3) months of the time of application; 
(2)  No member of the household shall own or have a controlling interest in any other real property; 
(3)  The household's gross annual income shall, at the time of application, be between forty (40) percent and ninety (90) percent of area median income, or, where the building contains an elevator, between forty (40) percent and one hundred (100) percent of Area Median Income, adjusted for household size; and 
(4)  The net worth of the household shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total of rent payments for a period of twelve (12) months. The following items shall not be included in determining the net worth of a household: 
a.  The present value of insurance policies, retirement plans, furniture or household goods; and 
b.  Any income-producing assets needed as a source of income to meet the minimum qualifying requirements for eligible renter status. 
(b)  Before a household may enter into a rental agreement for a workforce housing unit, the property owner or manager of the unit shall verify that such household meets the foregoing eligibility requirements. All property owners or managers of workforce housing units for rent shall maintain a list of households it has screened and determined to be eligible renters. 
(c)  Property owners or managers shall also maintain documentation on each household currently occupying a workforce housing unit for rent. At a minimum, such documentation shall include: 
(1)  Verification of residency or work requirements for eligibility purposes; 
(2)  Composition of the household; and 
(3)  Annual gross income for the household and each of the household members whose income is included in determining eligibility. 
(d)  Property owners or managers shall ensure that all persons living in a workforce housing rental unit are listed on the rental agreement. It shall be a condition of the rental agreement for any such unit that the city may inspect the records of the property owner or manager to ensure compliance with eligibility requirements and may, at reasonable times, enter any workforce housing rental unit to verify that it is occupied by an eligible renter. 
(e)  Property owners or managers shall, upon renewal of a rental agreement, but no less often than annually, verify that the occupants of a workforce housing unit for rent continue to meet applicable eligibility standards. 
(f)  If a property owner or manager determines that a household occupying a workforce housing unit for rent no longer meets applicable eligibility requirements, such property owner or manager shall: 
(1)  Require the household to vacate the unit upon the expiration of the current rental agreement; or 
(2)  Allow the household to continue to occupy the unit upon expiration of the current rental agreement at the market-based rental price and make the next comparable market-based rental unit available to an eligible renter at a rental price deemed affordable under the standards prescribed in this article. 
The household shall be removed from the list of eligible renters and shall not thereafter be eligible to rent a workforce housing unit for such period of time as applicable the household meets applicable eligibility requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3213, 1-24-12)  
Sec. 16-52. - Rental property compliance agreement. 
(a)  A property owner desiring to rent property under the workforce housing program shall enter into a compliance agreement with the city. The terms of such agreement shall be prescribed by the city and shall set forth the terms and conditions of the owner's participation in the workforce housing program, including, but not limited to, occupancy and rent requirements, including maximum rents, means of preserving the long-term affordability of workforce housing rental units, and such other terms and conditions as are, in the judgment of the director, reasonable and necessary to ensure compliance with applicable provisions of this article and the goals of the workforce housing program. All workforce housing rental units shall be rented in conformity with the income and rent limitations specified in the compliance agreement for a period of not less than fifty (50) years. 
(b)  Property owners or managers shall, upon request of the director, provide a copy of their most current tenant selection policy or criteria. 
(c)  Any material failure to comply with the terms of an compliance agreement shall subject the owner to a liquidated damages penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per unit for each day such noncompliance continues, unless the director waives such penalty, in whole or in part, based upon his determination that the owner has taken timely corrective action to cure such noncompliance. Liquidated damages collected by the city shall be deposited into the workforce housing revolving fund. 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3055, 10-28-08)  
Sec. 16-53. - Rental procedures. 
(a)  Workforce housing units shall be rented only to households who meet the eligibility standards set forth in section 16-51. 
(b)  A developer building workforce housing units for rental purposes shall notify the director no later than forty-five (45) days prior to the units being ready for initial occupancy. In the notification the developer shall supply the following information: 
(1)  The name of the development and its location; 
(2)  Number of units by type of unit; 
(3)  The size of units in square feet; 
(4)  The number of bedrooms and bathrooms in each unit; 
(5)  The market rental rates of each unit: 
(6)  The actual rates at which such units will be rented as workforce housing units; and 
(7)  Contact information for interested households. 
In addition, the owner or manager of a workforce housing rental unit shall notify the director within three (3) working days of such unit becoming available for rent. The city shall maintain on its web site a comprehensive listing of all properties with available workforce housing units for rent. 
(c)  Any household desiring to rent a workforce housing rental unit shall submit to the property manager or manager an application for determination of its eligibility to rent a workforce housing unit. Such application shall contain such information concerning the residency, employment, gross income and net worth for each member of the household as may be necessary to determine the eligibility of such household. The property owner or his designee shall determine the eligibility of the household and shall promptly notify the director of its determination. 
(d)  A household that meets all of the eligibility requirements set forth in section 16-51 shall be deemed an eligible renter and shall be placed on a waiting list for a workforce housing rental unit at the development at which the household has made application for a rental unit. At such time as a workforce housing rental unit becomes available at the development, the property owner or manager shall so notify the eligible renters on its waiting list, if any. The property owner or manager may review all tenant applications and make tenant selections based on any lawful tenant selection policy. 
(e)  The city shall make available to the general public information concerning the location of workforce housing rental units and such other information as may assist prospective renters in seeking available workforce housing rental units. 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07)  
DIVISION 4. - ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 16-54. - Housing advisory board established; membership; duties. 
(a)  Established. The housing advisory board is hereby established. 
(b)  Term. There shall be at least ten (10) members of the board, who shall be appointed by the city council for terms of four (4) years; provided, however, that the initial terms of two (2) members shall be one (1) year, the initial terms of three (3) members shall be two (2) years, and the initial terms of three (3) members shall be three (3) years. 
(c)  Membership. Two (2) members, both of whom shall have extensive experience in practice in the City of Virginia Beach, shall be either land planners or civil engineers or architects licensed by the Virginia Board for Architects, Professional Engineers, Land Surveyors, Certified Interior Designers and Landscape Architects; one (1) member shall be a real estate salesperson or broker licensed by the Virginia Real Estate Board; one (1) member shall be a representative of a lending institution that finances residential development in the City of Virginia Beach; one (1) member shall be a member of the city council; one (1) member shall be a builder with extensive experience in the construction of single-family detached and attached dwelling units; one (1) member shall be builder with extensive experience in the construction of multiple-family dwelling units; one (1) member shall be a current employee of the department of public works or department of planning; one (1) member shall be a representative of a nonprofit housing organization which provides services in the City of Virginia Beach; and the remaining members shall be citizens of the city. 
(d)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the board to: 
(1)  Establish the maximum sales and rental prices of workforce housing units. Such prices shall be based on the area median income, as defined in section 16-44, and shall be adjusted semi-annually; provided, however, that maximum rental prices in excess of those established by the board shall be allowed if such prices are consistent with the requirements of affordable housing funding sources and are approved by the director. 
(2)  Advise the city council on all aspects of the city's workforce housing program, including recommendations for modifications of the requirements of the program; and 
(3)  Report annually to the city council on the production of workforce housing units, participation in the workforce housing program, and achievement of program goals. 
(4)  Advise the city manager and the city council regarding implementation of strategies to address issues of housing affordability and neighborhood preservation. 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3002, 10-23-07; Ord. No. 3092, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 3213, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 3503, 5-16-17)  
Sec. 16-55. - Director to establish written rules and guidelines; legal instruments. 
(a)  The director shall establish written rules and guidelines supplementing, and in conformity with, the provisions of this article. Such rules and guidelines shall provide for, among other things, allocation of responsibilities, sharing of information, coordination of activities and procedural protocols for administering the workforce housing program. Such rules and guidelines shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
(b)  All legal instruments used in connection with the purchase, sale or rental of a workforce housing unit shall contain adequate provisions to ensure the eligible buyer's or eligible renter's compliance with the applicable provisions of this article. Such provisions shall be approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3055, 10-28-08)  
Sec. 16-56. - Violations. 
(a)  The following tables list certain violations of the Workforce Housing ("WFH") Program requirements and the penalties for their violation. Where more than one penalty is prescribed, they shall be deemed cumulative, such that any or all applicable penalties may be imposed: 
Table 1 (sale/ownership of workforce housing units): 
Program Violation 	Penalties 
Falsification of eligibility requirements 	Permanent ineligibility for the WFH Program. 
	Must sell WFH unit to the city. 
	Immediate payment of the city's share of net appreciation on the WFH unit at resale. 
	Immediate repayment of the second mortgage. 
Failure to occupy WFH unit as primary residence or to provide the certification required by section 16-46.1(b) 	Immediately reoccupy WFH unit. 
	If unable to reoccupy unit, the following penalties apply: 
	1. Permanent ineligibility for the WFH program. 
	2. Owner must sell WFH unit to the city. 
	3. Immediate payment of the city's share of net appreciation on the WFH unit at resale. 
	4. Immediate repayment of the second mortgage. 
Failure to comply with all city regulations for property maintenance 	Immediate correction of code violation. 
	If unable to correct code violations in prescribed time period, the following penalties apply: 
	1. Permanent loss of eligibility for the WFH program. 
	2. Must sell WFH unit to the city. 
	3. Immediate payment of the city's share of net appreciation on the WFH unit at resale. 
	4. Immediate repayment of second mortgage. 
Failure to comply with refinancing and home equity loan requirements of WFH program 	Permanent ineligibility for the WFH program. 
	Owner must sell WFH unit to the city. 
	Immediate payment of the city's share of net appreciation on the WFH unit at resale. 
	Immediate repayment of second mortgage. 
Failure to offer the city first right to purchase when desiring to sell WFH unit 	Immediate payment of the city's share of net appreciation on the WFH unit at resale. 
	Immediate repayment of second mortgage. 
	Further legal action as deemed appropriate by the city. 
End-user enters into a lease-to-purchase agreement for the WFH unit 	Owner must sell WFH unit to the city. 
	Immediate payment of the city's share of net appreciation on the WFH unit at resale. 
	Immediate repayment of second mortgage. 
 
Table 2 (rentals of workforce housing units): 
Program Violation 	Penalties 
Falsification of eligibility requirements such as income, residency, employment or persons who will be occupying the unit, etc. 	Permanent loss of eligibility for the WFH program. 
	Must move from the units within 60 days from date of written notice of being in violation of program 
	Must pay market rate rent on the unit until the unit is vacated 
Failure to occupy WFH unit as primary residence 	Immediately reoccupy WFH unit. 
	If unable to reoccupy unit, the following penalties apply: 
	1. Permanent loss of eligibility for the WFH program. 
	2. Must move from the unit within 60 days. 
	3. Required to pay market rate rent on unit after receiving notice of violation until unit is vacated 
Failure to list all persons living in the household on lease; allowing person or persons not listed on lease to move in after lease is signed 	1. Permanent loss of eligibility for the WFH program. 
	2. Must move from the WFH unit. 
	3. Required to pay market rate rent until household is in compliance or moves from the unit. 
	4. Unauthorized persons must immediately move from WFH unit. 
 
(b)  In the event the director determines that there is reasonable cause to believe that a violation has occurred, he shall so notify the eligible buyer or eligible renter who has allegedly committed the violation. Such notice shall be by certified mail to the last know address of the eligible buyer or eligible renter and shall specify the nature of the alleged violation and the facts supporting the director's determination. The eligible buyer or renter shall have ten (10) days from the date of mailing of the notice in which to request a hearing before the city manager or his designee, who shall not be the director. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall hold the hearing on the earliest practicable date but in no event later than fifteen (15) days from the date the request for a hearing is received. Both the director and the alleged violator shall be entitled to present witnesses and other evidence in his or her behalf. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee shall issue a written decision within five (5) working days of the hearing, and shall mail such decision to the eligible buyer or eligible renter by certified mail no later then the following working day. Such decision shall contain a finding that the eligible buyer or eligible renter has committed the alleged violations, or any of them, or that no violations have been committed. In the event he finds that one or more of the alleged violations have been committed by the eligible buyer or eligible renter, the penalty or penalties prescribed in the chart in subsection (a) shall apply. 
(e)  An adverse decision may be appealed to the circuit court by an eligible buyer or eligible renter within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision. No such appeal shall stay the imposition of any penalty except by order of the circuit court in an appropriate case. 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3055, 10-28-08)  
Sec. 16-57. - Application, etc. fees. 
The city shall charge a reasonable application fee and such other ordinary and customary fees in the real estate industry as are reasonable and necessary to cover the costs of the service for which the fee is charged. The amount of such fees shall be determined by the city council upon recommendation of the housing advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3503, 5-16-17)  
Sec. 16-58. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are severable, and in the event one or more such provisions are determined invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this article shall be unaffected by such determination and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2998, 8-28-07)  
Chapter 17 - LIBRARIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Libraries generally, Code of Virginia, title 42.1; local libraries, § 42.1-33 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Free public library continued. 
The free public library heretofore created by agreement between the City of Virginia Beach and Princess Anne County is hereby continued and shall be designated and known as the "Virginia Beach Public Library." 
(Code 1965, § 27-1)  
Sec. 17-2. - Department and director of public libraries. 
(a)  There is hereby created a department of public libraries, which shall consist of the director of public libraries and such other employees as shall be prescribed by the council or by the orders of the city manager or director of public libraries consistent therewith. 
(b)  The director of public libraries shall be a librarian certified by the state board for the certification of librarians [2] and shall have all the duties and responsibilities of a department head as prescribed in section 7.03 of the Charter. 
(c)  The department of public libraries shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the public libraries within the city, for the formulation and administration of the rules and regulations pertaining to the use of the libraries within the city and for such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the council. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2-148, 2-149, 27-2, 27-3; Ord. No. 3387, 12-9-14) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Librarians, Code of Virginia, § 54-261 et seq. 
 
Sec. 17-3. - Public library board. 
(a)  There is hereby created a public library board, which shall consist of not less than seven (7) nor more than thirteen (13) members. The members of the board shall be appointed by the city council for terms of four (4) years. Two (2) members shall be high school students (a junior and a senior), whose terms shall expire upon their graduation from high school, and one (1) member shall be an employee of the Virginia Beach City Public Schools. The board shall select from its membership a chair and vice-chair. 
(b)  The public library board shall meet not less frequently than once every quarter (three (3) months) and additionally, at the call of the chair or the director of public libraries. The board shall be responsible for making recommendations to the council on all phases of library planning, policy and management. 
(Code 1965, § 27-5; Ord. No. 2172, 8-25-92; Ord. No. 2813, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 2842, 10-5-04; Ord. No. 3387, 12-9-14; Ord. 3521, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 3569, 10-2-18) 
Cross reference— Limitation on terms of members of boards and commissions and application for appointment of such members, § 2-3.  
Sec. 17-4. - Damaging, defacing, etc., library property. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to willfully, maliciously or wantonly write upon, injure, deface, tear, cut, mutilate or destroy any book, plate, picture, engraving, map, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript, record or other library property belonging to, or in the custody of, any public library or any of its branches. 
(Code 1965, § 27-12) 
Cross reference— Damaging property generally, § 23-38 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-72.  
Sec. 17-5. - Concealment of book or other property while on premises of library; removal of book or other property from library. 
Whoever, without authority, with the intention of converting to his own or another's use, willfully conceals a book or other property valued at less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) from any public library or any of its branches, mobile units or collections, while still on the premises of such library or facility, or willfully or without authority removes any book or other property valued at less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) from any of the above libraries, facilities, or collections, shall be deemed guilty of petit larceny, which is punishable as set forth in City Code section 23-31. Proof of the willful concealment of such book or other library property while still on the premises of such library or facility shall be prima facie evidence of intent to commit larceny. 
(Code 1965, § 27-13; Ord. No. 3039, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 3576, 12-11-18; Ord. No. 3634, 7-21-20) 
Cross reference— Petit larceny generally, § 23-31. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-66, 42.1-73.  
Sec. 17-6. - Failure to return book or other library property. 
Any person having in his possession any book or other property of any public library, or any of its branches, mobile units or collections, which he shall fail to return within thirty (30) days after receiving notice in writing from the custodian, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor; provided, however, that if such book should be lost or destroyed, such person may, within thirty (30) days after being so notified, pay to the custodian the value to be determined by the public library board. 
(Code 1965, § 27-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-74.  
Secs. 17-7—17-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LAW LIBRARY 
 
Sec. 17-19. - Established; imposition of assessment of additional court costs to support library. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 42.1-70 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, the city hereby creates and establishes a public law library and, for the support thereof, does hereby impose and provide an assessment as part of the costs incident to each civil action filed in the courts located within the boundaries of the city in the sum of four dollars ($4.00) for each action so filed. 
(b)  The assessment provided for herein shall be in addition to all other costs prescribed by law, but shall not apply to any action in which the commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof or the federal government is a party, and in which the costs are assessed against the commonwealth, any political subdivisions thereof or the federal political subdivisions thereof or the federal government. 
(Code 1965, §§ 27-15, 27-18; Ord. No. 1177, 5-15-81; Ord. No. 1530, 5-6-85; Ord. No. 1791, 7-11-88; Ord. No. 1798, 8-1-88; Ord. No. 2325, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2942, 5-9-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70.  
Sec. 17-20. - Collection, remittance and disbursement of assessments imposed by section 17-19. 
The assessment imposed by section 17-19 shall be collected by the clerk of the court wherein the action is filed and shall be remitted to the city treasurer and held by the treasurer subject to disbursements by the city council for the acquisition of law books, law periodicals and computer legal research services and equipment for the establishment, use and maintenance of the public law library. Such disbursements may include compensation to be paid to librarians and other necessary staff for the maintenance of such library and the acquisition of suitable quarters for such library. 
(Code 1965, § 27-16; Ord. No. 1408, 10-17-83) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70.  
Sec. 17-21. - Compensation of librarians and staff. 
The compensation of librarians and the necessary staff for the maintenance of the public law library shall be fixed by the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 27-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70.  
Sec. 17-22. - Access to computer research services of state law library. 
The public law library of the city, pursuant to the rules of the state supreme court, may have access to computer research services of the state law library. Disbursements may be made to purchase or lease computer terminals for the purpose of retaining such research services. 
(Code 1965, § 27-17.1)  
Sec. 17-23. - Acceptance of contributions, law books, etc. 
The city may accept contributions for the support of the public law library or accept law books or law periodicals from any person. 
(Code 1965, § 27-19)  
Chapter 18 - LICENSE CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Deduction of licenses, due city when paying warrant, § 2-190; local vehicle licenses, § 21-71 et seq.; taxation, Ch. 35. 
State Law reference— License taxes generally, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq.; city license taxes, §§ 58.1-3702, 58.1-3703. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Title. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the "License Code of the City of Virginia Beach, Virginia" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1965, § 20-1)  
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or there is an express provision to the contrary, the following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following respective meanings: 
Affiliated group: 
(1)  One or more chains of includable corporations connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is an includable corporation if: 
a.  Stock possessing at least eighty (80) percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty (80) percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the includable corporations, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other includable corporations; and 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least eighty (80) percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty (80) percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other includable corporations. 
As used in this definition, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends. The term "includable corporation" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income. 
(2)  Two (2) or more corporations if five (5) or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.  At least eighty (80) percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least eighty (80) percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation; and 
b.  More than fifty (50) percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than fifty (50) percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
When one or more of the includable corporations, including the common parent corporation, is a nonstock corporation, the term "stock", as used in this definition, shall refer to the nonstock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
(3)  Two (2) or more entities if such entities satisfy the requirements in subdivision (1) or (2) of this definition as if they were corporations and the ownership interests therein were stock. 
Assessment: A determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by an assessing official when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the assessing official or an employee of the assessing official, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by this chapter or any other provision of law for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be. 
Assessor: The commissioner of the revenue of the City of Virginia Beach. 
Base year: The calendar year preceding the license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of § 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
Business: A course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: (i) advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or (ii) filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
Definite place of business: An office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for thirty (30) consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis; it may also include real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
Entity: A business organization, other than a sole proprietorship, that is a corporation, limited liability company, limited partnership, or limited liability partnership duly organized under the laws of the Commonwealth or another state. 
Financial services: The buying, selling, handling, managing, investing, and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities, or other investments. 
Gross receipts: The whole, entire, total receipts without deduction. 
License year: The calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
Professional services: Services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians, and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the department of taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to § 58.1-3701 of the Code of Virginia. The word "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 
Purchases: All goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term shall also include the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. A wholesale merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine the cost of manufacture or chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture. 
Real estate services: Providing a service with respect to the purchase, sale, lease, rental or appraisal of real property. 
(Code 1965, § 20-2; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2436, 1-28-97; Ord. No. 2569, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 2594, 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 18-3. - Designation and general duties of license inspector and assistants. 
The commissioner of revenue shall designate some person in his office to act as license inspector and such assistant license inspectors he may deem necessary. The license inspector and the assistant license inspectors shall see that the provisions of this chapter are enforced. The license inspector or any assistant license inspector shall make such reports to the commissioner of revenue as may be required and perform any service required by the commissioner of revenue in connection with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. It is hereby specifically made the duty of the license inspector, his assistants, and the police department to issue summonses to any person found to be in violation of this chapter to come before the general district court of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 20-3; Ord. No. 1488, 9-10-84)  
Sec. 18-4. - Adoption of state law. 
As to all questions in regard to the duty or conduct of officers of the city in collecting and enforcing the license taxes imposed by this chapter, and in regard to questions of construction, and for definitions of terms used in this chapter and the rules and regulations applicable to putting the same in operation, reference is hereby made to the laws of the state for the assessment, levy and the collection of taxes for the current year, or to so much thereof as is applicable to this chapter and is not inconsistent with it and the general ordinances of the city. For the conduct and guidance of the officers of the city and other parties affected by this chapter, and for fixing their powers, rights, duties and obligations, the provisions of such laws, so far as applicable, are hereby adopted, without being specifically herein quoted. 
(Code 1965, § 20-28)  
Sec. 18-5. - General requirements. 
(a)  Every person who, in the City of Virginia Beach, engages in any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling (collectively hereinafter a "business"), as defined in this chapter, unless otherwise exempted by law, shall apply for a license for each such business if (i) the person has a definite place of business in the City of Virginia Beach; (ii) there is no definite place of business anywhere and the person resides in the City of Virginia Beach; or (iii) there is no definite place of business in this jurisdiction but the person operates amusement machines or is classified as an itinerant merchant, peddler, carnival, circus, contractor subject to § 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia, or a public service corporation. A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business and for each business. A person engaged in two (2) or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: (i) each business or profession is licensable at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of the City of Virginia Beach; (ii) all of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and (iii) the taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the commissioner of the revenue may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or conduct a business, occupation or profession or do any other thing for which a license tax is required under this chapter, without first obtaining the requisite license and any tag, sign or other evidence thereof required by this chapter. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a second violation of this section within less than five (5) years of a previous conviction for a violation of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Conviction of such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment of any license tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2436, 1-28-97; Ord. No. 2569, 12-14-99)  
Sec. 18-5.1. - Revoked, denied or suspended license; penalty for operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and unless otherwise provided, a Class 1 misdemeanor, for any person who has been denied a license or whose license has been suspended or revoked because of failure to meet or maintain eligibility criteria established by this chapter, to engage thereafter in the business, profession or activity for which the license is denied, suspended or revoked. Each day of operation shall be a separate violation of this section. Conviction of such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment of any license tax imposed by this chapter. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, no license shall be deemed to be denied, suspended or revoked, except after written notice mailed or personally delivered to the applicant or licensee stating the basis for such proposed action, and setting forth a time and place for a hearing before the commissioner of revenue or his designee. After a hearing on the issues or in the event that the applicant or licensee shall fail to appear the commissioner of revenue may refuse to issue or may suspend or revoke such license if he determines that the applicant or licensee has not met or has failed to maintain any required criteria, including, but not limited to zoning, insurance coverage and financial accountability, established by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1747, 11-16-87)  
Sec. 18-5.2. - License fees and taxes. 
Effective January 1, 1997, every person required by section 18-5 of this chapter to have a business license shall pay the following license fees and taxes, as applicable, unless specifically provided otherwise: 
(a)  Businesses with gross receipts during the preceding calendar year of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or less shall pay a fee of forty dollars ($40.00); 
(b)  Businesses with gross receipts during the preceding calendar year of between twenty-five thousand and one dollars ($25,001.00) and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00); 
(c)  Businesses with gross receipts during the preceding calendar year of greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall pay a license tax on gross receipts. Such license tax shall be calculated by applying the specific percentage rate provided in this chapter for each different classification of business to the amount of a business' gross receipts; and 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, the term "gross receipts" shall include, but not be limited to, the following: gross receipts, gross sales, gross purchases, gross commissions, gross contracts or orders. 
(Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 2462, 11-18-97; Ord. No. 2489, 5-12-98)  
Secs. 18-6, 18-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 18-6 and 18-7, pertaining to separate license for each place and class of business and effect of advertising a business, and derived from Code 1965, §§ 20-5, 20-19, 20-20, were repealed by Ord. No. 2363, adopted Jan. 9, 1996.  
Sec. 18-8. - Levy and purposes of taxes. 
Effective January 1, 1997, for each year, beginning with the first day of January and ending with the thirty-first day of December following, there are hereby imposed and levied, and there shall be collected, the annual license taxes and fees set forth in this chapter, on persons conducting or engaged in businesses, occupations or professional employments in the City of Virginia Beach, which shall be for the purpose of providing funds for the operation of the city government, the payment of the city debt and for other municipal purposes. 
(Code 1965, § 20-6, Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2569, 12-14-99)  
Sec. 18-9. - Tax not imposed contrary to state or federal law. 
Nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed as imposing any license tax on any business, occupation or professional employment, or on any part thereof, which license tax the city is prohibited by federal or state law from imposing. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-7, 20-156, 20-165, 20-172)  
Sec. 18-10. - Measurement of tax based on gross receipts, gross sales, etc. 
(a)  Whenever in this chapter it is provided that any person shall pay a license tax based or partly based on gross receipts, gross sales, gross purchases, gross commissions, gross contracts or orders or graduated in any other way (hereinafter, "gross"), so much of the license tax as is so based shall be measured by the gross for the preceding calendar year ending on the thirty-first day of December; provided, however, that whenever any such person was not engaged in such business, occupation or professional employment on which such license tax is imposed for the full preceding calendar year ending on the thirty-first day of December, so much of such license tax as is based on gross shall be measured by the estimated gross that will be made and received from the first day of the then current license year to the last day of such license year, unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. Whenever any person begins a business, occupation or professional employment on or after the first day of the license year, so much of the license tax imposed by this chapter as is based on gross shall be measured by the estimated gross that will be made and received from the commencement of the business, occupation or professional employment to the end of the license year. 
(b)  Whenever a license tax is assessed on the basis of estimated gross, every underestimate thereof shall be subject to correction by the commissioner of the revenue, and it shall be her or his duty to assess such person with such additional license tax as may be found to be due after the close of the license year on the basis of the true amount of such gross. 
(Code 1965, § 20-9; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96)  
Sec. 18-10.1. - Situs of gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this chapter is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a licensable privilege at a definite place of business within the City of Virginia Beach. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed, or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices as follows: 
(1)  The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which services are performed, or if services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of § 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia, as amended; 
(2)  The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares or merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to a license tax in two (2) or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the Department of Taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of the purchases and gross receipts subject to the license tax in each locality; 
(3)  The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed; and 
(4)  The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled. 
(b)  Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of businesses on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to the City of Virginia Beach solely because the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction. 
(c)  Agreements. The commissioner of the revenue may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of Virginia concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being notified by a taxpayer that his or her method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to result in, taxes on more than one hundred (100) percent of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the commissioner of the revenue shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. If an agreement cannot be reached, either the commissioner of the revenue or the taxpayer may seek an advisory opinion from the Department of Taxation pursuant to § 58.1-3701 of the Code of Virginia, as amended; and notice of the request shall be given to the other party. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 58.1-3993 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, when a taxpayer has demonstrated to a court that two (2) or more political subdivisions of Virginia have assessed taxes on gross receipts that may create a double assessment within the meaning of § 58.1-3986 of the Code of Virginia, the court shall enter such orders pending resolution of the litigation as may be necessary to ensure that the taxpayer is not required to pay multiple assessments even though it is not then known which assessment is correct and which is erroneous. 
(Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2436, 1-28-97)  
Sec. 18-10.2 - Exclusions and deductions from "gross receipts." 
(a)  General rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall only include amounts derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business or profession. 
(b)  Exclusions and deductions. Exclusions and deductions from gross receipts shall be governed by the provisions of § 58.1-3732 of the Code of Virginia, which is hereby incorporated by reference, along with any future amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2569, 12-14-99)  
Sec. 18-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 18-11, pertaining to allowance for freight in computing tax, and derived from Code 1965, § 20-17, was repealed by Ord. No. 2363, adopted Jan. 9, 1996.  
Sec. 18-12. - Application generally. 
(a)  Every person desiring to obtain a license to prosecute any business, employment, profession or to do anything for which a license is required under this chapter shall make application therefor in writing to the commissioner of revenue, in which shall be stated the residence of the applicant, the nature of the business, employment, profession or thing to be done, the place where it is proposed to be prosecuted and, in case the business to be licensed is taxed upon a graduated scale based or partly based on gross receipts, gross sales, gross purchases, gross commissions, gross contracts or orders or graduated in any other way, shall make such statement under oath as is required by this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every person doing business, carrying on any trade or calling or practicing any profession within the city and of any person who shall open an office, have a place of business or shall, by use of signs or otherwise, advertise any business, trade or profession within the city, to make application to the commissioner of revenue for the license required by this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of revenue to keep a record of all applications filed pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-10, 20-11)  
Sec. 18-13. - Sworn statement required in case of graduated tax. 
(a)  Every person liable, under this chapter, to a license tax based upon the amount of his actual or probable purchases or sales or of his actual or probable commissions or of the gross receipts from his business or profession or graduated in any other way shall, before being granted the license in question, file with the commissioner of revenue a statement, in writing and sworn to before notary public or the commissioner of revenue, upon forms to be prepared by the city attorney, stating the amount of his actual or probable purchases or sales or of his actual or probable commissions or of the gross receipts from his business or profession or any other matter that may be pertinent to the assessment or the tax on such license. In the case of a corporation, such statement shall be sworn to by the chief officer or agent resident in the city or in charge of the business of such a corporation, and in case of a firm, by any member thereof. The form shall be such that the application, filed as provided in section 18-12, and such statement shall be separately made and signed. 
(b)  Any person who shall fail or refuse to file any statement required by this section or who shall make any false statement therein shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-12, 20-14)  
Sec. 18-14. - Use of interrogatories and other evidence to ascertain amount of tax. 
As one of the means of ascertaining the amount of any license tax due under this chapter, the commissioner of revenue may propound interrogatories to an applicant and use such other evidence as he may procure. Such interrogatories shall be answered under oath. Any applicant refusing to answer such interrogatories under oath shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Code 1965, § 20-13)  
Sec. 18-15. - Dates for application and payment. 
(a)  (i)  Each person required to obtain a license by this chapter shall apply for such license prior to beginning business if he or she was not licensable in the City of Virginia Beach on or before January 1 of the license year; persons issued a license for the preceding license year shall apply no later than March 1 of the current license year. 
(ii)  The application shall be on forms prescribed and provided by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(b)  The tax or fee shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not based on gross receipts or purchases. If the tax is measured by the gross receipts or purchases of the business, the tax shall be paid on or before March 1 of the license year. 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue may, for good cause, grant an extension of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, in which to file an application for a license. The extension may be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax, subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, a penalty of ten (10) percent of the portion paid after the due date. 
(Code 1965, § 20-8; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2569, 12-14-99)  
Sec. 18-16. - Penalties and interest for late payment of tax; interest on refunds. 
(a)  A penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax may be imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the commissioner of the revenue if both the application and payment are late; however, both penalties may be assessed if the commissioner of the revenue determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax made by the commissioner of the revenue, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud, or any reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the commissioner of the revenue is not paid within thirty (30) days, the treasurer or other collecting official may impose a ten (10) percent late payment penalty. Any such penalty when so assessed shall become a part of the tax. The penalties shall not be imposed, or if imposed, shall be abated by the official who assessed them, if the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he or she acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his or her control. 
For purposes of this section, "acted responsibly" means that: (i) the taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the same or similar circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business, and (ii) the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered. 
"Events beyond the taxpayer's control" include, but are not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the commissioner of the revenue, who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when the erroneous information was provided. 
(b)  Interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the commissioner of the revenue is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any license tax paid from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged for late payments under this section. 
(c)  No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, in event of such adjustment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than thirty (30) days from (i) the date of the payment that created the refund, or (ii) the due date of the tax, whichever is later. 
(Code 1965, § 20-8.1; Ord. No. 1519, 3-4-85; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2436, 1-28-97; Ord. No. 2462, 11-18-97; Ord. No 2479, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 18-17. - Assessment of additional tax. 
Whenever the commission of revenue shall ascertain that any person should be assessed with any additional license tax pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, it shall be his duty thereupon to assess such person with such additional tax as may be so ascertained by him to be due. The commissioner of revenue shall mail a copy of such assessment to the person against whom assessed and shall also transmit a copy thereof to the city treasurer for collection. 
(Code 1965, § 20-15)  
Sec. 18-18. - Proration of tax. 
(a)  In the event any person required to obtain a license under the provisions of this chapter, the tax for which is not measured by gross receipts, gross sales, gross purchases, gross commissions, gross contracts or orders or graduated in any other way, shall begin any business, occupation or employment after the first day of January of the license year, the license tax shall be prorated as follows: If such business, occupation or employment is begun on or before March 31 of the license year, the full license tax shall be paid; if begun after March 31 and on or before June 30 of the license year, three-fourths of the license tax shall be paid; if begun after June 30 and on or before September 30 of the license year, one-half of the license tax shall be paid; and if begun after September 30 of the license year, one-fourth of the license tax shall be paid; provided, however, that no such license tax shall be subject to such proration where proration is expressly prohibited or where the amount of the license tax is fixed for any part of the license year or where the license tax or fee for the whole year is fifty dollars ($50.00) or less. 
(b)  Regardless of the basis or method of measurement or computation, in the event a person ceases to engage in a business within the city during a year for which a license tax based on gross receipts on a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling has already been paid, the taxpayer shall be entitled upon application to the commissioner of the revenue to a refund for that portion of the license tax already paid, prorated on a monthly basis so as to ensure that the license privilege is taxed only for that fraction of the year during which it is exercised within the city. In no event shall the city refund any part of a flat fee or minimum flat tax. 
(Code 1965, § 20-9; Ord. No. 1412, 11-7-83; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2569, 12-14-99)  
Sec. 18-19. - Effect of payment of tax on personal or professional services by corporation, partnership or employer. 
(a)  In the case of personal services and professional services, when the business taxed is conducted by a corporation or partnership, the license tax shall be imposed upon the gross receipts of the corporation or partnership, and paid by it, and when so paid, and also when paid by an individual employing persons who otherwise would be liable to a license tax, it shall be deemed to discharge the license tax liability of all officers, partners or other persons who share as partners, or receive their entire compensation as officers or employees, from the gross receipts upon which the tax is based; provided, that the tax paid shall in no case be less than the aggregate of the minimum taxes which, except for this provision, would be due from such officers, partners or employees. 
(b)  In case a person who otherwise would be liable to a license tax under personal services and professional services classifications is employed on a part-time basis by a person, firm or corporation who pays a license tax under personal services and professional services classifications based upon the entire gross receipts of the business, such person shall be liable, independently, to the license tax, but may, in computing the amount, deduct so much of his gross receipts as is included in the gross receipts upon which the tax has been paid by his employer. 
(Code 1965, § 20-27)  
Sec. 18-20. - Assessment of tax and issuance of license generally. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue shall assess each applicant for a license or other person whom a license is required under this chapter with a license tax required by this chapter and shall issue a license, signed by him, to such applicant or other person to prosecute the business, employment, profession or thing to be done therein named. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provision of subsection (a), no such license shall be issued until such applicant has produced satisfactory evidence that all delinquent business license, business personal property, meals, transient occupancy and admissions taxes owed by the business to the city have been paid which have been properly assessed against the applicant by the city. 
(Code 1965, § 20-18; Ord. No. 2084, 7-9-91; Ord. No. 2569, 12-14-99)  
Sec. 18-21. - Not to be issued contrary to zoning ordinance. 
The commissioner of revenue shall not issue a license under this chapter for conducting any business or practicing any profession or calling at a location where the conduct or practice of the same is prohibited by the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 20-31) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, App. A.  
Sec. 18-22. - Insurance prerequisite to issuance for rental of certain vehicles. 
(a)  No license shall be issued for the rental of self-propelled vehicles having less than four (4) wheels until the applicant therefor shall have presented a certificate, approved by the city attorney as to form and surety, of personal liability insurance coverage in the amount of $100,000.00 per person and $300,000.00 per accident and property damage liability insurance in the amount of $10,000.00. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "self-propelled vehicles having less than four (4) wheels" shall include mopeds, as defined in section 7-1 of this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 20-59.2; Ord. No. 1083, 8-25-80)  
Sec. 18-22.1 - Insurance prerequisite to issuance of license to any business which rents personal watercraft. 
(a)  No license shall be issued to any business which provides personal watercraft for rent until the applicant therefor shall have presented a certificate of liability insurance, approved by the city attorney as to form and surety, in an amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence which insurance shall provide coverage for claims of death, bodily injury and/or property damage resulting from the operation of such personal watercraft. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "personal watercraft" means a motorboat less than sixteen (16) feet in length which uses an inboard motor powering a jet pump as its primary motive power and which is designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing, or kneeling on, rather than in the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside, the vessel. 
(c)  This section shall be applicable to any business described in subsection (a) which applies for a new business license, or renewal of an existing business license, after August 11, 1998. 
(Ord. No. 2502, 8-11-98)  
Sec. 18-23. - Prerequisite to validity. 
A license issued under this chapter shall not be valid or effective unless and until the tax required by this chapter is paid to the city treasurer, as collector of city taxes and levies, and such payment shall be shown on the license. If the business in question is one for which a license can be granted only on a certificate of a court or other officer, such license shall not be valid or effective until such certificate is obtained. 
(Code 1965, § 20-18)  
Sec. 18-24. - Designation of place of business. 
Every license issued by the commissioner of revenue, unless expressly authorized elsewhere or otherwise, shall designate a definite place within the city at which the business, employment or profession is to be engaged in or conducted. Any person exercising the privilege granted by such license or engaging in or conducting such business, employment or profession elsewhere than at such definite place, unless expressly authorized elsewhere or otherwise, shall be held to be without a license. 
(Code 1965, § 20-21)  
Sec. 18-25. - Display of license, etc. 
Except as otherwise provided, every person required to pay a license tax or obtain any tag or sign under the provisions of this chapter shall keep his license, tag or sign in a convenient place and, whenever required to do so, shall exhibit the same to any member of the police department duly detailed or authorized to inspect such license, tag or sign or to the license inspector. Any person violating the provisions of this section or any person failing to properly display any license, tag or sign required under this chapter to be displayed in a particular way shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 20-22)  
Sec. 18-26. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  Licenses issued under this chapter shall be transferable, except where otherwise provided, but in no case shall any transfer of the license be legal or valid, until notice in writing has been given to the commissioner of revenue and he has approved such transfer in writing on the license. Such notice shall state the time of the transfer, the place of business and the name of the person to whom transferred. Any person transferring or attempting to transfer any license contrary to the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The commissioner of revenue shall keep a record of transfers made pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-23, 20-24)  
Sec. 18-27. - Recordkeeping and audits. 
(a)  Every person who is assessable with a license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the commissioner of the revenue to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable, and to enable the commissioner of the revenue to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the commissioner of the revenue to allow the commissioner to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within the City of Virginia Beach. The commissioner of the revenue shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside the City of Virginia Beach, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the commissioner's office upon demand. 
(b)  Any person who shall fail or refuse to keep the invoices and records required by this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 20-25; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96)  
Sec. 18-28. - Records relating to solicitors of laundry, cleaning, dyeing and pressing work. 
Every person engaged in the business of doing laundry or cleaning, dyeing and pressing work, whose plant, where such work is done, is located in the city and who has one or more solicitors for such work, who are not among his regular employees, as determined by his social security records, shall keep an accurate record showing the names and addresses of such solicitors, the gross amount of such work received from each such solicitor and the amount of discounts allowed each such solicitor. Any person failing or re fusing to keep such records shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 20-26)  
Sec. 18-29. - Examination and audit of licensee's records. 
(a)  The commissioner of revenue, his duly authorized agent, or any other officer of the city charged in any manner with the duty of assessing or collecting taxes may conduct an investigation, examination or audit to determine that the amount of actual purchases or sales or actual commissions or the gross or net receipts from any business or profession or any other matters that may be pertinent to the assessment of the license tax in question have been correctly reported or returned in accordance with section 18-13. To that end, the commissioner of revenue may summon such person before him and require the production of his records, books and papers likely to throw any light upon the matter under investigation and may make, or cause to be made, such other and further investigations, examinations and audits of the records, books and papers of such person as he shall deem proper in order to determine accurately the proper return to be made by such person. 
(b)  If, after an investigation, examination or audit under this section, it shall appear that purchases, sales, commissions, receipts or other matters pertinent to the assessment have been incorrectly reported or returned, the commissioner of revenue shall assess such person with the proper city license tax. If, as a result of such investigation, examination or audit, additional tax is assessed, a penalty as provided by section 18-16 shall be imposed on the increased assessment. Such penalty shall become a part of the increased assessment. Interest as provided in section 18-16 shall also be added to such increased assessment from the date the increased assessment would have been due under this chapter had the return been correctly reported. 
(c)  Any person who shall fail to appear before the commissioner of revenue or his duly authorized representative and produce such records, books and papers, when duly summoned, or who shall refuse to permit the commissioner of revenue or his duly authorized representative to make or cause to be made such other and further investigation and audit of such books and papers, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 20-16; Ord. No. 1230, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 1520, 3-4-85; Ord. No 2479, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 18-30. - Chapter does not repeal ordinances imposing other taxes. 
Nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed to repeal any tax imposed by ordinance upon motor vehicles and other vehicles, persons, property, admissions, charges for utility services or any subject not mentioned in this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 20-29)  
Sec. 18-31. - Peddlers' licenses do not authorize violation of motor vehicle and traffic laws. 
Peddlers' licenses, the license taxes for which are established in sections 18-93, 18-94, 18-95 and 18-96 of this Code shall not be construed to authorize any violations of the motor vehicle and traffic laws of the city, except that during the hours of lawful operation, the operator of a vehicle peddling on the streets, may ring a bell approved by the chief of police, subject to any provisions of this Code or other ordinance regulating the use of such bell. 
(Code 1965, § 20-154) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 21; use of bell on vehicle used by certain street vendors, § 13-54.  
Sec. 18-32. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the activities of a dealer as defined in section 18-76.1, pawnbroker, junk dealer, or secondhand dealer without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police. 
(b)  To obtain a permit, the applicant shall file with the chief of police an application form which includes the applicant's full name, any aliases, address, age, date of birth, sex, and fingerprints; the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant's employer, if any; and the location of the applicant's place of business. Upon filing this application and the payment of the permit fee set forth in subsection (g) of this section, the applicant shall be issued a permit by the chief of police or his or her designee, provided that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within seven (7) years prior to the date of application. Further, the permit shall be denied if the applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked under any statute or ordinance similar in substance to the provisions of this section, and may be denied if the applicant has been a principal or associate in any partnership, corporation or other business enterprise which has been subject to civil or criminal penalty or any order to cease doing business issued by a federal, state, or local governmental law enforcement or consumer protection agency. 
(c)  The chief of police, prior to issuance or renewal of a permit, shall determine that the applicant intends to conduct business at a fixed and permanent location, and shall require proof of ownership of the proposed business premises by the applicant or the applicant's employer, or evidence of a valid lease of such premises held by the applicant or the applicant's employer. Conduct of business from a hotel, motel, temporary lodging unit or similar location shall not satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(d)  No more than sixty (60) days prior to issuance of the permit required by this section, the applicant must have any weighing devices used in the business inspected and approved by local or state weights and measures officials and present written evidence of such approval to the chief of police or his or her designee. 
(e)  This permit shall be valid until the end of the current business license year and may be renewed in the same manner as such permit was initially obtained upon payment of an annual permit fee. No permit shall be transferable. 
(f)  If the business of the applicant is not operated without interruption, with Saturdays, Sundays and recognized holidays excepted, the applicant shall notify the chief of police of all closings and reopenings of such business. The business of an applicant shall be conducted only from the fixed and permanent location specified in the application for a permit. 
(g)  The initial and annual permit fee shall be the amount set forth in section 27-3(b)(5) for a dealer as defined in section 18-76.1, and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a pawnbroker, or secondhand dealer, and fifty dollars ($50.00) for a junk dealer; provided, however, that if an applicant applies for an initial or renewal permit as a dealer of precious metals and gems at the same time as the applicant applies for an initial or renewal permit as a pawnbroker, junk dealer or secondhand dealer, the applicant need only pay the permit fee for the dealer of precious metals and gems. If the chief of police refuses to issue such permit, the applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the reasons for the refusal and the applicant may appeal such refusal to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 3130, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 3151, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 3169, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 3451, § 1, 5-10-16; Ord. No. 3463, 9-20-16; Ord. No. 3492, 3-21-17) 
Note— The effective date of this section shall be July 1, 2016.  
Sec. 18-33. - Limitations, extensions, appeals and rulings. 
(a)  Whenever, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of any license tax imposed pursuant to this chapter, both the commissioner of the revenue and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. 
(b)  Notwithstanding § 58.1-3903 of the Code of Virginia, the commissioner of the revenue shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current year and the six (6)preceding license years. 
(c)  The period for collecting any local license tax shall not expire prior to the period specified in § 58.1-3940 of the Code of Virginia, two (2) years after the date of assessment if the period has been extended pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, two (2) years after the final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed pursuant to subsection (e) or (g) of this section, or two (2) years after the final decision in a court application pursuant to § 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia or similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later. 
(d)  Any person assessed with a tax under this chapter as the result of an appealable event as defined in this section may within one (1) year from the last day of the tax year for which such assessment is made, or within one (1) year from the date of the appealable event, whichever is later, to the commissioner of the revenue for a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, the tax periods covered by the challenged assessments, the remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The commissioner of the revenue may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, an audit or further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the applications. The assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct. The commissioner of the revenue shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth the commissioner's position. Every assessment pursuant to an appealable event shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to seek correction and the specific procedure to be followed in the City of Virginia Beach. 
(e)  Provided a timely and complete application is made, collection activity shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the commissioner of the revenue, unless the commissioner determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b) of section 18-16 of this chapter, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" includes a finding that the application is frivolous, or that a taxpayer desires (i) to depart quickly from the locality, (ii) to remove property therefrom, (iii) to hide or hide property therein, or (iv) to do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
(f)  Any person assessed with a tax under this chapter as a result of a determination, upon an application for correction pursuant to subsection (d), that is adverse to the position asserted by the taxpayer in such application may apply within ninety (90) days of the determination by the commissioner of the revenue to the tax commissioner for a correction of such assessment. The tax commissioner shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within ninety (90) days of receipt of the taxpayer's application, unless the taxpayer and the commissioner of the revenue are notified that a longer period will be required. The application shall be treated as an application pursuant to § 58.1-1821 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, and the tax commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to § 58.1-1822. Following such an order, either the taxpayer or the assessing official may apply to the appropriate circuit court pursuant to § 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia. However, the burden shall be on the party making the application to show that the ruling of the tax commissioner is erroneous. Neither the tax commissioner nor the department of taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the tax commissioner has ruled on it. 
(g)  On receipt of a notice to file an appeal to the tax commissioner under subsection (f) of this section, the commissioner of the revenue shall further suspend collection activity until a final determination is issued by the tax commissioner, unless the commissioner determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with subsection (b) of section 18-16 of this chapter, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection activity is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" shall have the same meaning as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(h)  Any taxpayer may request a written ruling from the commissioner of the revenue regarding the application of the tax to a specific situation. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if (i) there is a change in the law, a court decision, or the guidelines issued by the department of taxation upon which the ruling was based, or (ii) the commissioner of the revenue notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any person who acts in reliance upon a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
(i)  For purposes of this section, "appealable event" means an increase in the assessment of a local license tax payable by a taxpayer, the denial of a refund, or the assessment of a local license tax where none previously was assessed, arising out of the commissioner of the revenue's (i) examination of records, financial statements, books of account or other information for the purpose of determining the correctness of an assessment, (ii) determination regarding the rate or classification applicable to the licensable business, (iii) assessment of a local license tax when no return has been filed by the taxpayer, or (iv) denial of an application for correction of erroneous assessment attendant to the filing of an amended application for license. 
(j)  Any taxpayer whose application for correction pursuant to the provisions of subsection (d) has been pending for more than two (2) years without the issuance of a final determination may, upon not less than thirty (30) days' written notice to the commissioner of the revenue, elect to treat the application as denied and appeal the assessment to the tax commissioner in accordance with the provisions of subsection (f). The tax commissioner shall not consider an appeal filed pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision if he finds that the absence of final determination on the part of the commissioner of the revenue was caused by the willful failure or refusal of the taxpayer to provide information requested and reasonably needed by the commissioner of the revenue to make his determination. 
(Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2436, 1-28-97; Ord. No. 2705, 6-25-02)  
Secs. 18-34—18-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE TAX SCHEDULE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Dog license tax, § 5-48; license tax on vehicles, § 21-75; gross receipts tax on bus operators in lieu of license tax, § 36-19. 
 
Sec. 18-46. - Unclassified businesses or trades. 
For every person engaged in any business or trade not subject to a specific license tax under the provisions of this chapter or other ordinance of the city the license tax rate shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts, in such business or trade during the preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1965, § 20-35; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-47. - Agents for selling books, magazines and periodicals. 
(a)  The license tax rate for each agent selling books, magazines and periodicals shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts attributable to the business conducted within the city during the preceding calendar year. In addition, a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) will be collected from each agent granted a permit to sell door-to-door. 
(b)  A license, the tax for which is set out in this section, shall not authorize the licensee to sell, offer for sale or solicit the sale of any books, magazines or periodicals on the streets, lanes, alleys or public places in the city unless compliance shall have been made with all applicable provisions of chapter 26 of this Code. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-68, 20-69; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-48. - Agricultural service businesses. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in any agricultural service business shall 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  Agricultural service businesses, as referred to in this section, shall include those businesses set out below and any miscellaneous agricultural service businesses not elsewhere classified: 
(1)  Grist mills, including custom flour mills. 
(2)  Crop dusting: contract. 
(3)  Crop spraying: contract. 
(4)  Weed control, on a contract or fee basis. 
(5)  Animal hospitals. 
(6)  Animal husbandry services: 
a.  Animal breeding and training. 
b.  Dog grooming shops. 
c.  Kennels. 
(7)  Horticultural services. 
(Code 1965, § 20-53; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-49. - Alcoholic beverages—Generally. 
(a)  Every person engaged in manufacturing, bottling, selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall pay license taxes in the following sums, per annum: 
(1)  For each distiller's license, if more than five thousand (5,000) gallons of spirits are manufactured during the license year but not more than thirty-six thousand (36,000) gallons manufactured during such year, seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00); if more than thirty-six thousand (36,000) manufactured during such year, including bottling, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and no local license shall be required for any person who manufactures not more than five thousand (5,000) gallons of alcohol or spirits, or both, during such license year. 
(2)  For each winery license, fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(3)  For each brewery license, including bottling, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), except if the brewery manufactures less than five hundred (500) barrels during the year in which case the brewery license for such person shall be two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(4)  For each bottler's license, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(5)  For each wholesale beer license, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(6)  For each wholesale wine distributor's license, fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(7)  For each retail on-premises wine and beer license for a hotel, restaurant, gift shop, gourmet shop, convenience grocery store or club; for each retail off-premises wine and beer license; and for each on and off-premises wine and beer license, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(8)  For each retail on-premises beer license for a hotel, restaurant or club; for each retail off-premises beer license; for each on- and off-premises beer license; and for each druggist license, one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(9)  For each bed & breakfast license, forty dollars ($40.00). 
(10)  For each day spa license, twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(11)  For each farm winery license, fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(12)  For each annual arts venue event license, twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(13)  For each art instruction studio license, twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(b)  The licenses referred to in subsection (a) above shall be as respectively defined by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the state, as amended, and the terms "alcoholic beverages", "alcohol", "spirits", "beer" and "wine", wherever used in this section shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by such act. 
(c)  No license shall be issued under this section to any person, unless such person shall hold or shall secure simultaneously therewith the proper state license required by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. Such state license shall be exhibited to the commissioner of revenue. 
(d)  Any license issued under this section may be amended to show a change in the place of business within the city. Any such license may be transferred from one person to another; provided the person to whom transferred holds, at the same time, a similar license from the state alcoholic beverage control commission. 
(e)  In imposing wholesale merchant's license taxes measured by purchases and retail merchant's license taxes measured by sales and restaurant license taxes measured by sales under the provisions of this chapter, other than the provisions of this section, alcoholic beverages shall be included in the base or bases for measuring such license taxes the same as if the alcoholic beverages were nonalcoholic. No alcoholic beverage license tax levied under this section shall be construed as exempting any licensee from any merchant's or restaurant license tax, and such merchant's and restaurant license taxes shall be in addition to the alcoholic beverage license taxes levied hereby; provided, however, that in determining the liability of a beer wholesaler or wholesale wine distributor to merchant's license taxation under this chapter, there shall be deducted from such merchant's license tax the amount of the specific license tax imposed under this section and paid by such beer wholesaler or wholesale wine distributor. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-75—20-79; Ord. No. 1171, 4-29-81; Ord. No. 2944, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2965, 1-9-07; Ord. No. 3362, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3472, 12-6-16) 
Cross reference— Use of pool tables, pinball machines, etc., prohibited during certain hours in establishments selling alcoholic beverages, § 4-3. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Code of Virginia, § 4-1 et seq.; authority for above tax, § 4-38.  
Sec. 18-50. - Same—Mixed beverages. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of selling mixed alcoholic beverages shall pay a license tax in the following sums: 
(1)  Persons operating restaurants, including restaurants located on the premises of and operated by hotels or motels: 
a.  $200.00 per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for up to 100 persons; 
b.  $350.00 per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 100 but not more than 150 persons; and 
c.  $500.00 per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 150 persons. 
(2)  A private, nonprofit club operating a restaurant located on the premises of such club, $350.00 per annum. 
(3)  A mixed beverage caterer, $250.00 per annum. 
(4)  An amphitheater, $300.00 per annum. 
(5)  A mixed beverage performing arts facility, $300.00 per annum. 
(b)  No license shall be issued under this section to any person, unless such person shall hold or secure simultaneously therewith the proper state license required by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the state, as amended. 
(c)  Any license referred to in this section may be amended to show a change in the place of business within the city. Any such license may be transferred from one person to another; provided the person to whom it is transferred holds, at the same time, a similar license from the state alcoholic beverage control commission. 
(d)  No local license tax shall be either charged or collected for the privilege of selling alcoholic beverages in passenger trains, boats, airplanes, or rooms designated by the Board of establishments of air carriers of passengers at airports in the Commonwealth for on-premises consumption only. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-79.1—20-79.3; Ord. No. 2944, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 3472, 12-6-16) 
State Law reference— Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Code of Virginia, § 4-1 et seq.; authority for above tax, § 4-98.19.  
Sec. 18-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1307, adopted July 12, 1982, repealed § 18-51, which had set a license tax for beer delivery trucks and solicitors. Said section derived from Code 1965, § 20-74.  
Sec. 18-52. - Amusement and recreation service businesses. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in any amusement and recreation service business shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  Amusement and recreation service businesses referred to in this section shall include those businesses set out below and any miscellaneous amusement and recreation service businesses not elsewhere classified: 
(1)  Dance studios and schools. 
(2)  Theatrical producers. 
(3)  Bowling alleys. 
(4)  Sports promoters. 
(5)  Skating rinks. 
(6)  Amusement centers. 
(7)  Golf clubs. 
(8)  Race track operations. 
(9)  Motion picture services industries. 
(Code 1965, § 20-83; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1444, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-53. - Amusement parks. 
(a)  The owner or operator of any permanent park for public amusement in the city open to the public shall, for the privilege of operating within such park a bowling alley, hobby horse, merry-go-round, ferris wheel, old mill, dip-the-dips and other similar amusements, bathhouses, boat houses, parking lots and the following coin-operated devices: Machines for exhibiting pictures, automatic photo machines, baseball machines, bowling alley machines, hockey machines, auto testing machines, machines for testing strength or grip, electronic gun and rifle machines, aeroplane-testing machines, basketball machines, foot-ease machines, weight scale machines, punching bag machines, tractor machines, crane machines, voice-recording machines and similar coin-operated amusement devices that are usual to an amusement arcade operation, other than coin-operated pinball machines, shall pay the license tax rate of 0.36 percent of the gross receipts, exclusive of any federal and city admission tax thereon, from all such activities, except the gross receipts from the operation of such bathhouses, boat houses and parking lots; provided, that coin-operated pinball machines shall be separately licensed under the law relating thereto. 
(b)  When an amusement park has six (6) or less of the amusements enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, the owner or operator shall pay $100.00 for each amusement and, in addition thereto, 0.36 percent of the gross receipts from all the amusements, exclusive of any federal and city admission tax thereon. 
(c)  Whenever any amusement within an amusement park is operated by a person other than the operator of such park, such person shall pay for such amusement the license tax rate of 0.36 percent of the gross receipts therefrom, exclusive of any federal and city admission tax thereon. 
(d)  Any person, other than the operator of an amusement park, who shall operate any amusement within such park, for which tickets are not sold, such as recording the voice, guessing one's weight, testing one's strength and the like, shall pay the license tax rate of 0.36 percent of the gross receipts therefrom. 
(e)  Any person operating any concession, amusement enterprise or other like business enterprise, for which a license tax is not specifically provided in this section, shall pay the license tax rate of 0.36 percent of the gross receipts therefrom. 
(f)  A license for the operation of any permanent park for public amusement in the city open to the public shall not be construed to authorize the operation within such park of any hotel, dance hall, motion picture theatre, theatre, restaurant or store or the sale of beer, wine or tobacco or the conduct of any other business or occupation for which a specific license is required by this chapter. 
(g)  No license tax provided in this section shall be prorated. 
(h)  The commissioner of revenue may require an applicant for a license under this section to file with him a certificate in writing, sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths, that the operation of the amusement or activity proposed to be so licensed does not include any element of gambling. [3] 
(i)  No license issued under this section shall be construed to authorize the licensee to operate any amusement or other activity the operation of which is prohibited by law. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-91—20-95; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1444, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Gambling, Ch. 14. 
 
Sec. 18-54. - Athletic fields or parks for professional sports. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person operating an athletic field or park for professional baseball games, football games and other professional games of similar character, where a charge is made for admission, shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts, exclusive of any federal and city admission tax thereon, from admissions to such athletic field or park. 
(b)  The payment of the license tax imposed by this section shall not be construed to authorize, within such athletic field or park, the sale of beer, wine, tobacco or other articles or the conduct of any business, vocation or calling for which a specific license is required by this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 20-80; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-55. - Automotive services and garage businesses. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in any automotive service and garage business shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  Automotive services and garage businesses as referred to in this section shall include those businesses set out below and any miscellaneous automotive services and garage businesses not elsewhere classified: 
(1)  Automobile rentals, without drivers. 
(2)  Truck rental and leasing, without drivers. 
(3)  Utility and house trailer rental. 
(4)  Automobile parking. 
(5)  Automobile repair shops. 
(6)  Tire retreading and repair shops. 
(7)  Paint shops. 
(8)  Automobile laundries. 
(Code 1965, § 20-59.1; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1444, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-55.1. - Insurance prerequisite for tow truck services. 
Every tow truck service, as defined in section 21-419, shall submit a certificate of insurance as proof of insurance coverage, (a) upon application for a business license or, (b) upon renewal of its current business license or within sixty (60) days of the date of the adoption of this section, whichever occurs first, as a condition precedent to being issued a new business license, or to having its current business license renewed or to being permitted to continue operating beyond sixty (60) days from the date of the adoption of this section. The required insurance coverage shall be of types and amounts indicated below and shall be approved by the city manager or his duly authorized agent: 
(1)  Garage liability insurance/auto liability insurance: $500,000.00 combined single limits. 
(2)  Cargo insurance: Tow vehicles up to seventeen thousand five hundred (17,500) pounds vehicle weight—Minimum of $50,000.00. Tow vehicles over seventeen thousand five hundred (17,500) pounds vehicle weight—Minimum of $300,000.00. 
(3)  Garagekeeper's legal liability insurance: Minimum of $50,000.00. 
Such insurance shall be in full force and effect at all times, and the city manager shall be given at least thirty (30) days' notice of any cancellation or material modification of coverage. Failure of a tow truck service to carry the required insurance shall result in revocation of its business license in addition to other penalties which may be prescribed by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1458, 6-18-84; Ord. No. 1731, 9-14-87) 
State Law reference— Authority to require insurance of a licensee, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-906.  
Sec. 18-56. - Barbershops, beauty parlors, barber and beauty culture schools, tanning salons, and nail salons. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall be construed as follows: 
(1)  Barbering or hairdressing: Any one or any combination of the following acts, when done on the human body for pay or reward and not for the treatment of disease: Shaving, shaping and trimming the beard; cutting, curling, singeing, shampooing or dyeing the hair or applying lotions thereto; or applications, treatments or massages of the face, neck or scalp with oil, creams, lotions, cosmetics, antiseptics, powders, clays or other preparations in connection with shaving, cutting or trimming the hair or beard. 
(2)  Barbershops; beauty parlors: Any establishment or place of business within which the practice of barbering or hairdressing is engaged in or carried on by one or more barbers. 
(3)  Tanning salon: Any establishment or place of business providing persons access to equipment used for the tanning of human skin, including sunlamps, tanning booths, or tanning beds. This definition shall not include any physician who employs tanning equipment in his or her practice. 
(4)  Nail salon: Any commercial establishment, residence, vehicle or other establishment, place or event wherein nail care is offered or practiced on a regular basis for compensation. 
(b)  The license tax rate for every person who shall conduct or operate a barbershop shall be 0.36 percent on gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  The license tax rate for every person who shall conduct or operate a beauty parlor, hairdressing establishment, tanning salon or nail salon shall be 0.36 percent of gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. A license issued under this chapter pursuant to the payment of the license tax set out in this subsection shall not authorize the teaching or instruction of beauty culture or cosmetology. 
(d)  The license tax rate for every person who shall conduct or operate a barber school or beauty culture school shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. The rendering by students in such school, in the course of their training, of services usually performed in barbershops and beauty parlors shall not require the payment of an additional license tax required by this section. 
(e)  No license for a barbershop, beauty parlor, hairdressing establishment, tanning salon or nail salon shall be issued or renewed under this chapter unless and until there is presented to the commissioner of the revenue a current permit from the director of public health for the operation of such business. The permit required by this section shall be issued on an annual basis upon payment of a fee in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00) to the director of public health. For purposes of this permit requirement, hairdressing, tanning and nail care are separate activities, and each activity shall require a permit by the director of public health. The director of public health may suspend or revoke such permit upon the failure of the establishment or salon to comply with the Guidelines and Permitting Procedures adopted by the public health department. If the director of public health refuses to issue such permit, suspends or revokes such permit, he shall notify the applicant, in writing, of his reasons therefor and the applicant may appeal such refusal to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice. 
(f)  Where merchandise is sold at a barbershop, beauty parlor, hairdressing establishment, barber school or beauty culture school licensed under this section, a merchant's license shall be required in addition to the barbershop, beauty parlor, hairdressing establishment, barber school or beauty culture school license; provided, however, that the licensee in question may make sales of merchandise used in the operation of such barbershop, beauty parlor, hairdressing establishment, barber school or beauty culture school not to exceed $250.00 in any calendar year without paying such additional merchant's license tax. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-104—20-111; Ord. No. 1091, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1444, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2388, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 3155, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 3164, 4-12-11) 
Cross reference— Maintenance, etc., of establishments licensed under above section, § 23-57.  
Sec. 18-57. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-58. - Barging and lightering. 
The license tax rate for every person engaged in the city in the business of barging and lightering, or who shall hire out barges, lighters or vessels to do this work, or have an office in the city where such contracts are made, shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business conducted in the city during the preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1965, 20-32; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-59. - Beach equipment rental—Generally. 
(a)  The license tax rate for each person engaged in the business of renting beach equipment in the city shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the term "beach equipment" shall mean dugouts, umbrellas, chairs, windbreakers, air floats and life rafts. 
(Code 1965, § 20-33; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-60. - Same—Surfboards. 
(a)  The license tax rate for each person engaged in the business of renting surfboards in the city shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  All surfboards offered for rent shall be marked with a permanent identification indicating that they are for rent. 
(c)  No license shall be issued for the rental of surfboards until the applicant therefor shall have presented a certificate, approved by the city attorney as to form and surety, of personal injury liability insurance coverage in the amount of $100,000.00 per person and $300,000.00 per accident and property damage liability insurance in the amount of $5,000.00. 
(Code 1965, § 20-33.1; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-61. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-62. - Billiard, pool or bagatelle tables or shuffleboards. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in the business of operating a pool room in which are located billiard, pool or bagatelle tables or shuffleboards shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  No license shall be issued under this chapter for the operation of a poolroom within the city unless a permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police. If the chief of police refuses to issue such permit, he shall notify the applicant, in writing, of his reasons therefor and the applicant may appeal such refusal to the city council within thirty days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-81, 20-82; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-63. - Billposters. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in business as a billposter shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business. 
(b)  The term "billposter," as used in this section, shall mean any person who shall, for compensation, post bills, distribute circulars and handbills or tack or nail signs in public places. 
(Code 1965, § 20-34; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-64. - Boardinghouses, lodging houses and tourist homes. 
The license tax rate for every person engaged in keeping a boardinghouse, lodging house, bed and breakfast, campground or tourist home, where the total number of rooms available for boarders or lodgers is five (5) or less shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts. Where the total number of rooms available for boarders or lodgers is over five (5), such person shall pay the license tax required of hotels and other like establishments under section 18-85. 
(Code 1965, § 20-130; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 3152, § 1, 9-14-10) 
Cross reference— Hotels and similar establishments, Ch. 15.  
Sec. 18-64.1. - Body piercing establishments. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in the business of operating a body piercing establishment shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, "body piercing" and "body piercing establishment" shall have the definitions provided by section 23-53.1 of this Code. 
(c)  No license for a body piercing establishment shall be issued or renewed under this chapter unless or until there is presented to the commissioner of the revenue a current permit from the department of public health for the operation of such business. The failure of any person to obtain or maintain this permit shall constitute grounds for suspension of the license in the manner provided by section 18-5.1 of this chapter. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to body piercing performed by medical doctors, registered nurses or other medical service personnel licensed pursuant to Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia as part of their professional duties; provided, however, that gross receipts from body piercing activities performed by doctors, nurses or other medical service personnel as part of their professional duties remain taxable under this chapter in the same manner as other services provided by such persons. 
(Ord. No. 2628, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 18-65. - Property Bail Bondsmen. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every Property Bail Bondsman who shall, for compensation, enter into any bond or bonds for others, whether as principal or surety, shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  The term "Property Bail Bondsman," as used in this section, shall mean a person licensed pursuant to sections 9.1-185 to 9.1-186.14 of the Code of Virginia who, for compensation, enters into a bond or bonds for others, whether as a principal or surety, or otherwise pledges real property, cash or certificates of deposit issued by a federally insured institution, or any combination thereof as security for a bond as defined in section 19.2-119 of the Code of Virginia that has been posted to assure performance of terms and conditions specified by order of an appropriate judicial officer as a condition of bail. 
(c)  Any person who shall, for compensation, enter into any bond for others, whether as principal or surety, without having obtained a license shall be guilty of a class three misdemeanor. 
(d)  No license, the tax for which is set out in this section shall be issued unless there is presented to the commissioner of revenue a Property Bail Bondsman license from the Department of Criminal Justice Services. 
(e)  A license, the tax for which is set out in this section, may be revoked at any time for failure to comply with any of the terms or conditions set out in this section. 
(f)  No business license shall be required for any surety bail bondsman licensed under sections 9.1-185 to 9.1-186.14 of the Code of Virginia who is also licensed by the State Corporation Commission as a property and casualty insurance agent, and who sells, solicits, or negotiates surety insurance as defined in section 38.2-121 of the Code of Virginia on behalf of insurers licensed in the Commonwealth, pursuant to which the insurer becomes surety on or guarantees a bond, as defined in section 19.2-119 of the Code of Virginia, that has been posted to assure performance of terms and conditions specified by order of an appropriate judicial officer as a condition of bail. Any bondsman claiming exemption under this subsection must file a copy of his State Corporation Commission license with the Commissioner of the Revenue. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-195—20-199, 20-201; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 2945, 6-6-06) 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax and similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3724.  
Sec. 18-66. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2462, adopted Nov. 18, 1997, repealed § 18-66, which pertained to card-writing stands, and which derived from Code 1965, § 20-36; Ord. No. 1516, adopted Feb. 4, 1985; and Ord. No. 2390, adopted May 14, 1996.  
Sec. 18-67. - Carnival, street fairs and tent shows—Generally. 
(a)  For every carnival, street fair or tent show, except those provided for in section 18-69, there shall be paid the following license tax for each day or part thereof: $300.00 and, in addition thereto, one percent of the gross receipts, exclusive of any federal and city admissions tax thereon, received from all admissions to such carnival, street fair or tent show and all side shows and amusements operated in connection therewith; provided, however, that any such carnival, street fair or tent show that has wintered for at least four months during the previous winter in the city, which, before starting out on the road on its itinerary, desires to give a number of performances for practice purposes, shall pay the following license tax for each day or part thereof for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days: $90.00 and, in addition thereto, one percent of the gross receipts, exclusive of any federal and city admission tax thereon, received from all admissions to such carnival, street fair or tent show and all side shows and amusements operated in connection therewith, and any such carnival, street fair or tent show exhibiting beyond such period of fifteen days shall, after that time, pay the license tax above prescribed in this section for carnivals, street fairs and tent shows generally. 
(b)  For each parade of a carnival, street fair or tent show subject to the license tax imposed in subsection (a) of this section, an additional license tax of $150.00 shall be paid. 
(c)  In those cases where the carnival, street fair or tent show is sponsored by a business association for promotional purposes, or by a charitable, nonprofit or eleemosynary organization in connection with a fund-raising activity of such organization, and when approved by the city manager, the license tax shall be $200.00 for two (2) weeks or any portion thereof; provided, that such reduced tax shall apply only to a single location and the reduced tax shall not reduce or eliminate that portion of the license tax which is measured by gross receipts. 
(d)  No additional license shall be required for the privilege of selling soft drinks, confections, food, souvenirs and novelties on the grounds on which a carnival, street fair or tent show licensed under this section is exhibited. 
(e)  No license shall be issued under this section unless there is presented to the commissioner of revenue a permit from the city manager for the operation of the carnival, street fair or tent show in question. If the city manager refuses to issue such permit, he shall notify the applicant, in writing, of his reasons therefor and the applicant may appeal such refusal to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-96, 20-97, 20-99) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to impose license tax on carnivals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3728.  
Sec. 18-68. - Same—Payment of tax; deposit; issuance of license; certificate of gross receipts. 
(a)  Before any license shall be issued under section 18-67, the applicant therefor shall pay so much of the license tax as is not measured by gross receipts and shall deposit with the treasurer the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) in cash to be held as security for the payment of so much of such license tax as is based on gross receipts. 
(b)  The license tax imposed by section 18-67 shall be paid and the license issued daily for each day's operation of the carnival, street fair or tent show in question. 
(c)  On the day following the expiration of any such daily license, the licensee shall file with the commissioner of revenue a certificate in writing, in form prescribed by the commissioner of revenue and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths, showing his gross receipts for the previous day. The commissioner of revenue shall then compute that part of the license tax in question that is based on gross receipts and assess the same accordingly. Upon the making of such assessment, the licensee shall forthwith pay the amount thereof and he shall not be entitled to operate such carnival, street fair or tent show further until such sum is paid. Further operation of such carnival, street fair or tent show while such sum is unpaid shall constitute an operation thereof without a license and the person operating the same shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and each day's operation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Should the licensee in question fail to file the certificate of gross receipts for the last day of operation in the city, and fail to pay the part of the license tax for such day which is based on gross receipts, within five (5) days from the termination of the operation of the carnival, street fair or tent show in question in the city, the commissioner of revenue shall thereupon assess so much of such license tax as is based on gross receipts, for such day, at the amount of the deposit made under this section and the city shall retain such deposit in full payment of the license tax due under section 18-67 for such day's operations. 
(e)  Upon the termination of the operation of the carnival, street fair or tent show in question in this city and the payment of all license taxes due under section 18-67, the city treasurer shall refund the deposit made under this section to the licensee or to the person who made the deposit. 
(Code 1965, § 20-98)  
Sec. 18-69. - Circuses and menageries—Generally. 
(a)  For each circus and menagerie, for each day or part thereof, the following license tax shall be paid: A sum which equals or amounts to five dollars ($5.00) for each railroad car and two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) for each vehicle, other than a railroad car, used in transporting such circus or menagerie to the city; provided, however, that such sum shall not be less than one hundred fifty ($150.00) in any case; and, in addition thereto, one (1) percent of the gross receipts, exclusive of any federal and city admissions tax thereon, received from all admissions. 
(b)  For each side show in connection with a circus or menagerie, for each day or part thereof, there shall be paid the following license tax: Ninety dollars ($90.00) and, in addition thereto, one (1) percent of the gross receipts, exclusive of any federal and city admissions tax thereon, from all admissions. 
(c)  For each parade of a circus or menagerie, an additional license tax of $150.00 shall be paid. 
(d)  No additional license shall be required for the privilege of selling soft drinks, confections, food, souvenirs and novelties on the grounds on which a circus or menagerie licensed under this section is exhibited. 
(e)  No license shall be issued under this section unless there is presented to the commissioner of revenue a permit from the city manager for the operation of the circus, menagerie and side show in question. If the city manager refuses to issue such permit, he shall notify the applicant, in writing, of his reasons therefor and the applicant may appeal such refusal to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-100, 20-102, 20-103) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to impose license tax on circuses, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3728.  
Sec. 18-70. - Same—Payment of tax; deposit; issuance of license; certificate of gross receipts. 
(a)  Before any license shall be issued under section 18-69, the applicant therefor shall pay so much of the license tax as is not measured by gross receipts and shall deposit with the city treasurer the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in cash to be held as security for the payment of so much of such license tax as is based on gross receipts. 
(b)  The license tax imposed by section 18-69 shall be paid and the license issued daily for each day's operation of the circus, menagerie and side show in question. 
(c)  On the day following the expiration of any such daily license, the licensee shall file with the commissioner of revenue a certificate in writing, in form prescribed by the commissioner of revenue and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths, showing his gross receipts for the previous day. The commissioner of revenue shall then compute that part of the license tax in question that is based on gross receipts and assess the same accordingly. Upon the making of such assessment, the licensee shall forthwith pay the amount thereof and he shall not be entitled to operate such circus, menagerie and side show further until such sum is paid. Further operation of such circus, menagerie and side show while such sum is unpaid shall constitute an operation thereof without a license and the person operating the same shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and each day's operation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Should the licensee in question fail to file the certificate of gross receipts for the last day of operation in this city, and fail to pay the part of the license tax for such day which is based on gross receipts, within five (5) days from the termination of the operation of the circus, menagerie and side show in question in the city, the commissioner of revenue shall thereupon assess so much of such license tax as is based on gross receipts, for such day, at the amount of the deposit made under this section and the city shall retain such deposit in full payment of the license tax due under section 18-69 for such day's operations. 
(e)  Upon the termination of the operation of the circus or menagerie in question in this city and the payment of all license taxes due under section 18-69, the city treasurer shall refund the deposit made under this section to the licensee or to the person who made the deposit. 
(Code 1965, § 20-102)  
Sec. 18-71. - City directories. 
The license tax rate for every person engaged in the city in the business of publishing or distributing a directory, commonly known as a "city directory", having an office or representative, or making a contract for work or soliciting for work, in the city, shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts attributable to the business conducted within the city during the preceding calendar year. In addition, a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) will be collected from each agent granted a permit to solicit. 
(Code 1965, § 20-37; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-72. - Coin-operated amusement machines—Operators. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "amusement operator" shall mean any person leasing, renting or otherwise furnishing or providing a coin-operated amusement machine in the city, whether or not such operator has a fixed place of business within the city; provided, however, that the term "operator" shall not include a person owning less than three (3) coin machines and operating such machines on property owned or leased by such person. 
(b)  (1)  Amusement operators with ten (10) or more machines shall pay an annual license tax of two hundred dollars ($200.00), in addition to a license tax of 0.36 percent on the share of gross receipts actually received by the operator from such business for the preceding calendar year. 
(2)  Amusement operators with at least three (3) but less than ten (10) machines shall pay an annual license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), in addition to a license tax of 0.36 percent on the share of gross receipts actually received by the operator from such business for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  The operator's license tax shall not be applicable to operators of weighing machines, automatic baggage or parcel checking machines or receptacles, nor to operators of vending machines which are so constructed as to do nothing but vend goods, wares and merchandise or postage stamps or provide service only, nor to operators of viewing machines or photomat machines, nor to operators of devices or machines affording rides to children or for the delivery of newspapers. 
(d)  Upon making application for a license as an operator, the applicant shall file with the commissioner of the revenue, in duplicate, a list of the locations of all machines and devices sold, leased, rented or otherwise furnished to or placed with others and, during the current license year, every operator shall notify the commissioner of the revenue, in writing in duplicate, of all changes in locations of such machines and devices, within five (5) days after such changes are made. 
(e)  Every operator, before commencing doing business in the city, shall register with the commissioner of the revenue and deposit with him a bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), payable to the city, to insure the keeping of adequate records, the filing of reports in such form and at such times as may be prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue and the proper payment to the city of the tax imposed by this section. The form and surety of such bond shall be determined by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(f)  Every coin machine covered by this section shall be plainly marked by the owner thereof with the name and address of such owner. 
(g)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense and the machine or other device shall become forfeited to the city. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-113—20-115, 20-117, 20-188; Ord. No. 1084, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 2724, 10-29-02) 
Cross reference— Fraudulent use of coin-operated devices, § 23-35. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to levy license tax on operator of coin-operated machines or devices, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3720. See also, § 58.1-3721.  
Sec. 18-73. - Vending machines. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of selling goods, wares and merchandise through the use of coin-operated vending machines shall be classified as a retail merchant on that phase or part of the business done through such machines and the license tax rate shall be 0.20 percent of the gross receipts for the privilege of doing business in this city; provided, however, that if any such person has more than one (1) definite place in this city at which goods, wares or merchandise are stored, kept or assembled for supplying such vending machines, each such place in excess of one (1) shall be regarded as an additional definite place of business. 
(b)  The term "vending machine," as used in this section, includes only such machines as vend goods, wares and merchandise and gives to the customer on every purchase his money's worth in goods, wares or merchandise. The term does not include any machine the operation of which is prohibited by law, nor any machine which has any gambling or amusement feature whatsoever. 
(c)  The term "engaged in the business of selling goods, wares and merchandise through the use of coin-operated vending machines," as used in this section, shall be construed as including the use of such machines by a soft drink manufacturer or bottler and a manufacturer or packager of nuts, candy and sandwiches, who leases, rents or otherwise furnishes vending machines to his customers for their use in selling at retail soft drinks or packaged nuts, candy or sandwiches, as well as a soft drink manufacturer or bottler or a manufacturer or packager of nuts, candy and sandwiches, who himself sells his products at retail through the use of such machines. Every such soft drink manufacturer or bottler and manufacturer or packager of nuts, candy and sandwiches shall report, at retail selling prices, all sales made through such vending machines and shall pay the tax thereon under this section accordingly. A soft drink manufacturer or bottler and a manufacturer or packager of nuts, candy and sandwiches licensed under this section shall be deemed to have qualified as to all vending machines placed and in any way serviced by him, whether the sales at retail through the use of such machines are made by the manufacturer, packager or bottler himself or by his customers. 
(d)  The use of a cigarette-vending machine on premises which are not already covered by a tobacco retailer's license shall require the owner of such cigarette vending machine to take out a tobacco retailer's license for that location. 
(e)  Every vending machine shall be plainly marked by the owner thereof with the name and address of such owner. 
(f)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding twelve (12) months, or both, in the discretion of the jury or of the court trying the case without a jury. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-119, 20-120, 20-122, 20-123, 20-125; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1444, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-74. - Commercial service businesses. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in any commercial service business shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  Commercial service businesses referred to in this section shall include those businesses set out below and any miscellaneous commercial service business not elsewhere classified: 
(1)  Advertising. 
(2)  Consumer credit reporting agencies, mercantile. 
(3)  Reporting agencies and adjustment agencies. 
(4)  Collection agencies. 
(5)  Duplicating, addressing, blueprinting. 
(6)  Photocopying, mailing, mailing list and stenographic services. 
(7)  Building cleaning, disinfecting, exterminating services. 
(8)  Private employment agencies. 
(9)  Commercial research and development laboratories. 
(10)  Business, management, administrative and consulting services. 
(11)  Protective services. 
(12)  Equipment rental and leasing services. 
(13)  Photofinishing laboratories. 
(14)  Commercial testing laboratories. 
(15)  Temporary help supply services. 
(16)  Commission merchants. 
(Code 1965, § 20-39; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 1950, 3-5-90; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-75. - Contractors. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of section 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia, the license tax rate for every person engaged in any contracting service business shall be 0.16 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. Contract service businesses referred to in this subsection shall include those businesses set out below and any miscellaneous contract service business not elsewhere classified: 
(1)  General building contractors. 
(2)  Highway and street construction. 
(3)  Heavy construction. 
(4)  Special trade contractors: 
a.  Plumbing, heating and air-conditioning. 
b.  Painting, paper hanging and decorating. 
c.  Electrical. 
d.  Masonry, stone setting and other. 
e.  Stonework. 
f.  Plastering and lathing. 
g.  Terrazzo, tile, marble and mosaic work. 
h.  Carpentering. 
i.  Floor laying and other floorwork. 
j.  Roofing and sheet metal work. 
k.  Concrete work. 
l.  Structural steel erection. 
m.  Ornamental metal work. 
n.  Glass and glazing work. 
o.  Excavating and foundation work. 
p.  Wrecking and demolition work. 
q.  Removing contents of privies, cesspools, septic tanks and other similar facilities. 
(b)  Persons who subdivide and improve real estate, and speculative builders who build houses or other buildings with the intention of offering the subdivided lots or completed buildings for sale, shall be considered contractors and pay the license tax as provided in subsection (a) of this section on the gross receipts from the sale of the real estate or building(s); provided, however, if such person maintains ownership of such structure and rents or leases rooms or space in such structure, then the license tax rate for such person shall be 0.16 percent of the actual cost of construction. No license for the conduct of such business shall be transferred. 
(c)  A person shall not be deemed to be engaged in the business of contracting solely because he acts as his own prime contractor to build or improve a building which he intends to occupy as his residence, office or other place of business, or actually so occupied within a reasonable time prior to the sale of the premises. 
(d)  Every person licensed under this section shall, within thirty (30) days from the issuance of a building permit, furnish the commissioner of revenue, on forms provided by him, the amount of each subcontract, along with the names and addresses of all subcontractors to be employed in the construction of the work encompassed by such permit. Failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection shall constitute a basis for the revocation of the building permit and suspension of all work under such permit. 
(Code 1965, §§ 17-33, 20-42—20-43.1; Ord. No. 1239, 11-6-81; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1365, 4-4-83; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 2925, 2-28-06) 
Cross reference— Building regulations, Ch. 8; contractors' registration and bond, § 8-6; sanitation disposal contractors, § 28-58 et seq.  
Sec. 18-76. - Dance halls and teenage events. 
(a)  Every person operating a dance hall or teenage event shall pay an annual license tax of two hundred dollars ($200.00). A manager of a dance hall or teenage event shall also collect and remit all required taxes, including but not limited to, admissions taxes as required by section 35-182 of this Code. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the terms " dance hall" and "teenage event" are defined as provided in section 4-16 of this Code. 
(c)  No license shall be issued under this chapter for the operation of a dance or teenage event hall unless a permit, as required by article II of chapter 4 of this Code, has been granted. 
(d)  Upon conviction of a violation of article II of chapter 4 of this Code by any person holding a license for the operation of a dance hall or teenage event, such license may be revoked. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-84—20-86; Ord. No. 3139, 6-22-10) 
Cross reference— Public dance halls generally, § 4-16 et seq.; operating permit, § 4-32 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-433.  
Sec. 18-76.1. - Dealers in precious metals and gems. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  "Coin" means any piece of gold, silver or other metal fashioned into a prescribed shape, weight and degree of fineness, stamped by authority of a government with certain marks and devices, and having a certain fixed value as money. 
(2)  "Dealer" means any person, firm, partnership or corporation engaged in the business of purchasing, acquiring or selling secondhand precious metals or gems, or precious metals or gems removed in any manner from manufactured articles not then owned by such person, firm, partnership or corporation. "Dealer" includes all employers and principals on whose behalf a purchase is made and any employee or agent who makes any purchase for or on behalf of an employer or principal. 
This definition shall not be construed so as to include persons engaged in the following: 
a.  Purchases of precious metals or gems directly from other dealers, manufacturers, or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories. 
b.  Purchases of precious metals or gems from a duly qualified fiduciary who is disposing of the assets of the estate being administered by such fiduciary in the administration of an estate. 
c.  Acceptance by a retail merchant of trade-in merchandise previously sold by such retail merchant to the person presenting that merchandise for trade-in. 
d.  Preparing, restoring or designing jewelry by retail merchant, if such activities are within the normal course of business. 
e.  Purchases of precious metals or gems by industrial refiners and manufacturers, insofar as such purchases are made directly from retail merchants or wholesalers. 
f.  Persons regularly engaged in the business of purchasing and processing nonprecious scrap metals which incidentally may contain traces of precious metals recoverable as a by-product. 
(3)  "Gems" means any items containing precious or semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry. 
(4)  "Precious metals" means any item except coins composed in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum or platinum alloys. 
(b)  Tax levied on receipts. The license tax rate for every dealer engaged in business in the city of purchasing, acquiring or selling secondhand precious metals or gems shall be 0.36 percent of gross receipts received in the resale of such precious metals or gems made during the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  Dealers shall obtain a permit from the chief of police prior to obtaining a license under this chapter in accordance with section 18-32. 
(Ord. No. 1113, 11-3-80; Ord. No. 1355, 2-7-83; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-76.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2363, adopted Jan. 9, 1996, repealed the provisions of former § 18-76.2, which pertained to permit and other related requirements for dealers in precious metals and gems, and was derived from Ord. No. 1911, adopted Sept. 11, 1989.  
Sec. 18-77. - Detectives, detective agencies, watchmen services, security patrols and similar security services. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person operating a detective agency or engaged in the business of a detective shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. Any person or agency obtaining a license under this subsection may conduct the business of furnishing watchmen for compensation without securing an additional license under subsection (b) of this section for so doing. 
(b)  The license tax rate for every person or agency furnishing watchmen, security patrols or similar security services for compensation shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  As a prerequisite to obtaining the license required by this section, every person operating a detective agency, watchmen service, security patrol or similar security service or engaged in the business of a detective or watchman must have (1) an approved private security services business license from the Virginia Department of Criminal Justice Services or its successor agency as required under Virginia Code sections 9-183.1 through 9-183.12; and, (2) the written approval of the chief of police of the city as to the badges, insignia and uniforms that will be used by such detective, detective agency, security patrol, security service, watchmen or watchmen service, and as to the insignias, lettering or decals to be used on private security patrol vehicles. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-126, 20-127; Ord. No. 1211, 8-17-81; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96) 
State Law reference— Private security services, Code of Virginia, § 54-729.27 et seq.  
Sec. 18-78. - Distributing houses. 
For every distributing house or place in the city (other than the house or place of manufacture) operated by any person engaged in the business of a merchant in this city for the purpose of distributing goods, wares and merchandise among his retail stores, a separate merchant's license shall be required, which shall be the same license required by this chapter of a wholesale merchant. The goods, wares and merchandise distributed through such distributing house or place shall be regarded as purchases for the purpose of measuring the license tax. 
(Code 1965, § 20-148)  
Sec. 18-79. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2363, adopted Jan. 9, 1996, deleted § 18-79, which section pertained to dry cleaning, dyeing, towel and linen rental services, etc., and was derived from Code 1965, §§ 20-44, 20-45; and from Ord. No. 1516, adopted Feb. 4, 1985.  
Sec. 18-80. - Educational service businesses. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in any educational service business shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such businesses during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  Educational service businesses referred to in this section shall include those businesses set out below and any miscellaneous educational service business not elsewhere classified: 
(1)  Private academies. 
(2)  Boarding schools. 
(3)  Day nurseries. 
(4)  Finishing schools. 
(5)  Kindergartens. 
(6)  Nursery schools. 
(7)  Correspondence schools. 
(8)  Aviation schools. 
(9)  Business colleges and schools (not of college grade). 
(10)  Commercial art schools. 
(11)  Data processing schools. 
(Code 1965, § 20-54; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1444, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-81. - Electrical service. 
Any person or company engaged in the business of furnishing electric light, power or service shall pay one-half of one percent of the gross receipts of such person or company accruing from such business, other than mercantile, in the city for the calendar year ending with the thirty-first day of December immediately next preceding and shall also pay, on the mercantile business, the same license tax as required of merchants under section 18-89. Each person or company applying for such a license shall submit to the commissioner of revenue a statement of such receipts, which statement shall be verified by the commissioner of revenue by examination of the books of such person or company. 
(Code 1965, § 20-46) 
Cross reference— Tax on purchasers of utility services, § 35-114 et seq.  
Sec. 18-82. - Emigrant labor agents. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in the business of soliciting, hiring or contracting with laborers to be employed by persons other than himself beyond the limits of the state, and every agent of such person, shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. Such license shall not be transferred. 
(b)  No license, the tax for which is prescribed by this section, shall be issued unless the applicant submits to the commissioner of revenue a certificate from the circuit court to the effect that, to the personal knowledge of the judge of such court or from the information of credible witnesses under oath before such court, the court is satisfied that such applicant is a person of good character and honest demeanor. 
(c)  This subsection shall not apply to state contractors temporarily engaged on contracts in other states when they themselves are employing labor for their own work nor shall this section apply to representatives of labor organizations within the state when, because of need of employment, they may direct their members to employment in other states. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-70—20-73; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-83. - Gas service. 
Any person or company engaged in the business of furnishing or supplying gas for illuminating or fuel purposes shall pay one-half of one percent of the gross receipts of such person or company accruing from business, other than mercantile, in the city for the calendar year ending with the thirty-first day of December immediately next preceding and shall also pay, on the mercantile business, the same license tax as required of merchants under section 18-89. There shall be excluded from the gross receipts of such person or company such receipts as are derived from gas sold for resale. Each person or company applying for such a license shall submit to the commissioner of revenue a statement of such receipts, which statement shall be verified by the commissioner of revenue by examination of the books of such person or company. 
(Code 1965, § 20-47) 
Cross reference— Tax on purchasers of utility services, § 35-114 et seq.  
Sec. 18-84. - Grain dealers. 
Every person doing business in the city as a wholesale grain buyer, buying and selling commercial grain, except wheat grain, at wholesale, in or for his own name, whose purchases exceed 100,000 bushels during such year, and whose gross receipts are in excess of $100,000.00, shall pay a license fee of $50.00 plus a license tax of $0.02 per 100 bushels purchased in excess of 100,000 bushels. If the grain buyer's gross receipts do not exceed $100,000, or the purchases do not exceed 100,000 bushels, only a license fee shall be required. 
(Code 1965, § 20-48; Ord. No. 2436, 1-28-97)  
Sec. 18-85. - Hotels, motels, motor lodges, etc. 
The license tax rate for every person conducting the business of keeping a hotel, motel, motor lodge, auto court, campground, bed and breakfast or tourist camp shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts during the preceding calendar year, except receipts from telephone service and except rent from stores and offices. 
(Code 1965, § 20-129; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1444, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 3152, § 1, 9-14-10) 
Cross reference— Hotels and similar establishments generally, Ch. 15.  
Sec. 18-86. - Junk dealers and canvassers; secondhand dealers. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in business in the city as a junk dealer or secondhand dealer shall be 0.36 percent of the gross sales, whether paid for or not, in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  No license to engage in business as a junk dealer or secondhand dealer in the city shall be issued until the applicant therefor has obtained a permit from the chief of police in accordance with section 18-32. If the chief of police refuses to issue such permit, he or she shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons therefor and the applicant may appeal such refusal to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-49, 20-50; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-87. - Marinas. 
The license tax rate for every person engaged in the business of keeping or operating a marina shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts, including the gross receipts from repairs and from the berthing of boats, in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1965, § 20-52; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96) 
Cross reference— Beaches, boats and waterways, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 18-88. - Medical and other health service businesses. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in any medical or other health-service business shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  Medical and other health service businesses referred to in this section shall include those businesses set out below and any miscellaneous medical and other health service businesses not elsewhere classified: 
(1)  Medical or dental laboratories, provided such laboratories are not substantially engaged in manufacturing. 
(2)  Sanatoria and convalescent and rest homes. 
(Code 1965, § 20-54.1; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1444, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2462, 11-18-97)  
Sec. 18-89. - Merchants, retail. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in the business of a retail merchant, as defined in section 18-2, shall be 0.20 percent of the gross sales, whether paid or not, in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the gross sales of a motor vehicle dealer may be computed after consideration of allowances for cash discounts given and used motor vehicles taken in trade. When used or secondhand vehicles are sold, the price received therefor shall be considered as sales. 
(c)  Where a merchant conducts both a retail and a wholesale business, separate license taxes shall be paid on the retail and wholesale parts of such business; provided, however, that any retail merchant who desires to do a wholesale business also may elect to do such wholesale business under a retailer's license by paying license taxes under this section as a retailer on both the retail business and his wholesale business. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-144, 20-144.1, 20-145; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1444, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-89.5. - Mail-order sales. 
The license tax rate for every person engaged in the business of a mail-order warehouse distribution center (other than manufacturers), who advertises his products by use of circulars or catalogs which are mailed to his customers, and who receives orders in this city and who ships or mails all such orders from this city directly to his customers shall be as follows: 
(1)  0.20 percent of the gross receipts during the preceding year up to $40,000,000.00, plus 
(2)  0.10 percent of the gross receipts during the preceding year between $40,000,000.01 and $60,000,000.00, plus 
(3)  0.05 percent of the gross receipts during the preceding year between $60,000,000.01 and $100,000,000.00, plus 
(4)  0.025 percent of the gross receipts in excess of $100,000,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 1709, 6-22-87; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-90. - Merchants, wholesale. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in the business of a wholesale merchant, as defined in section 18-2, shall be 0.12 percent of all gross purchases in such business during the preceding year. 
(b)  When a merchant conducts both a wholesale and a retail business, separate license taxes shall be paid on the wholesale and retail parts of such business; provided, however, that any wholesale merchant who desires to do a retail business also may elect to do so under a retailer's license by paying the license taxes as a retailer on both the retail business and the wholesale business. 
(c)  Any person who maintains no place of business in the city and who stores goods, wares and merchandise in a public warehouse or public warehouses in the city, for ultimate distribution to wholesalers only or to the federal or state government, or to any agency of either of such governments, shall not be classified as a wholesale merchant and shall not be subject to a license tax as such. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-30, 20-146, 20-147; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-91. - Money lenders generally; handling or dealing in installment paper. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person, other than banks, bankers, pawnbrokers and those set forth in the following subsections of this section engaged in the business of purchasing salaries, lending money, or handling or dealing in installment paper, with or without security or endorsement, shall be 0.58 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  No license, the tax for which is set out in this section, shall be transferable. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-137—20-141; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1444, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96) 
State Law reference— Small Loan Act, Code of Virginia, § 6.1-244 et seq.  
Sec. 18-92. - Pawnbrokers. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in business as a pawnbroker shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, a pawnbroker is any person meeting the definition provided at § 54.1-4000 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(c)  No license to engage in business as a pawnbroker in the city shall be issued under this chapter unless the applicant therefor shall produce to the commissioner of the revenue the license required by § 54.1-4001 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(d)  No license to engage in business as a pawnbroker in the city shall be issued until the applicant therefor has obtained a permit from the chief of police in accordance with section 18-32. If the chief of police refuses to issue such permit, he shall notify the applicant, in writing, of his reasons therefor and the applicant may appeal such refusal to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice. 
(e)  Upon conviction of the holder of a license to engage in business as a pawnbroker in the city for the violation of any state law or provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city concerning pawnbrokers, such license shall be deemed forfeited without further adjudication. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-149—20-153; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-93. - Peddlers generally. 
(a)  Every person peddling goods, wares, merchandise or products of any description, except as in this chapter otherwise provided, shall pay a license tax of $500.00. All peddlers applying to be licensed under this section shall first obtain a permit from the city manager. 
(b)  A license, the tax for which is established in this section, shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-193, 20-194; Ord. No. 1228, 10-5-81; Ord. No. 1446, 4-16-84) 
Cross reference— Peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— City license tax for peddlers, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3718, 58.1-3719.  
Sec. 18-94. - Peddlers of bottled drinks, hot dogs and wrapped sandwiches. 
(a)  Every person peddling bottled soft drinks, hot dogs and wrapped sandwiches from a cart, wagon, truck, automobile, basket or tray shall pay a license tax of $300.00. All peddlers licensed under this section shall first obtain a permit from the city manager. Such tax shall not be prorated and the license shall not be transferable. 
(b)  When articles referred to in subsection (a) above are peddled along with the articles specified in sections 18-95 and 18-96 and the license tax imposed by this section is paid, the person paying such tax shall not be required to pay, in addition thereto, the license taxes imposed by sections 18-95 and 18-96. 
(c)  No license shall be issued under this section, unless the applicant holds a permit from the director of public health. If the director of public health refuses to issue such permit, he shall notify the applicant, in writing, of his reasons therefor and the applicant may appeal such refusal to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-186—20-190; Ord. No. 1228, 10-5-81; Ord. No. 1447, 4-16-84) 
Cross reference— Food and food establishments, Ch. 13; street vendors of food, § 13-36 et seq.  
Sec. 18-95. - Peddlers of ice cream, candy, etc., from vehicles. 
(a)  Every person peddling ice cream and other ice confectioneries, candies and confections from vehicles on the streets of the city shall pay a license tax of $50.00. No such license tax shall be prorated and the license shall not be transferable. 
(b)  No person licensed under this section shall sell, or offer for sale, ice cream and other ice confectioneries, candies and confections, unless each operator covered by such license has obtained a permit from the chief of police. If the chief of police refuses to issue such permit, he/she shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons therefor and the applicant may appeal such refusal to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-164, 10-166; Ord. No. 1228, 10-5-81; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96) 
Cross reference— Street vendors of food products, § 13-36 et seq.  
Sec. 18-96. - Peddlers of market produce, coal, wood, ice, fresh meat, fruit, seafood or nuts—Generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, every person peddling market produce, coal, wood, ice, fresh meats, fruits, seafoods or nuts, when sold from carts, drays, wagons, automobiles, trucks or pushcarts or other hand-propelled vehicles, shall pay a license tax of $50.00. No such license tax shall be prorated and the license shall not be transferable. 
(b)  The commissioner of revenue shall issue to each applicant for a license under this section a tag or sign, of a size and design to be selected by the commissioner of revenue, suitable to be displayed on the peddler's wagon, cart or truck. 
(c)  Any tag or sign issued under this section shall be affixed and displayed by the owner on the left-hand side of his cart, wagon, dray, automobile, truck, pushcart or other vehicle, on the outside thereof and in a conspicuous place, so that the same may be readily seen at all times by anyone authorized to inspect the same. 
(d)  A permit from the city sealer of weights and measures is required when any of the articles referred to in this section is sold by weight. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-171, 20-174, 20-178, 20-180, 20-182, 20-185; Ord. No. 1228, 10-5-81) 
Cross reference— Farmer's market, Ch. 11; food generally, Ch. 13.  
Sec. 18-97. - Same—Exemption for producers, growers, etc. 
(a)  No license shall be required under section 18-96 of peddlers of market produce, fresh meats or fruits who are bona fide producers or growers of the produce, meats or fruits sold by them. No such license shall be required of peddlers of seafoods who are bona fide catchers, producers or growers of the seafoods sold by them. 
(b)  Any person desiring to avail himself of the exemption provided in this section, with reference to bona fide producers or growers of market producer, meats or fruits, shall file with the commissioner of revenue a certificate in which shall be given the name and post office address of the person desiring the exemption, the location of the land from which his fruits, vegetables or other perishables are to be produced, whether such person is the owner thereof or a renter, and in the latter case, the name of the landlord or owner and the time from which his lease is to run. Such certificate shall include a statement that the person desiring the exemption intends to use the sign issued to him under this section himself personally, or by agent, for the sale of his own produce only, and will not permit the same to be used by any third party or for the sale of any produce, except his own. 
(c)  Any person desiring to avail himself of the exemption provided in this section, with reference to bona fide catchers, producers or growers of seafoods, shall file with the commissioner of revenue a certificate in which shall be given the name and post office address of the person desiring the exemption, the location of the land or area from which his seafoods are to be caught, produced or grown, whether such person is the owner thereof or a renter, and in the latter case, the name of the landlord or owner and the time from which his lease, if any, is to run. Such certificate shall include a statement that the person desiring the exemption intends to use the sign issued to him under this section himself personally, or by agent, for the sale of his own seafoods only, and will not permit the same to be used by any third party or for the sale of any seafood, except his own. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a certificate filed pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the commissioner of revenue shall furnish to each bona fide producer or grower of market produce, meats or fruits a sign, of a size and design to be selected by the commissioner of revenue, suitable to be displayed on his wagon or truck, on which shall be printed "Produce Grower No. _____, 19___—19___", with the license year inserted. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a certificate filed pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the commissioner of revenue shall furnish to each bona fide catcher, producer or grower of fish, oysters, clams or other seafood a sign, of a size and design to be selected by the commissioner of revenue, suitable to be displayed on his wagon or truck, on which shall be printed "Seafood Producer No. _____, 19___—19___", with the license year inserted. 
(f)  Any tag or sign issued under this section shall be affixed and displayed by the owner on the left-hand side of his cart, wagon, dray, automobile, truck, pushcart or other vehicle, on the outside thereof and in a conspicuous place, so that the same may be readily seen at all times by anyone authorized to inspect the same. 
(g)  Any person making any false statement in a certificate filed under this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(h)  Any producer or grower of market produce, meats or fruits permitting the grower's sign issued to him under this section to be used in the sale of any market produce, meat or fruits, except market produce, meat or fruits grown or produced by him on the land described in the certificate filed under this section, shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(i)  Any catcher, producer or grower of fish, oysters, clams or other seafoods permitting the producer's sign issued to him under this section to be used in the sale of any seafoods, except seafoods caught, produced or grown by him on or in the land or area described in the certificate filed under this section, shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-113, 20-175—20-177, 20-179, 20-181—20-183)  
Sec. 18-98. - Peddlers selling to dealers or retailers. 
(a)  Every person, other than a distributor or vendor of motor vehicle fuels and petroleum, a farmer, a dealer in forestry products or a producer or manufacturer, who, as a peddler, shall peddle goods, wares or merchandise by selling and delivering the same at the same time, to licensed dealers or retailers, at other than a definite place of business operated by the seller, shall pay a license tax of $100.00 for each vehicle used in such business, which license tax shall not be prorated; provided, however, that such license tax shall not in any case be in excess of the rates imposed by this chapter on a wholesale merchant selling similar goods, wares or merchandise at a definite place of business. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the word "peddler" means any person, who, at other than a definite place of business operated by the seller, shall sell or offer to sell goods, wares or merchandise to licensed dealers or retailers and, at the time of such sale or exposure for sale, shall deliver, or offer to deliver, the goods, wares or merchandise to the buyer. Any delivery made on the day of sale shall be construed as equivalent to delivery at the time of sale. 
(c)  The word "farmer," as used in this section means any person chiefly engaged in producing agricultural products on whose farm the volume or character of the agricultural products is in keeping with the size of the farm, but does not mean any person engaged in producing agricultural products who actively engages, directly or indirectly, in buying or trading in agricultural products not grown or produced by him or who actively engages, directly or indirectly, in conducting a business that includes buying or selling agricultural products not grown or produced by him. 
(d)  The exemption accorded a farmer, a dealer in forestry products, a producer or a manufacturer under this section is restricted to such peddling of goods, wares or merchandise as is actually produced or grown or manufactured by the seller. 
(e)  Every person claiming exemption from the provisions of this section on the grounds that he is delivering goods, wares or merchandise previously sold to the customer shall, upon request of any police, tax or revenue officer, furnish evidence of his claim, other than his mere statement, which evidence may be an invoice or signed order. Failure to furnish such evidence shall be sufficient ground for charging the person operating the vehicle involved with a violation of this section and, in any prosecution for a violation of this section, such claim, if made, shall be corroborated by satisfactory evidence. 
(f)  Each vehicle used in his business by a licensee under this section shall have conspicuously displayed thereon the name of the person using the same, together with his post office address. The license in question shall be conspicuously displayed on each vehicle used in such business. 
(g)  No license, the tax for which is designated in this section, shall be transferable. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-155, 20-157—20-161)  
Sec. 18-99. - Personal service businesses. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in any personal service business as defined in section 18-2 shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  Personal service businesses referred to in this section shall include, but not be limited to, those businesses set out below and any miscellaneous personal service business not elsewhere classified: 
(1)  Laundries, family and commercial. 
(2)  Linen supply. 
(3)  Diaper service. 
(4)  Coin-operated laundries and dry cleaning. 
(5)  Dry cleaning and dyeing. 
(6)  Rug cleaning and repairing. 
(7)  Industrial launderers. 
(8)  Photographic studios, including commercial. 
(9)  Photography. 
(10)  Shoe repair shops, shoe shine parlors and hat cleaning shops. 
(11)  Funeral service and crematories. 
(12)  Garment pressing, alteration and repair. 
(c)  For each vehicle or conveyance used by a person who has been licensed to solicit for laundry, cleaning, dyeing and pressing work, as set forth in this section, the commissioner of the revenue shall issue a tag or number plate, in form prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue, to evidence the payment of the license tax imposed by this section, which tag or number plate shall be attached to such vehicle or conveyance. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-45, 20-55; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1444, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-100. - Photographers, film developers, etc., with no permanent place of business in city. 
The license tax rate for every person engaged in the business of taking pictures or photographs or developing, copying or enlarging the same, or both, but who has no permanent place of business in the city, shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts attributable to such business conducted in the city during the preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1965, § 20-57; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-100.1. - Professional service businesses and professions. 
The license tax rate for every person engaged in any professional service business or profession as defined in section 18-2 shall be 0.58 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1965, § 20-58; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1444, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-100.2 - Research and development services. 
Every person, firm or corporation designated as the principal or prime contractor receiving identifiable federal appropriations for research and development services as defined in section 31.205-18(a) of the Federal Acquisition Regulation in the areas of (i) computer and electronic systems, (ii) computer software, (iii) applied sciences, (iv) economic and social sciences and (v) electronic and physical sciences shall be subject to a license tax rate of $0.03 per $100.00 of such federal funds received in payment of such contracts upon documentation provided by such person, firm or corporation to the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96)  
Sec. 18-101. - Real estate and financial services businesses. 
The license tax rate for every person engaged in any real estate or financial services businesses as defined in section 18-2 shall be 0.58 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1965, § 20-41; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1444, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-102. - Repair service businesses. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in any repair service business shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  Repair-service businesses referred to in this section shall include those businesses set out below and any miscellaneous repair service business not elsewhere classified: 
(1)  Bicycle repair shop. 
(2)  Boiler repair shop. 
(3)  Coppersmith. 
(4)  Electrical appliance repair shop. 
(5)  Engine repair shop. 
(6)  Fountain pen repairing. 
(7)  Fountain repairing. 
(8)  Furniture repairing or cleaning. 
(9)  Harness and leather repairing. 
(10)  Household and office appliance or equipment repairing or cleaning. 
(11)  Lawn mower repairing. 
(12)  Reserved. 
(13)  Luggage repairing. 
(14)  Machine shop. 
(15)  Mattress renovating and repairing. 
(16)  Motor repairing and rewinding. 
(17)  Musical instrument repairing. 
(18)  Radio or television repair shop. 
(19)  Refrigerator repair shop. 
(20)  Rug cleaning. 
(21)  Scale repairing. 
(22)  Sewing machine repair shop. 
(23)  Tailor (repair work). 
(24)  Tank repair shop. 
(25)  Upholstering establishment. 
(26)  Watch and jewelry repairing. 
(Code 1965, § 20-59; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1444, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2363, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-103. - Savings and loan associations. 
Every savings and loan association having its principal office in the city shall pay a license tax of $50.00. 
(Code 1965, § 20-142) 
State Law reference— Limits for above tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3730.  
Sec. 18-104. - Shooting galleries and archery ranges. 
The license tax rate for every person operating a shooting gallery or archery gallery or archery range shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1965, § 20-87; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96) 
Cross reference— Weapons, Ch. 38.  
Sec. 18-104.1. - Short-term rental business. 
Every person engaged in the short-term rental business as defined in section 35-252 of this Code shall be classified in the category of retail sales and shall pay a license tax rate equal to that imposed in section 18-89 on merchants, retail. 
(Ord. No. 1861, 5-8-89; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-104.2. - Tattoo parlors. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in a tattoo parlor business shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, "tattoo" and "tattoo parlor" shall have the definitions provided by section 23-51 of this Code. 
(c)  No license for a tattoo parlor business shall be issued or renewed under this chapter unless or until there is presented to the commissioner of the revenue a current permit from the department of public health for the operation of such business. The failure of any person to obtain or maintain this permit shall constitute grounds for suspension of the license in the manner provided for by section 18-5.1 of this chapter. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to tattoos applied by medical doctors, veterinarians, registered nurses or other medical service personnel licensed pursuant to Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia as part of their professional duties; provided, however, that gross receipts from tattoos applied by doctors, veterinarians, nurses or other medical personnel as part of their professional duties remain taxable under this chapter in the same manner as other services provided by such persons. 
(Ord. No. 2628, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 18-105. - Taxicabs and for-hire cars. 
The license tax rate for every person engaged in the business of operating taxicabs or for-hire cars over the streets of the city shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1965, § 20-60; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 2578, 5-9-2000) 
Cross reference— Taxicabs and for-hire cars, § 36-66 et seq.  
Sec. 18-106. - Telegraph service. 
Any person or company engaged in the business of sending telegrams from the city to a point within the state, or of receiving telegrams in the city from a point in the state, excepting, however, telegrams sent to or received by the government of the United States or this state, or their agents or officers, shall pay a license tax of $40.00. 
(Code 1965, § 20-61)  
Sec. 18-107. - Telephone service. 
Every telephone company or person providing telephones or telephone service shall pay a license tax equal to one-half of one percent of the gross receipts accruing from sales to the ultimate consumer in the city. However, charges for long distance telephone calls shall not be included in gross receipts for the purposes of license taxation. 
(Code 1965, § 20-62; Ord. No. 2462, 11-18-97) 
Cross reference— Tax on purchasers of telephone service, § 35-114 et seq.  
Sec. 18-108. - Temporary or transient businesses. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this chapter, every person who engages in, or transacts any temporary or transient business in the city for the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or services and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building or structure, motor vehicle, tent, car, boat or public room, or any part thereof, including rooms in hotels, lodging houses or houses of private entertainment, or in any street, alley or other public place, for the exhibition of or sale of such goods, wares, merchandise or services, shall pay for such privilege a tax of $500.00. Any such person conducting business in the city for thirty (30) consecutive days or more shall obtain the license and pay the tax or fee required by sections 18-5 and 18-5.2 of this chapter. The license required by this section shall not be transferable. 
(b)  (1)  The sale of goods, wares, merchandise and services in the city by merchants and vendors at a community event or an event conducted by a nonprofit charitable organization is hereby recognized as a distinct activity. Any organization conducting such an event may obtain an umbrella license from the commissioner of the revenue that will satisfy the business license requirement for business transacted by all registered merchants and vendors at the event. For any other business conducted in the city by any such merchant or vendor, the appropriate license required by this chapter must be obtained. 
(2)  The cost of the umbrella license described in subsection (b)(1) shall be $10.00 per merchant or vendor; provided, however, that regardless of the number of merchants and vendors, the cost of such license shall not be less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsection (b)(2) a community event sponsored by a nonprofit church or other religious body or a nonprofit parent-teacher association may obtain an umbrella license described in subsection (b)(1) for no cost provided: (i) the nonprofit church or other religious body or a nonprofit parent-teacher association makes proper application to the commissioner of the revenue; (ii) the duration of the community event is limited to one calendar day; and (iii) such umbrella license is only applicable to merchants or vendors and is not applicable to other activities such as the sale of prepared food or alcohol. 
(4)  As used in this section, a "community event" is any fair, show, exhibition, or celebration conducted over a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days for which a permit is required pursuant to section 4-1 or section 24-6 of this Code, and has been obtained. A "nonprofit charitable organization" means a nonprofit corporation organized for charitable purposes that has been designated by the Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization. 
(5)  For purposes of this section, a person shall be considered a merchant or vendor at a community or charitable event only if he or she (i) has registered with the event organizer, and (ii) only conducts business within the boundaries of the area in which the event is held. 
(6)  Any organization issued an umbrella license pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall, within ten (10) days of the last day of the event for which such license was issued, file with the commissioner of the revenue on a form prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue, a final accounting of the merchants and vendors who actually conducted business at the event. 
(7)  The provisions of this subsection are applicable only to the activities of temporary or transient merchants and vendors, and shall not be applicable to other licensable activities, including, but not limited to, persons operating amusement and recreation parks, businesses or carnivals, street fairs and tent shows. Any person who does business at a community event or event conducted by a qualifying nonprofit organization and is not registered as a merchant or vendor for the event shall be considered a temporary or transient merchant as described in subsection (a), and shall be required to pay the tax required by that subsection. 
(c)  Every person who has not been licensed for at least one year to sell or to offer for sale goods, wares or merchandise, and who shall apply for a license to offer or sell goods, wares or merchandise within the city, shall file, with the application for such license, an affidavit from the owner of the building, structure or other property to be used by such applicant, showing for what period of time the property to be used by such applicant has been hired or leased by such applicant. No license, the license tax for which is set out in this section, shall be issued unless such affidavit is attached to the application; provided, however, that the commissioner of the revenue may, in lieu of such affidavit, issue a regular merchant's or regular auctioneer's license to any applicant upon the giving of a bond or security in such amount as will equal the specific tax required by this section for a period of one year from the date of the applicant for such license. Such bond or security shall provide that such amount shall be paid to the city in the event and at any time during any such year that the commissioner of the revenue shall receive sufficient evidence showing that it was the applicant's intention to engage in or transact a temporary or transient business in the city. 
(d)  No person shall be exempt from the payment of the license tax imposed by this section by reason of associating temporarily with any local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or by reason of conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or as a part of the business in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale, at an auction, of any wagon, carriage, automobile, mechanics' tools, used farming implements, livestock, poultry (dressed or undressed), seafood, vegetables, fruits, melons, berries, flowers or leaf tobacco; or to the sale of used household furniture and used household effects, when being sold at the residence of the housekeeper desiring to dispose of the same; or to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or selling agents or regularly established merchants or manufacturers selling to the trade by sample for future delivery from their established place of business; or to the sale of products raised upon lands leased or owned by the seller; or to the sale of vegetables, fruits or other farm products; or to hawkers on the streets; or to the sale of any goods by an assignee, trustee, executor, fiduciary, officer in bankruptcy or other officer appointed by any court of this state or of the United States; or to peddlers licensed under this chapter. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-131—20-136; Ord. No. 1238, 11-16-81; Ord. No. 1448, 4-16-84; Ord. No. 2621, 3-13-01; Ord. No. 3375, 9-16-14; Ord. No. 3478, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 18-108.1. - Temporary or transient church and non-profit fundraisers. 
(a)  The sale of ice cream or other ice confectioneries, candies or confections by a nonprofit charitable organization or nonprofit church is hereby recognized as a distinct activity. Any organization conducting such an event may obtain a license from the commissioner of the revenue that will satisfy the business license requirement, peddler permit, or solicitor permit for any volunteer or employee of such organization provided the sale of such products occurs upon the property of the nonprofit charitable organization or nonprofit church and the proceeds from the sale inure to benefit of the nonprofit charitable organization or nonprofit church. 
(b)  The cost of the license described in subsection (a) shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall only apply to the business license requirement, peddler permit, or solicitor permit. Nothing herein shall relieve any such organization from compliance with land use, public health, or other applicable law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 3511, 6-20-17)  
Sec. 18-108.2. - Mobile food vending. 
(a)  Vending food products at retail from a self-propelled motor vehicle or trailer is recognized as a distinct activity (mobile food vending), except for a vehicle operated solely for the sale of ice cream or other ice confectioneries, candies or confections operated under the provisions of section 13-46, et seq. or for food delivery. 
(b)  Each mobile food vendor shall pay a license tax rate of 0.20 percent of gross receipts. The business license tax set forth herein shall only be applied to gross receipts in the city and business licenses shall not be transferable. 
(c)  No license shall be issued under this section, unless that applicant for such license holds a permit from the director of health and the fire department. 
(d)  If the person vending food products at retail from a self-propelled motor vehicle or trailer has a business license for a definite place of business in the City of Virginia Beach, Virginia, then all motor vehicles located at the definite place of business may be included in this license tax. In the absence of a definite place of business, each vehicle or trailer shall obtain a business license, and that license is to be based upon the gross receipts for the retail transactions of such motor vehicle or trailer. 
(e)  All persons obtaining a license under this category and their employees will be required to obtain a criminal record check through the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 3581, 2-19-19)  
Sec. 18-108.3. - Mobile food units; new business; registration; penalties. 
(a)  For purposes of this business license sub-classification, the following definitions shall apply: 
Mobile food unit means a restaurant that is a self-propelled motor vehicle or trailer and readily movable from place to place at all times during operation. 
New business means a business that locates for the first time to do business in a Virginia locality. A business shall not be deemed to be a new business based on a merger, acquisition, similar business combination, name change, or change to its business form. 
(b)  If the owner of a new business that operates a mobile food unit pays the license tax required by another Virginia locality in which the mobile food unit is registered, such owner shall not be required to pay a license tax in the city for a period of two (2) license years after the payment of the initial license tax in the Virginia locality in which the mobile food unit is registered. The preferential business license tax treatment provided by this section may apply to up to three mobile food units provided all three (3) units are registered in the same Virginia locality and there is a shared owner of the three (3) units. 
(c)  At the conclusion of the two (2) license year period described in subsection (b), the mobile food unit shall register for the business license set forth in section 18-108.2 and complete all requirements set forth therein. 
(d)  Prior to operation in the city, any owner of a mobile food unit subject to this section shall register with the commissioner of the revenue regardless of whether the owner is exempt from paying the license tax pursuant to this section. 
(e)  The commissioner of the revenue shall assess a statutory assessment for meals taxes for any owner that fails to register with the commissioner of the revenue prior to conducting taxable meals tax transactions. 
(f)  Upon the second occurrence of a mobile food unit failure to register with the commissioner of the revenue as required by subsection (d), the commissioner shall levy a penal fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) upon the owner of the mobile food unit. This fine shall be in addition to any statutory assessment or other remedy for the failure to collect and remit meals taxes. 
(g)  Upon the second or subsequent occurrence of a mobile food unit failure to register with the commissioner of the revenue as required by subsection (d), the commissioner of the revenue shall require the mobile food unit post a bond with corporate surety to insure the faithful performance of the mobile food unit's duties to the city as to meals taxes collected and held in trust for the city. The bond, including corporate surety thereon, shall be in a form deemed satisfactory to the city attorney. The bond shall not be in an amount less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The commissioner of the revenue may accept an irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of a bond required by this subsection, provided the letter must be reviewed and approved by the city attorney. The owner of a mobile food unit required to obtain the bond described herein shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor for the failure to produce the evidence of compliance when demand for same has been made by either an agent of the commissioner of the revenue or any law enforcement officer. 
(h)  Any requirement imposed under the city's police power to require a criminal records check or certain limitations upon parking set forth in section 18-108.2 or elsewhere in the City Code shall apply to any business subject to this section. 
(Ord. No. 3594, § 1, 6-18-19)  
Sec. 18-109. - Theatres for moving pictures. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in the business of furnishing entertainment by the use of moving or talking pictures in a theatre or drive-in establishment where a charge is made for admission shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts, exclusive of any federal or city excise tax thereon, received for admissions during the preceding calendar year. Where merchandise is sold at any such theatre, a merchant's license shall be required in addition to the above. 
(b)  No license shall be issued for furnishing entertainment by the use of moving or talking pictures in a theatre or drive-in establishment unless there is presented to the commissioner of revenue a permit from the city council for the operation of such theatre or drive-in establishment. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-88, 20-89; Ord. No. 1516 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-110. - Theatrical performances, etc. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every theatrical performance or any performance similar thereto, panorama or any public performance or exhibition of any kind, except motion pictures, where an admission fee is charged, there shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts therefrom. 
(b)  Any person conducting a theatre may take out an annual license by paying the same annual license tax provided by section 18-109 for moving picture theaters. 
(c)  No license tax shall be charged under this section when the whole of the net proceeds are applied for religious, charitable or educational purposes. 
(Code 1965, § 29-90; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96) 
Cross reference— Permit for special events, § 4-1.  
Sec. 18-111. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1516, adopted Feb. 4, 1985, effective May 1, 1985, repealed § 18-111, concerning tobacco retailers, as derived from Code 1965, § 20-63.  
Sec. 18-112. - Trading stamps, premium coupons, etc. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in the business of selling or issuing trading stamps or any similar devices to merchants or redeeming trading stamps or any similar devices, giving money rebates or other things of value to therefor, shall be 0.36 percent of the value of the trading stamps or any similar devices sold, issued or redeemed in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  The license tax rate for every person who shall redeem, on behalf of any manufacturer, premium coupons, certificates or similar devices attached to original packages put up by such manufacturer and sold under his trade name, brand or mark shall be 0.36 percent on the value of the premium coupons, certificates or similar devices. 
(c)  As used in this section, the word "value" shall mean the value of the money rebates or the average value, if sold at retail, of the goods, merchandise, commodities or other things of value for which the trading stamps or any similar derives may be redeemed. 
(d)  The license taxes specified in this section shall not be imposed upon any person who shall issue stamps or any similar devices directly to any customer, where redemption is made by such person directly to such customer without intervention of any third person. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-202—20-205; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 18-113. - Trailer courts. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the words "trailer court" shall mean a space provided for two (2) or more occupied house trailers. 
(b)  The license tax rate for every person conducting the business of keeping a trailer court shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts of the business during the preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1965, § 20-129.1; Ord. No. 1357, 3-7-83; Ord. No. 1444, 3-26-84; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96) 
Cross reference— Mobile homes, Ch. 19.  
Sec. 18-114. - Transportation and warehousing businesses. 
(a)  The license tax rate for every person engaged in any transportation and warehousing business shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  Transportation and warehousing businesses referred to in this section shall include those businesses set out below and any miscellaneous transportation and warehousing business not elsewhere classified: 
(1)  Local trucking and storage. 
(2)  Farm product warehousing and storage. 
(3)  Refrigerated warehousing. 
(4)  Food lockers, with or without food preparation facilities. 
(5)  Household goods warehousing and storage. 
(6)  General warehousing and storage. 
(7)  Towing and tugboat service. 
(8)  Excursion boats. 
(9)  Sight-seeing boats. 
(10)  Water transportation services, not elsewhere classified: 
a.  Boat hiring, except pleasure. 
b.  Boat yards, storage and incidental repair. 
c.  Marine salvaging. 
d.  Rental or charter of commercial boats. 
(11)  Flying charter service. 
(12)  Sight-seeing airplane service. 
(13)  Airports and flying fields. 
(14)  Pipeline transportation. 
(15)  Transportation services. 
(16)  Arrangement of transportation. 
(17)  Stockyards. 
(18)  Packing and crating. 
(Code 1965, § 20-51; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 3455, 7-12-16)  
Sec. 18-114.1. - Marine cargo shipping. 
The license tax rate for every person engaged in the business of marine cargo shipping, not arrangement of transportation, haulers or deliverers, shall be as follows: 
(a)  0.36 percent of the gross receipts during the preceding year up to $500,000.00, plus 
(b)  0.000001 percent of the gross receipts during the preceding year in excess of $500,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 3455, 7-12-16)  
Sec. 18-115. - Water and sewer companies. 
Every public service corporation engaged in the business of furnishing water or sewerage service or facilities to the inhabitants of the city shall pay for the privilege a license tax of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts from any one or more of such businesses whether such corporation is franchised by the city or not. 
(Code 1965, § 20-65) 
Cross reference— Sewers, Ch. 28; water supply, Ch. 37.  
Sec. 18-116. - Wrecking or salvaging automobiles. 
The license tax rate for every person engaged in the business of wrecking or salvaging automobiles, having an office or representative or making contracts for work or soliciting work in the city, shall be 0.36 percent of the gross receipts in such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1965, § 20-67; Ord. No. 1516, 2-4-85; Ord. No. 2390, 5-14-96) 
Cross reference— Automobile graveyards, § 25-23 et seq.  
Secs. 18-117—18-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUSINESS LICENSE INCENTIVE PROGRAM FOR NEW BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 18-201. - Purpose and intent. 
The city council finds that the development of its business tax base requires a business license incentive program for new businesses ("incentive program"), and determines that a reduction in the business license taxes for qualifying new businesses will foster business development and encourage entrepreneurialism. 
(Ord. No. 3184, 6-28-11)  
Sec. 18-202. - Administration. 
This article shall be administered and enforced by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Ord. No. 3184, 6-28-11)  
Sec. 18-203. - Effective date. 
This article shall be effective January 1, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 3184, 6-28-11)  
Sec. 18-204. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Acquisition shall mean the combination of two (2) or more existing businesses where one (1) business acquires the ownership of the other business(es). 
Business license year shall mean calendar year. 
Change in business form shall mean a change in the organization of an existing business. A change in business form occurs whether such change is voluntary or involuntary, recognized by the state corporation commission or not recognized by the state corporation commission. A change in business form shall include a new business entity that meets the definition of "affiliated group," as that term is defined in Code of Virginia § 58.1-3700.1, and such business conducts business activities that are similar to one (1) or more of the affiliated businesses. However, a new business entity that meets the affiliation definition but undertakes a business that conducts substantially different business activities shall not be treated as a change in business form. 
Merger shall mean the combination of two (2) or more existing businesses to establish a new business. 
Name change shall mean the change in the name upon which a business trades. A name change occurs whether or not the business registers such name or change of name with the state corporation commission. 
Qualifying business shall mean a business that locates for the first time in the city after the effective date of this article. A business shall not be deemed to locate in the city for the first time based on a merger, acquisition, similar business combination, name change, or a change in business form. A business shall not be deemed to locate in the city for the first time if there is an existing business in the city trading under the same or substantially similar business name, the businesses conduct similar business activities, and the businesses are related either by a shared ownership structure or a contractual relationship such as a franchisor/franchisee relationship. A qualifying business shall not include peddlers and itinerant merchants. A qualifying business shall not include a contractor required to obtain a business license by Code of Virginia § 58.1-3715(B). When applying for any benefit afforded under this article, the applicant shall have the burden of proving qualification as a qualifying business. 
Similar business combination shall mean any transaction that is of the same nature as a merger or an acquisition. 
(Ord. No. 3184, 6-28-11)  
Sec. 18-205. - Presumption. 
The incentive program is a program in the nature of a partial tax exemption. As such, the rule of construction provided by article X, section (f) of the Constitution of Virginia shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 3184, 6-28-11)  
Sec. 18-206. - Application and appeal. 
(a)  Any business seeking to qualify as a qualifying business shall complete an application in writing. The application shall be on forms developed by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(b)  Any determination of qualification or of nonqualification as a qualifying business shall be in writing by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(c)  The appeal of a determination of nonqualification shall follow the appeal process of any other business license tax decision. 
(Ord. No. 3184, 6-28-11)  
Sec. 18-207. - Business license tax reduction. 
(a)  A qualifying business that would otherwise be required to pay license taxes pursuant to City Code section 18-5.2(c) shall be entitled to pay business license taxes at the fifty dollars ($50.00) flat fee provided by City Code section 18-5.2(b). 
(b)  The license tax reduction provided in subsection (a) shall apply to the business license year in which the qualifying business locates in the city and the following business license year. 
(c)  A qualifying business shall forfeit any entitlement to the license tax reduction provided in subsection (a) if such business is delinquent on any local tax including but not limited to personal property taxes, real property taxes, admissions taxes, meals taxes, and transient occupancy taxes. 
(Ord. No. 3184, 6-28-11)  
Sec. 18-208. - Obligations of a qualifying business. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to repeal any requirement of businesses within the city to maintain records or comply with an audit by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(b)  A qualifying business shall report its personal property and gross receipts to the commissioner of the revenue, at such times and in such manner as required by law and the failure to timely report shall result in the forfeiture of any entitlement to the license tax reduction provided by subsection (a) of section 18-206. 
(Ord. No. 3184, 6-28-11)  
Chapter 18.5 - MASSAGE THERAPY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— License Code, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 18.5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certified massage therapist means any person who administers a massage to a client, in exchange for consideration, and who is qualified as a certified massage therapist pursuant to the requirements of Code of Virginia section 54.1-3029. 
Client means any person who receives a massage in exchange for consideration. 
Massage and massage therapy mean the treatment of soft tissues for therapeutic purposes by the application of massage and body work techniques based on the manipulation or application of pressure to the muscular structure or soft tissues of the human body. The terms "massage" and "massage therapy" do not include the diagnosis or treatment of illness or disease or any service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, nursing, chiropractic therapy, physical therapy, occupational therapy, acupuncture or podiatry is required by law. 
Massage establishment means a fixed place of business where a certified massage therapist gives a client a massage. 
(Ord. No. 2599, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 18.5-2. - When and where massages may be given. 
Except as provided in section 18.5-5 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to give a massage in exchange for consideration within the city unless the person giving the massage is a certified massage therapist. 
(Ord. No. 2599, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 2678, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 18.5-3. - Display or presentation of certificate. 
Each certified massage therapist shall conspicuously post his or her current certificate issued by the State Board of Nursing in a public area at his or her massage establishment or, in the case of an off-premises massage, shall present his or her certificate to the client. 
(Ord. No. 2599, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 18.5-4. - Prohibited advertising. 
It shall be unlawful for a person who is neither a certified massage therapist nor a member of a profession exempted pursuant to section 18.5-5 of this chapter, or for a business in which all of the employees who administer massages are neither certified massage therapists nor members of an exempted profession, to use the word "massage" on any sign or other form of advertising, including a listing in a telephone or other business directory. 
(Ord. No. 2599, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 2678, 12-11-01)  
Sec. 18.5-5. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to the following persons while such persons are engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors and osteopaths duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state. 
(2)  Physical therapists duly licensed to practice physical therapy by the state. 
(3)  Employees of nursing homes and hospitals which are duly licensed by the state, provided the employees are acting under the direction and supervision of a licensed health care professional. 
(4)  Nurses duly licensed by the state. 
(5)  Trainers of any amateur, semi-professional or professional athlete or athletic team. 
(6)  Barbers and beauticians duly licensed by the state who administer massages only to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders of clients. 
(7)  Students of state-approved massage therapy program, provided the students are acting under the direction and supervision of a certified massage therapist. 
(Ord. No. 2599, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 18.5-6. - Violation. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2599, 7-11-00)  
Chapter 19 - MOBILE HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8; housing and building maintenance code, Ch. 16; license tax for trailer courts, § 18-113; maximum length of combination of towing vehicle and mobile home or house trailer, § 21-195; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28; water supply, Ch. 37; zoning ordinance generally, App. A; provisions of zoning ordinance relative to mobile homes, App. A, § 238; mobile homes at recreational campgrounds, App. A, § 240; subdivision ordinance, App. B. 
State Law reference— Mobile home safety law, Code of Virginia, § 36-70 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Freestanding mobile home: A mobile home that is not located in a mobile home park. 
Mobile home: Any vehicle designed, maintained and offered or used for living or sleeping purposes which is equipped or intended to be equipped with wheels or other devices for the purpose of transporting the unit. 
(Code 1965, § 35-1)  
Sec. 19-2. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor.  
Secs. 19-3—19-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FREESTANDING MOBILE HOMES 
 
Sec. 19-16. - Enforcement of article. 
This article shall be enforced by the director of public works or his designee. 
(Code 1965, § 35-5; Ord. No. 1006, 11-19-79; Ord. No. 2148, 6-23-92)  
Sec. 19-17. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, operate, occupy or use a freestanding mobile home, unless such person shall have obtained a permit therefor from the department of public works. 
(Code 1965, § 35-2; Ord. No. 2148, 6-23-92)  
Sec. 19-18. - Temporary use. 
A permit for a temporary freestanding mobile home, to be used exclusively for office quarters while the construction of the principal building is being planned and completed or as temporary office quarters for firms engaged in highway construction, building construction and trucking operations may be issued by the department of public works for a period not to exceed one calendar year, provided all requirements of the city zoning regulations are otherwise complied with. Such permit may be renewed for additional twelve-month periods. 
(Code 1965, § 35-3; Ord. No. 2148, 6-23-92) 
Cross reference— Zoning Ordinance, App. A.  
Sec. 19-19. - Location in agricultural districts. 
(a)  A permit to allow one (1) freestanding mobile home may be approved by the department of public works in any area zoned agricultural district, provided the following conditions are complied with: 
(1)  The mobile home is located to the rear or side and on the same lot or parcel with a principal residential building and all dimensional requirements for two (2) dwellings are complied with and the required yards or open space of the principal dwelling are not encroached upon. 
(2)  The mobile home is not located within four hundred (400) feet of any other residence existing at the time application is made to locate the mobile home. 
(3)  The immediately adjoining property owners and those directly across the fronting street shall be notified by the department of public works of the receipt of an application to place a mobile home. Such notice shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the issuance of a permit by the department of public works. The address to which such notice shall be sent by the department of planning shall be that as shown on the tax records of the city. 
(4)  The department of public works shall not issue a permit to locate a freestanding mobile home until the method of sewage disposal for such mobile home is approved by the department of public health. 
(5)  A freestanding mobile home authorized under the terms of this section shall not be occupied by anyone not a member of the immediate family resident in the principal dwelling on the lot or parcel and such mobile home shall not be occupied by more than one (1) family. For the purpose of this section, a member of the immediate family is defined as any person who is a natural or legally adopted child, grandchild or spouse or parent of the owner. 
(6)  The department of planning shall, upon written receipt of an objection from persons set forth in (3) above to the placement of a freestanding mobile home, refer the application to the city council for approval or disapproval. If no objection is received by the department of public works, it shall be authorized to issue the freestanding mobile home permit at the expiration of the notification period. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) hereof, the city council may, by resolution, allow the continuation of an existing freestanding mobile home if the circumstances under which the original approval took place change, provided the council finds the mobile home to be compatible with surrounding land use. In the resolution permitting such continuation, the city council may attach conditions and safeguards to its approval as it deems necessary to assure such compatibility. 
(c)  A temporary special permit may be issued by the department of public works for a period not to exceed nine (9) months in a case where a single-family dwelling has been destroyed or damaged by fire or other disaster to an extent which makes such dwelling uninhabitable and only where such dwelling is to be rebuilt or repaired. 
(Code 1965, § 35-4; Ord. No. 1006, 11-19-79; Ord. No. 1822, 12-5-88; Ord. No. 2112, 2-4-92; Ord. No. 2148, 6-23-92)  
Chapter 21 - MOTOR VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2903, adopted Dec. 13, 2005, repealed former Ch. 21 of the Code in its entirety and enacted new provisions as Ch. 21. Former Ch. 21, §§ 21-1—21-12, 21-14—21-23.1, 21-24—21-33.1, 21-34, 21-46—21-56, 21-71, 21-71.1, 21-72—21-75.1, 21-76, 21-77, 21-79, 21-85—21-86, 21-101—21-102.1, 21-103—21-111, 21-113—21-130, 21-141—21-160, 21-176—21-179, 21-191—21-207.4, 21-209—21-211, 21-226—21-251.1, 21-252—21-260, 21-271—21-276, 21-278—21-281, 21-294—21-300, 21-311—21-316.1, 21-317—21-321.2, 21-322, 21-323, 21-323.1, 21-324, 21-336, 21-336.1, 21-337, 21-338.1—21-338.11, 21-339—21-340.1, 21-341, 21-341.1, 21-341.3, 21-342—21-344, 21-356—21-374.1, 21-375—21-386, 21-394—21-395.1, 21-396—21-403, 21-405—21-407, 21-419—21-429, 21-440.1—21-440.11, 21-441—21-444, 21-456—21-468, 21-481—21-485, and 21-496—21-502, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of the provisions of Ord. No. 2903. 
Cross reference— Composition and general duties of traffic division of department of public works, § 2-271; operation of vehicle for display of announcements or advertisements thereon, § 3-6; use of radios, amplifiers, etc., on vehicles for advertising purposes, § 3-7; driving vehicles on beach or dunes, § 6-12; bicycles and other wheeled vehicles, Ch. 7; vehicles used for sale of ice cream, candy, etc., on streets, § 13-46 et seq.; storage of vehicles, § 16-40 et seq.; insurance prerequisite to issuance of license for rental of certain vehicles, § 18-22; injuring, tampering with, etc., vehicles, § 23-41; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 33; local vehicle license, § 35-275 et seq.; vehicles for hire, Ch. 36; zoning ordinance, App. A; subdivision ordinance, App. B. 
State Law reference— General authority of city to regulate traffic, Code of Virginia § 46.2-1300 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION OF TITLE 46.2 AND TITLE 18.2, CHAPTER 7, ARTICLE 2 OF THE VIRGINIA CODE; LOCAL AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Adoption of Title 46.2 and Article 2 (§ 18.2-266 et seq.) of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2 of the state code. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of § 46.2-1313 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the State contained in Title 46.2 and Article 2 (§ 18.2-266 et seq.) of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, and pursuant to § 1-220 of the Code of Virginia as amended in the future, except those provisions and requirements the violation of which constitutes a felony, and except those provisions and requirements which, by their very nature, can not have application to or within the City, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this Chapter by reference and made applicable within the City. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted and made a part of this Chapter as fully as though set forth at length herein, and it shall be unlawful for any person within the City to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of the Code of Virginia, which is adopted by this section; provided, that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  Any change to any Section of this Article resulting from a future amendment to a state law that is adopted and incorporated by reference shall become effective at the same time the amended state law becomes effective. 
(c)  All definitions of words and phrases contained in the State law hereby adopted shall apply to such words and phrases, when used in this Chapter, unless clearly indicated to the contrary. Reference to "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways and other public ways within the City. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2926, 2-28-06)  
Sec. 21-2. - Title. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall be known as the "Motor Vehicle and Traffic Code of the City of Virginia Beach, Virginia" and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-3. - General powers of City Manager relative to traffic. 
(a)  The City Manager shall have final authority over the management and direction of all vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the City and of the parking and routing of vehicles in the interest of the public safety, comfort and convenience, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter and Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia. He may cause appropriate signs to be erected and maintained, designating residence and business districts, school, hospital and safety zones, highways and interurban railway crossings, turns at intersections, traffic lanes and such other signs as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. He shall have power to regulate traffic by means of traffic officers or semaphores or other signaling devices on any portion of the highway where traffic is heavy or continuous or where, in his judgment, conditions may require. He may adopt any such regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter, as he shall deem advisable and necessary, and repeal, amend or modify any such regulation; provided, however, that such regulations shall not be deemed to be violated if, at the time of the alleged violation, any sign or designation required under the terms of this Chapter is missing, effaced, mutilated or defaced, so that an ordinary observant person, under the same circumstances, would not be apprised of or aware of the existence of such regulations. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), the City Manager shall not implement any program or regulation which requires the payment of a fee to park in any public lot within or adjacent to the Municipal Center absent specific authorization from City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-4. - Compliance with chapter; general penalty for violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter. Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of this Chapter shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Secs. 21-5—21-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - VEHICLE OPERATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-200. - Blocking intersections or marked crosswalks. 
No operator of a vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, unless there is sufficient space beyond such intersection or crosswalk, in the direction in which such vehicle is proceeding, to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-201. - Cruising. 
(a)  The City of Virginia Beach hereby finds and declares that the unregulated practice of cruising on Atlantic Avenue in the resort area creates substantial vehicular traffic congestion, including extended periods of gridlock; interferes with the smooth and orderly flow of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic; unduly interferes with the ability of police, fire, and rescue vehicles to respond to calls for assistance; and thereby endangers the health, safety and welfare of the City's citizens and visitors. By adoption of this Section, it is the intent of the City to regulate cruising on Atlantic Avenue in the resort area and thereby to alleviate the problems associated therewith. 
(b)  The following words and phrases shall, for purposes of this Section, have the meanings respectively ascribed thereto: 
(i)  Cruising or to cruise shall mean to operate a motor vehicle or low-speed vehicle, or as a custodian thereof, to permit its operation, past a traffic-control point two (2) times in the same direction within any three-hour period. 
(ii)  Custodian shall mean any person who is the owner of a motor vehicle or low-speed vehicle, or has custody thereof, and who is riding therein (or thereon) at the time of its operation. 
(iii)  Enforcement period shall mean the period from May 1 to September 30, inclusive, between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m., inclusive. 
(iv)  Restricted area shall mean Atlantic Avenue from and including the Rudee Inlet Loop to and including 31st Street. 
(v)  Resort area shall mean the area, from and including, the sidewalk on the west side of Pacific Avenue to the Atlantic Ocean between Rudee Inlet and 42nd Street. 
(vi)  Traffic-control point shall mean the location of any sign indicating that cruising is prohibited, or any point designated by the chief of police or his duly authorized designee which is located between any such signs. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cruise in the restricted area during the enforcement period. A violation of this subsection shall constitute a traffic infraction, and each successive trip past a traffic-control point after a violation has occurred shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)  Signs indicating that cruising is prohibited shall be posted at periodic intervals immediately adjacent to the restricted area. Such signs shall state substantially as follows: 
NO CRUISING 2 P.M. TO 4 A.M. 
UNLAWFUL TO PASS THIS POINT 
2 TIMES IN 3-HOUR PERIOD 
(e)  The provisions of this Section shall not be applicable to the operator of a police, fire or rescue vehicle in the conduct of official duties, the operator of a common carrier, or the operator of any motor vehicle or low-speed vehicle when such motor vehicle or low-speed vehicle is being operated for business purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Secs. 21-202—21-219. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS 
 
Sec. 21-220. - Activation of traffic control signals by fire department and emergency medical services agency members. 
Members of any fire department or any emergency medical services agency, when on duty, may activate electric traffic-control signals when such control signals are specifically authorized by the State Highway and Transportation Commissioner or the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3432, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 21-221. - Duty to obey traffic signs and signals and orders of police officers. 
Pedestrians shall obey signs and signals erected on highways or streets for the direction and control of travel and traffic and they shall obey the orders of police officers engaged in directing travel and traffic on the highways and streets. Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-222. - Traffic signal enforcement program. 
(a)  Establishment. There is hereby established a traffic signal enforcement program pursuant to and in accordance with Code of Virginia § 15.2-968.1. The program shall include the installation and operation of traffic light signal violation monitoring systems in a number up to the maximum number permitted by state law. No traffic light signal violation monitoring system shall be operated for enforcement purposes at an intersection until all prerequisites for such operation have been fulfilled. 
(b)  Implementation. The city manager shall (i) have the authority to implement the provisions of this section, (ii) promulgate the rules and regulations necessary to administer the traffic signal enforcement program in compliance with all requirements of Code of Virginia § 15.2-968.1 and this section, and (iii) be responsible for the compliance of all aspects of the traffic signal enforcement program with applicable state law. 
(c)  Private contractor. The city may enter into an agreement with a private entity for the installation and operation of traffic light signal violation monitoring systems and related services as permitted by and subject to the restrictions imposed by Code of Virginia § 15.2-968.1(I). 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  For failure to comply with traffic light signal. The operator of a vehicle shall be liable for a monetary penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) if such vehicle is found, as evidenced by information obtained from a traffic light signal violation monitoring system, to have failed to comply with a traffic light signal within the city. Any person found liable under this ordinance may contest the summons as provided by Code of Virginia § 15.2-968.1. 
(2)  For disclosure of personal information. Any person who discloses personal information collected by a traffic light signal violation monitoring system in violation of the provisions of Code of Virginia § 15.2-968.1(H) shall be subject to a civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 3048, 9-2-08)  
Sec. 21-223. - Video-monitoring systems in or on school buses. 
(a)  The School Board of the City of Virginia Beach dba Virginia Beach City Public Schools is hereby authorized to install and operate a video-monitoring system in or on the school buses operated by the School Board or to contract with a private vendor to do so on behalf of the School Board for the purpose of recording violations of the Code of Virginia § 46.2-844(A). 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "video-monitoring system" means a system with one or more camera sensors and computers installed and operated on a school bus that produces live digital and recorded video of motor vehicles being operated in violation of Code of Virginia § 46.2-859. 
(c)  All video-monitoring systems installed on public school buses shall, at a minimum, produce a recorded image of the license plate and shall record the activation status of at least one warning device as prescribed in Code of Virginia § 46.2-1090 and the time, date, and location of the vehicle when the image is recorded. 
(d)  The driver of a motor vehicle found to be in violation of Code of Virginia § 46.2-859, based upon evidence obtained from a video-monitoring system, shall be liable for a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) imposed in accordance with this section if such vehicle is found, as evidenced by information obtained from a video-monitoring system in or on a school bus, to have violated Code of Virginia § 46.2-859 within the city. Any person found liable under this ordinance may contest the summons as provided by Code of Virginia § 46.2-844(A). 
(e)  Information collected by a video-monitoring system installed and operated pursuant to this section shall be limited exclusively to that information that is necessary for the enforcement of violation of Code of Virginia § 46.2-859. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all images or video or other personal information recorded by such video-monitoring systems shall be used exclusively for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 3562, 7-3-18)  
Secs. 21-224—21-229. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SPEEDING 
 
Sec. 21-230. - Traffic calming via maximum speed limits in certain residential districts; penalty. 
Pursuant to § 46.2-878.2 of the Code of Virginia, any person who operates a motor vehicle in excess of the maximum speed limit established for any portion of the following highways located within the designated neighborhoods, on or after the effective date, shall be guilty of a traffic infraction punishable by a prepayable fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00), in addition to other penalties provided by law. No portion of the fine shall be suspended unless the court orders twenty (20) hours of community service. 
(1)  L & J Garden: Norwich Avenue; Tajo Avenue; Fairlawn Avenue; Dulcie Avenue. 
(2)  Acredale: Andover Road; Langston Road; Bonneydale Road; Olive Road, Alton Road; Old Kempsville Road. 
(3)  Lake Shores: Jack Frost Road; Lake Shores Road. 
(4)  Little Neck: Harris Road. 
(5)  Lake Shores: Oak Leaf Lane, Tern Road; Lake Road S; Regina Lane; Meredith Road, School Road, Mosby Road, Frizzel Drive; Finn Road; Charla Lee Lane; Smith Farm Road. 
(6)  Brighton on the Bay: Templeton Lane; Wivenhoe Way; Starr Way. 
(7)  Baylake Pines/Baylake Beach: Ben Gunn Road; Indian Hill Road; Baylake Road; Rampart Avenue; Bayville Road; Lookout Road; Sandy Bay Drive. 
(8)  Country Haven: Stewart Drive. 
(9)  Fairfield: Lord Dunmore Drive. 
(10)  Bellamy Manor: Homestead Drive. 
(11)  Church Point: Church Point Road; Church Point Place; Timber Ridge Drive. 
(12)  Stratford Chase: Stratford Chase Drive; Minden Road; Violet Bank; Kittery Drive. 
(13)  Bayville Park: Greenwell Road (From Shore Drive to First Court Road). 
(14)  Milburn Manor: Davis Street. 
(15)  Lake James: Lake James Drive. 
(16)  Larkspur: Edwin Drive from Princess Anne Road to Independence Blvd. 
Effective as of April 6, 2004: 
(1)  Croatan: Croatan Road. 
(2)  Birdneck Point: Cardinal Road. 
Effective as of April 5, 2005: 
(1)  Thoroughgood: Thoroughgood Drive. 
(2)  Hermitage Road. 
Effective as of September 12, 2006: 
(1)  Kings Grant: Oxford Drive. 
Effective as of January 27, 2009: 
(1)  Baycliff: Baycliff Drive between Mill Dam Road and Stephens Road. 
(2)  Lakeview Park: Cullen Road between Shell Road and Lakeside Road. 
Effective as of August 10, 2010: 
(1)  Bellamy Plantation: Grey Friars Chase between Lynnhaven Parkway and the 1900 block of Grey Friars Chase. 
Effective as of September 5, 2018: 
(1)  Mediterranean Avenue between Virginia Beach Boulevard and Norfolk Avenue. 
Effective as of November 12, 2019: 
(1)  Aragona: Sullivan Boulevard between Aragona Boulevard to Haygood Road. 
(2)  Red Mill: Red Mill Boulevard between General Booth Boulevard to Warner Hall Drive. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2961, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 3071, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 3149, 8-10-10; Ord. No. 3568, 9-4-18; Ord. No. 3604, 11-12-19)  
Secs. 21-231—21-239. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DRIVING WHILE UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS 
 
Sec. 21-240. - Reimbursement for expenses incurred from emergency responses. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the following provisions shall, at the time of sentencing or in a separate civil action, be liable to the City for restitution of reasonable expenses incurred by the City when issuing any related arrest warrant or summons. Further, any person so convicted shall at the time of sentencing or in a separate civil action, be liable to the City and to any responding volunteer rescue squads, or both for restitution of reasonable expenses incurred by the City or any volunteer rescue squad, for responding law enforcement, firefighting, rescue and emergency services, or by any combination of the foregoing, when providing an appropriate emergency response to any accident or incident related to such violation. 
(1)  The provisions of Code of Virginia §§ 18.2-36.1, 18.2-51.4, 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1, 29.1-738, 29.1-738.02 or 46.2-341.24, when such operation of motor vehicle, engine, train or watercraft while so impaired is the proximate cause of the accident or incident; 
(2)  The provisions of Article 7 (§ 46.2-852 et seq.) of Chapter 8 of Title 46.2 relating to reckless driving, when such reckless driving is the proximate cause of the accident or incident; 
(3)  The provisions of Article 1 (§ 46.2-300 et seq.) of Chapter 3 of Title 46.2 relating to driving without a license or driving with a suspended or revoked license; and 
(4)  The provisions of Code of Virginia § 46.2-894 relating to improperly leaving the scene of an accident. 
(b)  Personal liability under this section for reasonable expenses of an appropriate emergency response pursuant to subsection (a) shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in the aggregate for a particular accident, arrest or incident. In determining the "reasonable expenses" a flat fee of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) may be billed, or a minute-by-minute accounting of the actual cost incurred may be billed. 
(c)  As used in this section, "appropriate emergency response" includes all cost of providing law-enforcement, fire-fighting, rescue and emergency medical services. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not preempt or limit any remedy available to the commonwealth, the City of Virginia Beach, or to any volunteer rescue squad to recover the reasonable expenses of an emergency response to an accident or incident not involving impaired driving, operation of a vehicle or other conduct as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3025, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 3093, 6-23-09)  
Secs. 21-241—21-249. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES, MINIBIKES, ETC. 
 
Sec. 21-250. - Operation on private property; compliance with registration and licensing requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated any motorcycle, minibike, trail bike, motor scooter or other form of two (2) or more wheeled transportation propelled by an internal combustion engine, upon the private property of another, unless the operator of said vehicle has in his possession written authorization from the property owner or his agent. 
(b)  The owner of any privately owned property desiring enforcement upon his property of any provision of this Section shall notify the Chief of Police or his authorized designee. 
(c)  When any police officer arrests a person and charges him with a violation of this Section, such officer may seize the vehicle involved and deliver the same to the Chief of Police or his authorized designee, and the vehicle shall be held until the charge is disposed of by the court having jurisdiction; provided, that seizure shall not be made of any vehicle operated on private property, unless the owner of such property has complied with the requirements of subsection (b) above. In disposing of the charge, the court shall order the vehicle returned to its owner, except that, when any person has been convicted of a second or subsequent violation of this Section, the judge may order such vehicle held by the Chief of Police or his authorized designee for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
(d)  The provisions of this Section shall not apply to emergency vehicles, government vehicles or to persons driving upon such property with the written consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such property or to the property owner or his family, employees, agents or lessees. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-251. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3180, adopted May 24, 2011, repealed § 21-251, which pertained to unreasonable loud, disturbing, etc., noise from operation of motorcycle and derived from Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05.  
Sec. 21-252. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles. 
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-253. - Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers; persons under sixteen prohibited from riding in cargo areas of pickup trucks. 
(a)  No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise; provided, however, no person under sixteen (16) years of age shall be transported in the rear cargo area of any pickup truck on any highway in this City. 
(b)  The provisions of this Section shall not apply to transportation of persons in the bed of any pickup truck being operated (i) as part of an organized parade authorized by the state department of transportation or the City or (ii) on or across a highway from one field or parcel of land to another field or parcel of land in connection with farming operations. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Secs. 21-254—21-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-300. - General authority of director of public works as to parking. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this Chapter, the Director of Public Works is hereby authorized, when in his judgement it is in the public interest so to do, to set apart on any of the streets of the city spaces for loading and unloading merchandise, bus stops and other places in which no general parking shall be permitted, and he is further authorized to set aside spaces in which parking time shall be further limited or prohibited. Such action shall not be effective, unless signs or other markings are present, within or near such spaces, so as to apprise an ordinarily observant person of such parking prohibitions or regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the requirements of signs or other markings. 
(b)  This Section shall not be construed to authorize the Director of Public Works to designate parking meter zones or taxicab stands. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-301. - Appointees to enforce parking regulations. 
The City Manager is hereby authorized to appoint city personnel and/or personnel serving under contract with the City to enforce the provisions of Sections 21-303 through 21-310 of the City Code in addition to the regular police officers of the City. Such personnel shall wear a uniform as prescribed by the City Manager. Nothing shall preclude the City Manager from appointing personnel under this Section who may also have been appointed under Section 21-328 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-302. - Stopping or parking on highways generally. 
(a)  Except when actually loading or unloading merchandise, as permitted in this chapter, no vehicle shall be stopped except close to and parallel to the edge of the curb or roadway, except that a vehicle may be parked at an angle, where permitted. 
(b)  All trailers with a gross vehicle weight of less than ten thousand (10,000) pounds shall either be fitted with reflective tape or sheeting on the rear upright side posts of the trailer in a manner clearly visible to approaching traffic, or shall place a reflective cone behind the rear portion of the trailer which is closest to the center of the street. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2962, 11-7-06; Ord. No. 2971, 2-27-07)  
Sec. 21-303. - General parking prohibitions; penalties for violation. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  Within any designated fire lane. 
(2)  At any place so as to block any fire department connection. 
(3)  Within seventy-five (75) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station if properly posted, or on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station. 
(4)  In front of a public driveway. 
(5)  On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street (double parking). 
(6)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or highway or within a tunnel. 
(7)  On the left-hand side of roadway of a two-way street. The provisions of this sub-section exclude those city vehicles operated by city employees executing official duties that require repeated vehicle exit and entry. 
(8)  At any place so as to impede or render dangerous the use of any street or highway. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  On a crosswalk. 
(3)  Within twenty (20) feet of a marked crosswalk at an intersection. 
(4)  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(5)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by official signs or markings. 
(6)  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing. 
(7)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when such parking would obstruct traffic. 
(8)  At any place where official signs prohibit, reserve or restrict parking. 
(9)  In a residential or apartment district (area), if such vehicle is a commercial vehicle in excess of twenty (20) feet in length and/or seven (7) feet in height. This restriction shall not apply to commercial vehicles parked while engaged in the normal conduct of business or in the delivery or provision of goods or services in a residential or apartment district (area). 
(10)  At any place so as to prevent the use of a curb ramp located on public property or on privately owned property open to the public. 
(11)  At any place, angle parked or perpendicular to a curb, unless street markings permit. 
(12)  In a cul-de-sac other than close to and parallel to the edge of the curb or roadway, except in parking spaces approved and marked by the City or where a lawfully erected sign otherwise permits. 
(13)  On any street or highway or any city parking lot or other city-owned property for the purpose of selling or offering the vehicle for sale or rent. Factors that shall be considered in determining the purpose for which a vehicle is parked shall include, but not be limited to (i) the number, size and placement of signs offering the vehicle for sale or rent; (ii) the length of time the vehicle is parked; and (iii) the manner in which the vehicle is parked. 
(c)  No person shall park on any street or highway, or on any city parking lot, any vehicle which fails to display valid and current state license plates. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  When a notice or citation is attached to a vehicle found parked in violation of any provision of this section or section 21-1 incorporating the provisions of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, the owner of the vehicle may pay to the city treasurer, in satisfaction of any such violation, a penalty fine as listed below when such payment is postmarked or received by the city treasurer within fourteen (14) calendar day after issuance of such a notice or citation. Such payment shall constitute a plea of guilty to the violation in question. 
(i)  A penalty fine of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for all parking violations citing City Code section 21-1 incorporating the parking provisions of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(ii)  A penalty fine of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for a violation of any provision of subsection (a), except (a)(1), for each hour or fraction thereof during which such vehicle was unlawfully parked. 
(iii)  A penalty fine of twenty dollars ($20.00) for a violation of any provision of subsection (b) for each hour or fraction thereof during which such vehicle was unlawfully parked. 
(iv)  A penalty fine of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for a violation of subsection (c) for each day or fraction thereof during which such vehicle was unlawfully parked. 
(v)  A penalty fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a violation of subsection (a)(1) for each hour or fraction thereof during which such vehicle was unlawfully parked. 
(2)  If such payment is not postmarked or received by the city treasurer within fourteen (14) calendar days after issuance of such notice or citation, the penalty fine shall increase to double that indicated above. 
(3)  For failure to respond to notices or citations within thirty (30) days, refer to subsection 21-312(b) below. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2971, 2-27-07; Ord. No. 2988, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 3053, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 3065, 1-27-09; Ord. No. 3529, 1-9-18)  
Sec. 21-303.1. - Parking in spaces reserved for persons with disabilities; enforcement and penalties for violations. 
Pursuant to Virginia Code § 46.2-1313, all of the provisions and requirements of Virginia Code § 46.2-1242, including, pursuant to Virginia Code § 1-220, future amendments, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section by reference and made applicable within the City. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as fully as though set forth at length herein, and it shall be unlawful for any person within the City to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with Virginia Code § 46.2-1242. Any change to this section resulting from a future amendment to Virginia Code § 46.2-1242 shall become effective at the same time the state law amendment becomes effective. All definitions of words and phrases contained in Virginia Code § 46.2-100 shall apply to such words and phrases when used in this section. In addition to the provisions contained in Virginia Code § 46.2-1242, the following provisions also apply: 
(a)  A summons or parking ticket for violation of the state law that prohibits unauthorized parking in spaces reserved for persons with disabilities may be issued by law-enforcement officers, uniformed law-enforcement department employees, or volunteers supervised by the Police Department, without the necessity of a warrant's being obtained by the owner of any private parking area. 
(b)  When a notice or citation is attached to a vehicle found parked in violation of this section, the owner of the vehicle may, within fourteen (14) calendar days thereafter, pay to the city treasurer, in satisfaction of such violation, a penalty of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Such payment shall constitute a plea of guilty for the violation in question. If such payment is not postmarked or received by the city treasurer within fourteen (14) calendar days after receipt of such notice or violation, the penalty shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The failure of any owner to make payment as prescribed above within thirty (30) days shall render such owner, upon conviction of such violation, subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 2940, 5-9-06)  
Sec. 21-304. - Parking or stopping for certain purposes prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any automobile, truck, trailer or other vehicle upon or in any street, alley or parkway for the purpose of selling or offering the same for sale or rent. No sign or lettering shall be attached or placed upon any automobile, truck, trailer or other vehicle parked in or upon any public street, alley or parkway in the City indicating that such vehicle is offered for sale or for rent. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop a vehicle at any time upon a highway for the purpose of advertising any article of any kind, or to display thereupon advertisements of any article or advertisement for the sale of the vehicle itself. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-305. - Washing or greasing vehicle on highway or sidewalk. 
No person shall, for compensation, wash, polish or grease a vehicle upon a highway or sidewalk, nor shall the owner of a vehicle permit it to be washed, polished or greased, for compensation, upon a highway or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-306. - Backing to curb. 
No vehicle shall be backed to a curb, except during the time actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-307. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2988, adopted June 26, 2007, repealed § 21-307, which pertained to parking vehicle without current state license and derived from Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05.  
Sec. 21-308. - Parking in street sweeping zones. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in a "no parking" zone designated for street sweeping during the respective hours as noted. It shall also be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in a zone scheduled for street sweeping when proper notification has been given by the City through the placement of a notice on the windshield of vehicles located in the sweeping zone. The City has the right to remove any vehicle located within these zones during the designated times of street sweeping. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-309. - Manner of using loading zones. 
Where a loading or unloading zone has been set apart by the Director of Public Works in accordance with applicable provisions of this Chapter, the following regulations shall apply with respect to the use of such areas: 
(1)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, in any place marked as a curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. All delivery vehicles, other than regular delivery trucks, using such loading zones shall be identified by the owner's or company's name, in letters three (3) inches high on both sides of the vehicle. 
(2)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily in a space marked as a curb loading zone for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers or bundles, when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or is about to enter such loading space. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-310. - Manner of using bus stops and taxicab stands. 
Where a bus stop has been set apart by the Director of Public Works in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Chapter or where a taxicab stand has been designated in accordance with Section 36-78 of this Code, the following regulations shall apply as to the use thereof: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, where such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-311. - Contest of parking citations. 
Any person who shall desire to contest a parking citation shall present the citation at any office of the City Treasurer, who shall certify it on an appropriate form to the General District Court. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-312. - Penalty for violations of division; fine for failure to pay in timely manner. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, when a notice or citation is attached to a vehicle or given to a driver pursuant to this Division, the owner of the vehicle may, within fourteen (14) calendar days thereafter, pay to the City Treasurer, in satisfaction of the violation, a penalty of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). Such payment shall constitute a plea of guilty to the violation. If such payment is not postmarked or received by the City Treasurer within fourteen (14) calendar days after receipt of such notice or citation, the penalty shall be seventy dollars ($70.00). 
(b)  Any owner who, within thirty (30) days of notice or citation issuance, fails to either make payment as provided by this Division, or to present the citation or notice of violation at any office of the City Treasurer for certification to the general district court, shall be subject to a supplementary fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition to the penalty set forth in this Division. 
(Ord. No. 2988, 6-26-07)  
Secs. 21-313—21-319. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARKING METERS 
 
Sec. 21-320. - Installation, maintenance, required signals, etc. 
The City Manager shall have the authority to provide for the installation or placing of parking meters within the City and the regulation, control, operation and use thereof in accordance with the provisions of this Division and shall maintain such meters in good working condition. Such parking meters shall be placed upon the curbing immediately adjacent to individual parking spaces designated as provided in this Division. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such a manner as to show or display a signal that the parking space assigned to it is or is not legally in use and to display, upon deposit of the proper coin of the United States of America therein, a signal indicating legal parking time for the time allotted for such coin for the part of the street upon which such meter is placed. Each meter shall be so arranged that, upon the expiration of such parking limit, or the portion thereof for which the necessary coin or coins have been deposited, it will indicate, by mechanical operation and proper signal, that the lawful parking period has expired. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-321. - Designation of and method of parking in meter spaces. 
(a)  The City Manager or such officers and employees of the City as he shall select shall place lines or markings on the curb or in the street about or alongside of each parking meter installed pursuant to the provisions of this Division, to designate the parking meter space for which such meter is to be used. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in any such space, except within the lines and markings designating such space. 
(b)  When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such space shall be parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be alongside of and nearest to the parking meter. When a parking space in any parking meter zone is diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked with the foremost part of such vehicle directed at and nearest to such meter. 
(c)  The number of vehicles allowed to be parked in a designated parking space in a parking meter zone shall be limited to one (1) vehicle per space. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-322. - Deposit of coin required; exemption for senior citizens; overtime parking generally. 
(a)  When any vehicle shall be parked in any parking meter space designated as provided in this division, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering such space, immediately deposit, or cause to be deposited, one or more coins of the United States of America in the parking meter adjacent thereto, and such space may then be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of parking time calculated at an hourly rate in an amount to be determined by the city manager or his designee, not to exceed, however, the maximum time prescribed by section 21-423. If such vehicle shall remain in such parking space beyond the period of parking time calculated at an hourly rate in an amount to be determined by the city manager or his designee, the parking meter shall display a sign or signal showing illegal parking, in which event, the vehicle parked in such parking space shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, the City Manager or his designee may issue a parking permit to any citizen of the City who is sixty-five (65) years of age or older, which will allow the permittee to park in metered spaces in the area commonly known as Rudee Inlet Loop Wayside without depositing a coin or coins. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking space provided for in this division. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle to remain or to be parked in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter installed pursuant to the provi sions of this Division while such meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond the period of time prescribed for such parking space. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3074, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 21-322.1. - Veterans' paid parking exemption. 
(a)  A veteran to whom special license plates issued under Virginia Code Sections 46.2-741 (Pearl Harbor Survivor), 46.2-742 (Purple Heart), 46.2-742.1 (Bronze Star or Silver Star), 46.2-742.1:1 (Air Medal), 46.2-742.2 (Navy Cross, Distinguished Service Cross, Air Force Cross, or Distinguished Flying Cross), 46.2-745 (Medal of Honor), 46.2-746 (Prisoner of War), or 46.2-739 (Service-Disabled Veterans) have been issued, or a person transporting such veteran in a motor vehicle displaying special license plates, may park such motor vehicle, without charge, in a parking space in a City parking facility or a metered parking space. 
(b)  This section shall not exempt a vehicle displaying special license plates from compliance with any other state law or ordinance, including, but not limited to, limitations on the types of vehicles that may park in certain reserved parking spaces and time-based restrictions on parking in City parking facilities or metered parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 3029, 6-10-08; Ord. No. 3466, 11-1-16)  
Sec. 21-323. - Parking for more than three hours in metered space; exemption for senior citizens. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Division, and whether or not coins have been deposited in a parking meter, no person shall park a vehicle in any parking space in a parking meter zone established by this Division for longer than three (3) hours at any one time. The three-hour limit shall not apply to any citizen of the City who is sixty-five (65) years of age or older who is parked in a metered space in the area commonly known as Rudee Inlet Wayside Loop and who has been issued and displays a permit obtained under the provisions of Section 21-322(b). 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-324. - Hours and dates during which Division is applicable. 
(a)  The provisions of this division shall apply to parking twenty-four (24) hours per day in all areas, every day including federal and state legal holidays and Sundays from April first to November first of each calendar year. 
(b)  Pursuant to section 21-320, the city manager shall have the authority to designate specific areas in which the hours and/or dates that the provisions of this division is applicable are different from the hours and/or dates set forth in subsection (a), provided that any such area is clearly identified by signs, curb markings or other means. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3074, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 21-325. - Use of metered space without deposit for loading, unloading, etc. 
Operators of delivery vehicles may use, without deposit, any parking meter space referred to in this Division during the actual loading and unloading of such delivery vehicles. Operators of passenger vehicles, commercial or private, may use, without deposit, such a parking meter space for the purpose of promptly receiving or discharging any passenger. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-326. - Establishment of loading zones, bus stops, etc., in meter zones. 
The Director of Public Works may set apart, within the parking meter zones established by this Division, spaces for loading zones, bus stops and other places in which no parking by the general public shall be permitted; provided, however, that taxicab stands within such parking meter zones shall be designated as provided in Section 36-78 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-327. - Purpose of required deposits. 
The coins required to be deposited in parking meters, as provided in this Division, are hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic on the public streets and to cover the cost of the supervision, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of the parking meter spaces and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones established by this Division. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-328. - Appointment of persons to enforce Division. 
The City Manager is authorized to appoint city personnel and/or personnel serving under contract with the City to enforce the provisions of this Division, except Section 21-331, in addition to the regular police officers of the City. Such personnel shall wear a uniform as prescribed by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-329. - Duty of enforcing officers or persons with reference to violations of Division. 
Each police officer or other person charged with the duty of enforcing this Division shall take the number of any parking meter at which any vehicle is parked in violation of this Division, the tag number of such vehicle and the length of time during which such vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of this Division and report the same to the police department and make proper complaint touching such violation. Each such officer shall attach to the vehicle in question a notice to the owner thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of the parking meter regulations and instructing such owner when and where to report with reference to such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-330. - Prepayment of penalty for parking in metered spaces in violation of division. 
(a)  When a notice is attached to a vehicle pursuant to section 21-329, the owner of the vehicle may, within fourteen (14) calendar days thereafter, pay to the City Treasurer, in satisfaction of the violation for which the notice was given, a penalty of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each hour or fraction thereof during which such vehicle occupied a parking meter space illegally. Such payment shall constitute a plea of guilty to the violation in question. If such payment is not postmarked or received by the City Treasurer within fourteen (14) calendar days after receipt of such notice, the penalty for each hour or fraction thereof during which such vehicle occupied a parking meter space illegally shall be forty dollars ($40.00) 
(b)  The failure of any owner to make payment in accord with subsection (a) above or present the citation or notice of violation at any office of the City Treasurer for certification to the General District Court, within thirty (30) days shall render such owner subject to a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition to the penalty set forth in subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3349, 5-13-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 21-331. - Injuring, defacing, etc., meters. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed pursuant to this Division. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-332. - Division does not affect other provisions as to traffic or parking. 
Nothing in this Division shall alter or affect any other provision of this Code or ordinance, rule or regulation of the City relating to traffic or parking on any street, alley, lane or highway within the City, other than those included within the parking meter zones established by this Division. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Secs. 21-333—21-349. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMITS 
 
Sec. 21-350. - Objectives. 
This Division is adopted in order to reduce nighttime traffic congestion in public streets within residential neighborhoods; to reduce hazardous traffic conditions during nighttime hours in residential neighborhoods caused by the use of such streets for vehicular parking by persons attempting to avoid the use of nearby city meter-regulated parking; to protect residents of such neighborhoods from unreasonable noise and disturbance during nighttime hours; to protect such residents from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences; and to protect and preserve the peace, good order, convenience and character of residential neighborhoods located in close proximity to commercial areas of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-351. - Definitions. 
As used in this Division: 
(a)  Motor vehicle shall have the meaning set forth in § 46.2-100 of the State Code, and shall also include mopeds and motorcycles, as defined therein. 
(b)  Residence shall mean a single-family dwelling or a dwelling unit, as defined in Section 111 of the City Zoning Ordinance [Appendix A]. 
(c)  Residential area shall mean an area designated on the zoning map of the City as a residential zoning district or an area containing streets primarily abutted by residences or other noncommercial uses, including, but not limited to, schools, parks and churches. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-352. - Designation of residential permit parking areas. 
The City Manager or his designee is hereby authorized to designate as residential permit parking areas street blocks within any residential areas, or part thereof, which is located within one-half mile of a city meter-regulated parking area. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-353. - Parking restrictions. 
(a)  In any area designated as a residential permit parking area, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or otherwise leave unattended any all-terrain vehicle, bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, electric-powered wheeled device, gas-powered wheeled device, low-speed vehicle, moped or similar wheeled device on the street. 
(b)  In any area designated as a residential permit parking area, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on the street between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless there is affixed to the driver's side exterior surface of the windshield of such motor vehicle a valid residential parking permit; provided, however, that the provisions of this Section shall not apply to emergency or governmental vehicles, to delivery or service vehicles while engaged in such delivery or service, or to vehicles displaying a valid guest pass plainly visible from the exterior of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-354. - Permits generally. 
(a)  Following the designation of a residential permit parking area by the City Manager or his designee, the City Treasurer or city's parking management office shall issue annual residential parking permits for the area so designated. One (1) permit shall be issued, upon application and payment of the prescribed fee, if applicable, for each motor vehicle owned by a person residing on a street within the residential permit parking area, or on a street within a residential area that is contiguous to the residential permit parking area as specified in subsection (b). 
(b)  An applicant for a permit shall present his motor vehicle registration and operator's license with the application. No permit shall be issued in the event either the registration or operator's license shows an address not within a designated residential permit parking area, unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City Treasurer or city's parking management office that he is, in fact, a resident of such area, or that he is a resident of a residential area which is contiguous to a designated residential permit parking area and in which neither off-street nor nonmeter-regulated on-street parking is available. Any applicant who is a resident of such a contiguous residential area shall, upon receipt of a permit issued hereunder, be permitted to park in the designated residential permit parking area. Registered residential parking permit holders may obtain annual or temporary guest passes by applying to either the city treasurer's office or the city's parking systems management office. Temporary guest passes shall be issued and validated for up to seventy-two (72) hours. 
(c)  Monthly business parking permits shall be issued by the city treasurer's office or the city's parking systems management office to businesses licensed to operate in city meter-regulated parking areas. A current valid business license must be presented by the business owner or his designee to the city treasurer's office or to the city's parking systems management office at the time a request is made for annual business parking permits. The number of permits issued to a single business shall be limited to the maximum number of employees required to work after 8:00 p.m. or, in the case of a lodging facility, the number of rooms within such lodging facility that do not have on-site parking, whichever is greater. Employees of businesses eligible for parking permit passes under this Division may purchase employee parking permit passes directly from the city treasurer's office or city's parking management office after verification of employment with an eligible business. Any business that has been authorized to reduce the required parking of such business shall not be eligible for such monthly business parking permits. 
(d)  Permits issued pursuant to subsection (a) shall not be transferable, and may be revoked in the event the City Treasurer determines that the owner of the vehicle for which a permit has been issued no longer resides in the residential permit parking area. Upon written notification of such revocation, the holder of the permit shall surrender such permit to the City Treasurer. The willful failure to surrender such permit shall be punishable by a fine in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(e)  Permits issued pursuant to subsection (c) shall be transferable, and may be revoked in the event the City Treasurer's office determines that the number of permits exceeds the allowable number according to the criteria set forth in subsection (c). 
(f)  A replacement permit shall be issued upon proof of loss, theft or damage of the original permit, and payment of the replacement fee prescribed in section 21-359. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3057, 11-25-08; Ord. No. 3407, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15; Ord. No. 3523, 12-5-17)  
Sec. 21-355. - Signs. 
Following the designation of a residential permit parking area, the traffic engineer shall cause to be posted in appropriate locations within such area signs indicating the restrictions set forth in section 21-353. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-356. - Unauthorized use or display of permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or display, or to allow to be used or displayed, a permit issued under this Division upon any vehicle other than the vehicle for which the permit was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-357. - Obtaining permit by false pretenses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person falsely to represent himself as eligible for a permit under this division or to furnish any false information in, or in conjunction with, an application for a residential parking permit. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-358. - Penalties for violation of residential parking restrictions. 
(a)  When a notice or citation is attached to a vehicle parked in violation of section 21-353, the owner may within fourteen (14) calendar days thereafter, pay to the City Treasurer, in satisfaction of such violation, a penalty of seventy dollars ($70.00). If such payment is not postmarked or received by the City Treasurer within fourteen (14) calendar days after receipt of such notice or citation, the penalty therefore shall be one hundred forty dollars ($140.00). Additionally, any vehicle parked in violation of section 21-353 may be towed at the direction of a law enforcement officer. 
(b)  The failure of any owner to make payment in accordance with subsection (a) above or to present the notice or citation for a violation of section 21-353 at an office of the City Treasurer for certification to the General District Court within thirty (30) days shall render such owner subject to a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition to the penalty set forth in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  A violation of section 21-356 or 21-357 shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3306, 9-24-13)  
Sec. 21-359. - Fees. 
Fees required under this division shall be set in an amount to be determined by the City Manager or his designee. For a temporary guest permit, no fee. No more than ten (10) temporary guest permits shall be issued per week per residence. The city's parking systems management office may consider requests for more than ten (10) temporary guest permits per week per residence on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3057, 11-25-08; Ord. No. 3407, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15; Ord. No. 3448, § 1, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 21-360. - Appointees to enforce parking regulations. 
The City Manager shall be authorized to appoint city personnel and/or personnel serving under contract with the city, in addition to regular police officers of the city, to enforce the provisions of this Division. Such personnel shall, while performing their duties pursuant to this Division, wear a uniform prescribed by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 21-361—21-380. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CAVALIER SHORES RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING PILOT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 21-381. - Objectives. 
This Division is adopted as a temporary pilot program in order to mitigate traffic congestion and parking scarcity on public streets within the Cavalier Shores Neighborhood adjacent to an ongoing construction project. 
(Ord. No. 3582, 3-5-19)  
Sec. 21-382. - Definitions. 
As used in this division: 
(a)  Motor vehicle shall have the meaning set forth in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, and shall also include mopeds and motorcycles, as defined therein. 
(b)  Cavalier Shores Neighborhood refers to all on-street parking on the south side of 45th Street; the alley between 45th Street and 44th Street; both sides of 44th, 43rd ½, 43rd, and 42nd ½ Streets; the north side of 42nd Street; the alley that runs parallel to the west side of Atlantic Avenue from Cavalier Drive to 45th Street; and the north side of Cavalier Drive between Holly Road and Atlantic Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 3582, 3-5-19)  
Sec. 21-383. - Parking restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or otherwise leave unattended any all-terrain vehicle, bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, electric-powered wheeled device, gas-powered wheeled device, low-speed vehicle, moped or similar wheeled device on any street in the Cavalier Shores Neighborhood. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle on any street in the Cavalier Shores Neighborhood, where notice of these restrictions have been conspicuously posted in accordance with this Division, for longer than a three-hour period in any day unless there is affixed to the driver's side exterior surface of the windshield of such motor vehicle a valid residential parking permit or a temporary guest pass as authorized by subsection 21-354(b) hanging from the rearview mirror. 
(Ord. No. 3582, 3-5-19)  
Sec. 21-384. - Permits generally. 
The City Treasurer or the city's parking management office shall issue residential parking permits pursuant to this division in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 21-354. However, no permit shall be issued pursuant to this section for employee parking in the Cavalier Shores Neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 3582, 3-5-19)  
Secs. 21-385—21-399. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - USE OF TOW TRUCK SERVICE TO ENFORCE PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 21-400. - Definitions. 
Unless a different meaning is required by the context, the following terms, as used in this Division, shall have the meaning hereinafter respectively ascribed to them: 
Custodian means any person who is in possession and control of a vehicle whether or not such person is the registered owner of the vehicle. A person who is in possession of the ignition key to a vehicle, and who is also in possession of a valid driver's license, shall be deemed to be the "custodian" of such vehicle. 
Decal-controlled parking area means a parking area in which parking is limited to vehicles on which a decal, sign, placard or similar authorization issued by the owner, lessee or agent of the parking area is conspicuously displayed. 
Operator means any person operating a tow truck for a tow truck service. 
Tow truck service means a person engaged in any business which provides the services of one (1) or more tow trucks for hire or use to tow, transport or move motor vehicles on or from public streets or on or from private property by way of public streets. 
Tow truck service storage yard means any property, including the premises of any service station, upon which vehicles are stored that have been towed from privately owned lots or property at the request of the owner, lessee or agent of such lot or property and without the consent of the owner of the vehicle towed. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-401. - Applicability of Division. 
The provisions of this Division shall apply only to tow services which tow vehicles on or from privately owned lots or property, at the request of the owner of such lot or property and without the consent of the owner of the vehicle towed. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-402. - Violations of Division. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this Division. Each day that a continuing violation of the provisions of any section of this Division occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this Division shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-403. - Signs required on property. 
(a)  Each owner of private property having parking facilities accessible to the public, and offering parking to its customers, clientele, residents, lessees or guests, who intends to enforce parking restrictions by the use of a tow truck service, shall post, at each point of ingress and egress to the parking area, clearly legible signs, visible and unobstructed day and night upon entering the parking area, that contains the following wording and sets forth the hours of enforcement: 
PRIVATE PARKING 
NAME OF BUSINESS 
RESIDENTS/CUSTOMERS/CLIENTELE/ 
LESSEES/GUESTS ONLY 
TOWING ENFORCED 
HOURS OF ENFORCEMENT 
Unauthorized cars towed at owner's expense: $_____ day or night. Call (telephone number of tow truck service) for location and information concerning return of car if towed. With respect to retail establishments, this sign shall also contain the wording "WHILE ON THE PREMISES" following the wording "CUSTOMERS ONLY." Finally, this sign or an accompanying sign shall indicate whether the parking area is decal-controlled and shall contain the name and telephone number of any contracted towing service. 
(b)  The signs required by this Section shall be at least thirty-six (36) inches in width and thirty (30) inches in height. Lettering for the capitalized words shall be at least three (3) inches in height and, for all other lines, at least one and one-half (1½) inches in height. The face of the sign shall be composed of engineering grade reflectorized sheeting or like material. The name of the business may be on a separate sign, but must be adjacent to the primary sign containing the information required by this Section. The provisions of subsection (a) above shall be applicable to any parking area located on private property including parking areas of apartment houses, condominiums and nonprofit organizations. 
(c)  In addition to the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) above, if towing is enforced twenty-four (24) hours a day, the sign or signs required by this section shall include the wording "TOWING ENFORCED TWENTY-FOUR (OR 24) HOURS A DAY" in letters at least three (3) inches in height. In the alternative, an accompanying sign containing this wording in letters of the same height may be placed adjacent to each sign required by subsection (a) above. 
(d)  Vehicles may be towed from designated fire lanes approved by the fire department on private parking areas open to the public on which are posted signs as required by subsection (a) above, provided that such fire lanes are properly marked, including the posting of above grade signs stating FIRE LANE-TOWING ENFORCED. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any tow truck service or operator to tow or otherwise move a vehicle from any privately owned land or property within the City, unless such land or property is properly signed in accordance with this Section. 
(f)  An owner or operator of private property who enforces parking restrictions on the property by use of a tow truck service shall offer a copy of the survey and comment form developed by the Towing Advisory Board to anyone who contacts the owner, operator, or any employee or representative of the owner or operator, regarding a vehicle that has been towed or released after hookup from the owner's property. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2948, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 21-403.1. - Written authorization required. 
(a)  No tow truck service or operator shall remove any trespassing vehicle from private property without first obtaining, at the time the vehicle is towed, specific written authorization of the owner of the property from which the vehicle is towed, or the owner's agent. Such written authorization shall identify the vehicle to be towed by make, model, and color and shall include the legibly printed name of the agent or owner, as well as the agent's or owner's signature. This written authorization shall be in addition to any written contract between the tow truck service and the owner of the property or his agent. For purposes of this subsection, "agent" shall not include any person who either (i) is related by blood or marriage to the towing and recovery operator or (ii) has a financial interest in the towing and recovery operator's business. 
(b)  Written authorization shall not be required if the owner or operator of the private property is a business and the business is closed at the time of the tow. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to residential parking lots, decks, garages, or spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2954, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 21-404. - Business license requirements; identification of tow trucks. 
(a)  No tow truck service or operator shall remove any vehicle from public or private property unless the tow truck service possesses a valid business license issued in accordance with Chapter 18 of this Code. 
(b)  All tow trucks operated by a tow truck service shall display the name, address and telephone number of the owner thereof on both sides of the tow truck on permanently mounted signs or painted directly on the body of the truck in reflectorized letters large enough to be readily legible, but in no case less than two (2) inches in height. It shall be unlawful to operate a tow truck displaying an incorrect name or address, or a telephone number which is incorrect or not in service. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-405. - Release of vehicle to owner or custodian prior to towing. 
(a)  If the owner or custodian of any vehicle not authorized to be parked in a private parking area returns after a tow truck service has arrived but before the vehicle has been towed from the private parking area, he may reclaim the vehicle whether or not it is fully hooked up to the tow truck, and it shall be unlawful for the tow truck service or operator to refuse to release the vehicle. However, if the vehicle has been hooked up, or is in the process of being hooked up, the tow truck operator may charge a drop fee not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) before releasing the vehicle or discontinuing the towing process. The process of hooking up shall be defined as (i) the removal and/or unreeling of any towing equipment from the tow truck after the truck is positioned to effect the tow, whether or not the equipment has been attached to the vehicle, or (ii) the lowering of a hydraulically-operated lift in preparation for loading the vehicle. 
(b)  If the owner or custodian is unable or refuses to pay the fee set forth in subsection (a) above, the vehicle may be towed and the tow truck service may charge its basic fee for the tow. Whenever a vehicle is towed under these circumstances, the tow truck operator shall permit the owner or custodian to remove personal items from the vehicle prior to the tow. 
(c)  No tow truck operator shall request payment of the fee set forth in subsection (a) above or tow any vehicle thereafter if the charge is not paid unless he shall first provide to the owner or custodian of the vehicle a copy of this section. The tow truck operator, upon receiving such payment, shall provide to the owner or custodian a legible receipt containing the name of the towing service, the date, time and place of vehicle release, and the name of the tow truck operator. A copy of the receipt shall be retained by the tow truck service for a period of one (1) year and shall be made available for inspection by City police or the Commissioner of the Revenue during the normal business hours of the tow truck service. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the contrary, if a police officer determines that a vehicle is needed as evidence in a criminal matter, or concludes that, based upon surrounding circumstances, the failure to release a vehicle is likely to result in a disturbance of the public peace and good order, such officer may order release of the vehicle without immediate payment by the owner or custodian thereof of the fee set forth in subsection (a) above; provided, however, that nothing herein shall preclude a tow truck service or operator from civilly pursuing payment of such fee at a later date from the owner or custodian of the vehicle, or from the owner, lessee or agent of the parking area. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-406. - Emergency communications and citizen services to be notified of removal of vehicle. 
(a)  At the time of removal of any vehicle by a tow truck service operator, or no later than thirty (30) minutes thereafter, the tow truck service shall notify emergency communications and citizen services operations of such removal by calling 3-1-1 or 385-3111, and specifying the location of the storage yard to which the vehicle will be towed and the telephone number which the owner should call to reclaim the vehicle. Emergency communications and citizen services operations shall be given the license number and state of issuance of the license and, if known, the vehicle identification number and the make, model, and year of the vehicle towed or to be towed. 
(b)  If notified by emergency communications and citizen services operations or any law enforcement officer that the vehicle is subject to seizure by law enforcement authorities for evidentiary purposes, the tow truck operator or towing service shall forthwith relinquish the vehicle to such authorities and shall not be entitled to recover any costs or fees. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2948, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 3148, 8-10-10)  
Sec. 21-407. - Charges for towing and storage of vehicle; receipt required. 
(a)  No tow truck service or operator operating within the City shall, at any time, charge a basic towing fee greater than the fees set forth below: 
Gross weight of vehicle 	Maximum fee 
11,000 pounds or less 	$145.00 
11,001 pounds or more 	285.00 
 
The basic fee shall be inclusive of any additional towing services such as the use of a dolly. This subsection shall apply only when a vehicle is moved or towed without the prior consent and agreement of the owner or custodian of the vehicle. 
(b)  No tow truck service or operator shall assess any charges for storage for the initial twenty-four (24) hours, nor charge more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per twenty-four-hour period thereafter, for any vehicle with a gross weight of eleven thousand (11,000) pounds or less removed from private property without the consent of the owner or custodian of the vehicle, whether such tow originates in this City or any other jurisdiction. For vehicles with a gross weight of more than eleven thousand (11,000) pounds, a storage fee not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per twenty-four-hour period may be assessed after the first twenty-four (24) hours. Delays caused by storage yard personnel shall not be included when computing storage charges. 
(c)  If any vehicle is not redeemed within seventy-two (72) hours after it is towed, the tow truck service shall be entitled to recover an additional fee, not to exceed seventy-five dollars ($75.00), as payment for the cost of any search conducted to determine the registered owner and lien holder, if any, of the vehicle. 
(d)  No tow truck service or operator shall charge any fee for mileage, or any other fee in addition to the basic towing fee set forth in subsection (a) above. In order to ensure that no tow truck service or operator collects more than the fees authorized by this section, tow truck services and operators shall provide change for cash payments made by any person whose vehicle has been towed or released after hook up. 
(e)  A monetary receipt for each and every fee collected must be given to those persons whose vehicles have been towed by a tow truck service, or released after hook up, upon release of the vehicle. The information on the receipt must be clearly legible and include the time, date and place of the tow, the name of the tow truck operator who made the tow, and the name of the tow truck service for which said operator works. The receipt must also list the amount of money paid for the release of the vehicle, any additional charges incurred in the tow, and the reason for said additional charges. The following shall be printed conspicuously on every receipt: "NOTICE: Virginia Beach City Code § 21-407(f) requires the tow company to offer you a Survey and Comment Form with this receipt." A copy of the receipt must be retained by the tow truck service for a period of one (1) year and shall be made available for inspection by city police or the Commissioner of the Revenue during normal business hours of the tow truck service owner. 
(f)  A survey and comment form, developed by the Towing Advisory Board, shall be offered to those persons whose vehicles have been towed by a tow truck service, or released after hookup, upon release of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2948, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 2949, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 2974, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 3212, 1-10-12; Ord. No. 3299, 7-9-13)  
Sec. 21-408. - Requirements for storage yard. 
(a)  At the storage yard of each tow truck service, there shall be a sign prominently displayed specifying tow and storage rates. 
(b)  If an attendant is not on duty twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, to return vehicles upon the payment of towing and storage charges, the sign provided for in subsection (a) hereof shall also contain a telephone number where the owner, manager or attendant of the tow truck service storage yard may be reached at any time so that a towed vehicle may be reclaimed by its owner in a minimum amount of time, not to exceed two (2) hours. 
(c)  Each tow truck service storage yard shall provide reasonable security and protection for all vehicles towed, whether such tow originates in this City or any other jurisdiction, including illumination of the storage area during hours of darkness, and including a fence enclosing the storage yard if an attendant or security guard is not on duty twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. 
(d)  During the hours of darkness, the operator shall provide an area sufficiently illuminated to enable an owner to inspect a vehicle prior to removing it from the storage yard. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to operate any tow truck service storage yard or to deposit, impound or store any towed vehicle therein, unless said yard is in full compliance with the sign, security and lighting requirements of this Section and with all applicable zoning regulations, licensing requirements and use permits, established by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-409. - Tow truck service operator's log. 
Tow trucks service operators shall, within thirty (30) minutes of vehicle hook up, complete a record of the make, model, year and vehicle identification number, if known, of the vehicle, its license number and state of issuance, the time, date and place of removal, the name of the tow truck operator who made the tow and, for each entry of tow, the signature of the owner of the private lot, or his representative, requesting and authorizing the tow shall be required. A letter of authorization from the owner of the private lot or his representative, when carried in the tow truck making the tow, shall be sufficient to meet this latter requirement. Such record shall be retained by the tow truck service for not less than one (1) year, and shall be available for inspection by City police during normal business hours of the tow truck service owner, including any time that a vehicle is being impounded or reclaimed. Failure to keep and retain such a record, or omitting to make a true and complete entry for each vehicle towed, or failure to surrender such record to any police officer upon request shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-410. - Miscellaneous prohibited acts by tow truck service or operator. 
Except when acting as an agent in the legal repossession of a vehicle, it shall be unlawful for any tow truck service or operator to: 
(1)  Tow or otherwise move a vehicle from any area or portion of a public street without either the consent of the owner or custodian of the vehicle or authorization from a police officer or other designated official of the City. 
(2)  Block the movement of or tow or otherwise move a vehicle from any private road, driveway or any other privately owned land or property within the City without the consent of the owner or custodian thereof, unless: 
(i)  The vehicle is parked in a designated parking space of a decal-controlled parking area and is not displaying a decal or other form of authorization issued by the owner, lessee or agent of such parking area; 
(ii)  The vehicle is parked in a designated parking space of a non-decal-controlled parking area during any period when the business(es) serviced by the parking is (are) open, and the tow truck operator obtains the written consent of the owner, lessee or agent of such parking area prior to towing the vehicle; or 
(iii)  The vehicle is parked in a non-decal-controlled parking area during any period when the business(es) serviced by the parking area is (are) closed, and towing is enforced twenty-four (24) hours a day by such business(es); or 
(iv)  The vehicle is parked on any portion of a parking area in such manner as to block ingress or egress to the parking area, or to block access to a dumpster or properly marked service or delivery area, or is otherwise parked in a portion of the parking area that is not specifically designated, by lines, curbs or similar markings, as an area for the parking of vehicles. 
No vehicle shall be towed pursuant to subsections (i) (ii), (iii), or (iv) unless there is a written contract between the tow truck service and the owner, lessee or agent of the parking area to remove all unauthorized vehicles from the parking area, the tow truck operator has a copy of such contract in his or her possession, and the owner, lessee or agent has complied with all of the signage requirements set forth in Section 21-403. 
(3)  Tow or otherwise move a vehicle from any private road or driveway, or from any other privately owned land or property within the City to a place out of the City without the consent of the owner or custodian of the vehicle; provided that, after a period of not less than twenty-four (24) hours following the initial towing of a vehicle, as recorded in the police dispatcher's log, any such vehicle may be moved to a storage area located outside of the City, with prior notification to and approval of the police department. Notwithstanding the above, if a tow truck service or operator owns or leases a storage area located outside of the City, and such storage area is closer to the location from which a vehicle is towed than the closest in-city storage area owned or leased by the tow truck service or operator, such vehicle may be initially towed to the storage area located outside of the City, provided the tow truck service or operator is authorized to do business in both cities, charges a fee not greater than that fee authorized in Virginia Beach and invoices the tow in Virginia Beach. 
(4)  Block any vehicle, other than when on the property of the tow truck service, to prevent the movement thereof by its owner or custodian who has appeared prior to the vehicle being hooked up and desires to move the vehicle. 
(5)  Wait for employment by standing or parking on public property. 
(6)  Drive a tow truck or wrecker along any street to solicit towing. 
(7)  Tow or otherwise move a vehicle from any place in the city utilizing a wrecker or tow truck which is not insured as required by Section 18-55.1 of this Code. 
(8)  Provide false information to any police dispatcher concerning any vehicle towed. 
(9)  Require the owner of any towed vehicle to wait for a period exceeding two (2) hours for release of a vehicle. Any delay over two (2) hours caused by failure to monitor or respond to calls placed to the operator's designated telephone number shall constitute a violation of this Section. 
(10)  Move any vehicle to any intermediate place of storage, or to any location other than to the registered secure storage yard of a tow truck service, unless specifically requested by the owner or custodian of said vehicle. 
(11)  During the initial twenty-four (24) hours after the vehicle is towed and upon request by any owner or custodian of a currently licensed vehicle, deny or prevent access to said vehicle for the purpose of removing personal items, whether or not the owner or custodian is then able to reclaim the vehicle. After the initial twenty-four (24) hours has expired and upon the request by any owner or custodian of a currently licensed vehicle, no tow truck service or operator shall refuse to allow such owner or custodian access to such vehicle once per day between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(12)  Assess or collect any charge or fee in excess of, or in addition to, the charges and fees authorized by this division. 
(13)  Fail to provide a monetary receipt, for each and every fee collected, containing the notice provision outlined in Section 21-407(e). 
(14)  Fail to make the survey and comment form developed by the Towing Advisory Board available when the vehicle is retrieved. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2948, 6-27-06)  
Secs. 21-411—21-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD 
 
Sec. 21-500. - Temporary reduction of weight limit. 
(a)  The City Manager may make, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations decreasing the weight limits prescribed in Sections 46.2-1122 through 46.2-1127 of the Code of Virginia, for a total period not to exceed ninety (90) days in any calendar year, when an engineering study discloses that operation of vehicles over highways or streets under the jurisdiction of the City, by reason of deterioration or rain, snow or other climatic conditions, will seriously damage such highways or streets unless such weights are reduced. 
(b)  In all instances where the limits for weight have been reduced by the City Manager pursuant to this Section, signs stating the weight permitted on such highway or street shall be erected at each end of the section of highway or street affected and no such reduced limits shall be effective until such signs have been posted. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle or combination of vehicles over or upon any highway, street or section thereof when the weight exceeds the maximum posted by authority of the City manager pursuant to this Section. 
(d)  Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or be confined in jail for not less than one day nor more than six (6) months, or both, and the vehicle or combination of vehicles involved in such violation may be held upon an order of the court until all fines and costs have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-501. - Special permits for oversize and overweight vehicles generally. 
(a)  The City Manager may, in his discretion, upon application in writing and good cause being shown therefore, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle upon the highways of the City of a size or weight exceeding the maximum specified in this Article. Except as otherwise specifically provided, every such permit may designate the route to be traversed and contain any other requirements or conditions deemed necessary by the City Manager. For permits other than those specified in subsections (b), (c) and (d), the following processing fees shall be charged: 
(1)  Annual (blanket) permit .....$300.00 
(2)  Restricted equipment .....75.00 
(3)  Single trip permit .....75.00 
(b)  Special permits to operate or move a vehicle upon the highways of the City of a weight exceeding the maximum specified in this Article shall be granted without cost where the vehicle is hauling or carrying containerized cargo in a sealed, seagoing container bound to or from a Virginia seaport and has been or will be transported by marine shipment, provided the single axle weight does not exceed twenty thousand (20,000) pounds, the tandem axle weight does not exceed thirty-four thousand (34,000) pounds and the gross weight does not exceed eighty thousand (80,000) pounds, and provided the contents of such seagoing container are not changed from the time it is loaded by the consignor or his agents to the time it is delivered to the consignee or his agents. Cargo moving in vehicles conforming to specifications shown in this subsection but exceeding axle and gross weight limitations shown in this subsection shall be considered irreducible and eligible for permits under regulations of the State Highway and Transportation Commission. The requirement of this paragraph that the container be bound to or from a Virginia seaport need not be met if the cargo in the container (i) is destined for a seaport outside Virginia and (ii) consists wholly of farm products grown in that part of Virginia separated from the larger part of the Commonwealth by the Chesapeake Bay. 
(c)  The City Manager upon application in writing made by the owner or operator of three-axle vehicles used exclusively for the mixing of concrete in transit or at a project site or for transporting necessary components in a compartmentalized vehicle to produce concrete immediately upon arrival at the project site, and having a gross weight not exceeding sixty thousand (60,000) pounds, a single axle weight not exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) pounds, and a tandem axle weight not exceeding forty thousand (40,000) pounds, shall issue to such owner or operator, without cost, a permit in writing authorizing the operation of such vehicles upon the highways of the City. No such permit shall be issued authorizing the operation of the vehicles enumerated in this subsection for a distance of more than twenty-five (25) miles from a batching plant; however, the said permit shall not designate the route to be traversed nor contain restrictions or conditions not applicable to other vehicles in their general use of the highways. 
(d)  The City Manager, upon application in writing made by the owner or operator of three-axle passenger buses, consisting of two (2) sections joined together by an articulated joint with the trailer being equipped with a mechanically steered rear axle, and having a gross weight not exceeding sixty thousand (60,000) pounds, a single axle weight not exceeding twenty-five thousand (25,000) pounds and a width not to exceed one hundred two (102) inches, shall issue to such owner or operator, without cost, a permit in writing authorizing the operation of such vehicles upon the highways. 
(e)  No permit issued under this Section providing for a single axle weight in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) pounds or for a tandem axle weight in excess of thirty-four thousand (34,000) pounds shall be issued to include travel on the federal interstate system of highways. 
(f)  Each vehicle, when loaded according to the provisions of a permit issued under this Section, shall be operated at a reduced speed. The reduced speed limit shall be ten (10) miles per hour slower than the legal limit in fifty-five (55), forty-five (45) and thirty-five (35) miles per hour speed limit zones. 
(g)  Every permit issued under this Section shall be carried in the vehicle to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any officer and it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the terms or conditions of such special permit. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-502. - Penalty for violation of weight limits. 
Any person violating any weight limits as provided in this Chapter or any permit issued by either the Department of Transportation or by the City pursuant to this Article shall be subject to a civil penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and a processing fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) in addition to any liquidated damages and weighing fees imposed by this Article. Upon collection by the Department or by the court, the civil penalty shall be forwarded to the City Treasurer, to be allocated to the fund appropriated for the construction and maintenance of City highways; and the processing fee shall be paid to the state treasury to be used to meet the expenses of the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
The penalties, damages and fees specified in this Article shall be in addition to any other liability which may be legally fixed against the owner, operator or other person charged with the weight violation for damage to a highway or bridge attributable to such weight violation. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 21-503. - Reduction of noise from loads. 
No vehicle shall be loaded with materials likely to create loud noises by striking together, without using every reasonable effort to deaden the noise. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Secs. 21-504—21-599. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - HIGHWAY MEDIANS 
 
Sec. 21-600. - Highway medians; exemptions; penalty. 
(a)  No person or vehicle shall occupy a highway median. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, "highway median" shall be that paved or landscaped strip of ground dividing a highway into lanes according to direction of travel. 
(c)  This section shall not apply: 
(1)  To a pedestrian traversing a median while in the immediate process of crossing the highway; 
(2)  To any governmental employee or authorized agent while in the performance of official duties; 
(3)  At any time the adjacent highway is closed to traffic; 
(4)  To governmental vehicles operated in the course of official business; 
(5)  To utility employees or vehicles when necessary for utility installation, maintenance or repair; and 
(6)  In the event of a mechanical breakdown, or an emergency requiring a public safety response. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class II misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3098, 8-11-09)  
Secs. 21-601—21-699. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - VEHICLE DEMOLISHERS, REBUILDERS, SALVAGE DEALERS, ETC. 
 
Sec. 21-700. - Daily reports to police department. 
All persons engaged in a business requiring a license under the provisions of 46.2-1601 of the Code of Virginia shall make a daily electronic report to the police department regarding the purchase, exchange or acquisition of all salvage or scrap vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 3162, 3-22-11)  
Sec. 21-701. - Contents of daily reports; reporting time. 
(a)  Each daily electronic report shall contain the information mandated for maintenance under the provisions of 46.2-1608 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  Each daily electronic report shall be submitted to the police department no later than 10:00 a.m. on the day after the vehicle purchase. Electronic reports submitted from out-of-state shall be submitted no later than 10:00 a.m. in the time zone from which the report is submitted. 
(Ord. No. 3162, 3-22-11; Ord. No. 3196, 8-23-11)  
Sec. 21-702. - Holding period. 
No person required to be licensed under the provisions of 46.2-1601 of the Code of Virginia, or his employee or agent shall crush, flatten, or otherwise reduce a vehicle to a state where it can no longer be considered a vehicle until the vehicle has been in his possession for ten (10) days unless otherwise exempted under Chapter 16 of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 3162, 3-22-11)  
Sec. 21-703. - Penalty. 
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(Ord. No. 3162, 3-22-11)  
Chapter 22 - OBSCENITY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Sex offenses, § 23-23 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of council to adopt ordinance similar to the provisions of this article, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-389. 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Violations of article generally. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions with respect to violations of state law on obscenity, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-380.  
Sec. 22-2. - "Obscene" defined. 
The word "obscene," where it appears in this article, shall mean that which, considered as a whole, has as its dominant theme or purpose an appeal to the prurient interest in sex, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, excretory functions or products thereof or sadomasochistic abuse, and which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters and which, taken as a whole, does not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Code 1965, § 23-35) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-372.  
Sec. 22-3. - Obscene items enumerated. 
For the purposes of this article, obscene items shall include: 
(1)  Any obscene book; or 
(2)  Any obscene leaflet, pamphlet, magazine, booklet, picture, painting, drawing, photograph, film, negative, slide, motion picture; or 
(3)  Any obscene figure, object, article, instrument, novelty, device or recording or transcription used or intended to be used in disseminating any obscene song, ballad, words or sounds. 
(Code 1965, § 23-35) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-373.  
Sec. 22-4. - Production, publication, sale, possession, etc., of obscene items. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly: 
(1)  Prepare any obscene item for the purpose of sale or distribution; or 
(2)  Print, copy, manufacture, produce or reproduce any obscene item for the purpose of sale or distribution; or 
(3)  Publish, sell, rent, lend, transport in intracity commerce or distribute or exhibit any obscene item, or offer to do any of these things; or 
(4)  Have in his possession, with intent to sell, rent, lend, transport or distribute, any obscene item. 
(b)  Possession in public or in a public place of any obscene item shall be deemed prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, "distribute" shall mean delivery in person or by mail or messenger or by any other means by which obscene items may pass from one person to another. 
(Code 1965, § 23-35) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-374.  
Sec. 22-5. - Obscene exhibitions and performances generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly: 
(1)  Produce, promote, prepare, present, manage, direct, carry on or participate in any obscene exhibition or performance, including the exhibition or performance of any obscene motion picture, play, drama, show, entertainment, exposition, tableau or scene; provided, that no employee of any person or legal entity operating a theater, garden, building, structure, room or place which presents such obscene exhibition or performance shall be subject to prosecution under this section, if the employee is not the manager of the theater or an officer of such entity, and has no financial interest in such theater, other than receiving salary and wages; or 
(2)  Own, lease or manage any theater, garden, building, structure, room or place and lease, let, lend or permit such theater, garden, building, structure, room or place to be used for the purpose of presenting such obscene exhibition or performance or to fail to post prominently therein the name and address of a person resident in the city who is the manager of such theater, garden, building, structure, room or place. 
(Code 1965, § 23-35) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-375.  
Sec. 22-6. - Advertising obscene items, exhibitions or performances generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly prepare, print, publish or circulate or cause to be prepared, printed, published or circulated, any notice or advertisement of any obscene item referred to in section 22-3 or of any obscene performance or exhibition referred to in section 22-5, stating or indicating where such obscene item, exhibition or performance may be purchased, obtained, seen or heard. 
(Code 1965, § 23-35) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-376.  
Sec. 22-7. - Obscene placards, posters, bills, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly expose, place, display, post up, exhibit, paint, print or mark, or cause to be exposed, placed, displayed, posted, exhibited, painted, printed or marked, in or on any building, structure, billboard, wall or fence, or on any street, or in or upon any public place, any placard, poster, banner, bill, writing or picture which is obscene or which advertises or promotes any obscene item referred to in section 22-3 or any obscene exhibition or performance referred to in section 22-5, or to knowingly permit the same to be displayed on property belonging to or controlled by him. 
(Code 1965, § 23-35) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-377.  
Sec. 22-8. - Coercing acceptance of obscene articles or publications. 
No person shall, as a condition to any sale, allocation, consignment or delivery for resale of any paper, magazine, book, periodical or publication, require that the purchaser or consignee receive for resale any other article, book or other publication which is obscene; nor shall any person deny or threaten to deny any franchise or impose or threaten to impose any penalty, financial or otherwise, by reason of the failure or refusal of any person to accept such articles, books or publications, or by reason of the return thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 23-35) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-378.  
Sec. 22-9. - Obscene photographs, slides and motion pictures. 
Every person who knowingly: 
(1)  Photographs himself or any other person, for purposes of preparing an obscene film, photograph, negative, slide or motion picture for purposes of sale or distribution; or 
(2)  Models, poses, acts or otherwise assists in the preparation of any obscene film, photograph, negative, slide or motion picture for purposes of sale or distribution; 
shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-35) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-382.  
Sec. 22-10. - Public nudity generally. 
(a)  As used in this section, "state of nudity" means a state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, voluntarily and intentionally appear in public, or in a public place, or in a place open to the public or open to public view, in a state of nudity or to employ, encourage or procure another person to so appear. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to apply to the exhibition, presentation, showing or performance of any play, ballet, drama, tableau, production or motion picture in any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher learning or other similar establishment which is primarily devoted to such exhibitions, presentations, shows or performances as a form of expression of opinion, communication, speech, ideas, information, art or drama, as differentiated from commercial or business advertising, promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advertising, promoting, selling or serving products or services or otherwise advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise, such as a hotel, motel, bar, nightclub, restaurant, tavern or dance hall. 
(Code 1965, § 23-32.1) 
Cross reference— Swimming in the nude, § 6-19.  
Sec. 22-11. - Indecent exposure. 
No person shall intentionally make an obscene display or exposure of his person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place or in any place where others are present, and no person shall procure another to so expose himself. No person shall be deemed to be in violation of this section for breastfeeding a child in any public place or any place where others are present. 
(Code 1965, § 23-34; Ord. No. 1003, 11-5-79; Ord. No. 2279, 6-28-94) 
Cross reference— Swimming in the nude, § 6-19. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387.  
Sec. 22-11.1. - Urination or defecation in public. 
Any person who urinates or defecates in public or in a place open to public view except in public restroom facilities shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1184, 5-18-81) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1184, adopted May 18, 1981, added § 23-32.2 to the 1965 Code; the editor, upon the advice of the city, has made these provisions § 22-11.1 hereof.  
Sec. 22-11.2. - Obscene sexual display; penalty. 
Any person who, while in any public place where others are present, intending that he be seen by others, intentionally and obscenely as defined in section 22-2, engages in actual or explicitly simulated acts of masturbation, is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2887, 6-14-05)  
Sec. 22-12. - Employing or permitting minor to assist in violation of article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly hire, employ, use or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to do or assist in doing any act or thing constituting an offense under this article. 
(Code 1965, § 23-35) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-379.  
Sec. 22-13. - Proceeding against obscene book or motion picture film. 
Whenever he has reasonable cause to believe that any person is engaged in the sale or commercial distribution of any obscene book or motion picture film in the city, any citizen or the city attorney may institute a proceeding in the circuit court of the city for adjudication of the obscenity of the book pursuant to sections 18.2-384 and 18.2-385 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1965, § 23-35)  
Sec. 22-14. - Exceptions from article. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to apply to: 
(1)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition or loan of any book, magazine or other printed or manuscript material by any library, school or institution of higher learning, supported by public appropriation; 
(2)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition or loan of any work of art by any museum of fine arts, school or institution of higher learning, supported by public appropriation; 
(3)  The exhibition or performance of any play, drama, tableau or motion picture by any theater, museum of fine arts, school or institution of higher learning, supported by public appropriation. 
(Code 1965, § 23-35)  
Secs. 22-15—22-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES RELATING TO JUVENILES 
 
Sec. 22-26. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Harmful to juveniles: That quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, when it: 
(1)  Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of juveniles; 
(2)  Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community in the city as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for juveniles; and 
(3)  Is, when taken as a whole, lacking in serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value for juveniles. 
Juvenile: Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
Knowingly: Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both the character and content of any material described herein, which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant, and the age of the juvenile; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such juvenile. 
Nudity: A state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered or uncovered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Sadomasochistic abuse: Actual or explicitly simulated flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
Sexual conduct: Actual or explicitly simulated acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse or physical contact, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be female, breast. 
Sexual excitement: The condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(Code 1965, §§ 23-35.1, 23-36) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-390.  
Sec. 22-27. - Violations of article generally. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 22-28. - Unlawful sales or loans to juveniles generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell or loan to a juvenile: 
(1)  Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles; or 
(2)  Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in paragraph (1) above, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to juveniles. 
(Code 1965, § 23-35.1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391.  
Sec. 22-29. - Admitting juveniles to premises exhibiting obscene films or other presentations; such films not to be visible to juveniles from public way. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell to a juvenile an admission ticket or pass or to knowingly admit a juvenile to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion picture, show or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles, or to exhibit any such motion picture at any such premises which are not designed to prevent viewing from any public way of such motion picture by juveniles not admitted to such premises. 
(Code 1965, § 23-35.1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391.  
Sec. 22-30. - Misrepresentation to persons mentioned in sections 22-28 and 22-29 as to juvenile's age, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to falsely represent to any person mentioned in section 22-28 or 22-29, or to his agent, that such juvenile is eighteen (18) years of age or older, with the intent to procure any material set forth in section 22-28 or with the intent to procure such juvenile's admission to any motion picture, show or other presentation set forth in section 22-29. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make a false representation to any person mentioned in section 22-29, or to his agent, that he is the parent or guardian of any juvenile, or that any juvenile is eighteen (18) years of age, with the intent to procure any material set forth in section 22-28, or with the intent to procure such juvenile's admission to any motion picture, show or other presentation set forth in section 22-29. 
(Code 1965, § 23-35.1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391.  
Sec. 22-31. - Display of obscene materials at business establishments open to juveniles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly display for commercial purposes in a manner whereby juveniles may examine or peruse: 
(1)  Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles, or 
(2)  Any book, pamphlet, magazine or printed matter, however reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in paragraph (1) above, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to juveniles. 
(Code 1965, § 23-36; Ord. No. 1539, 6-24-85)  
Sec. 22-32. - Exceptions from article. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to apply to: 
(1)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition or loan of any work of art, book, magazine or other printed or manuscript material by any accredited museum, library, school or institution of higher learning. 
(2)  The exhibition or performance of any play, drama, tableau or motion picture by any theatre, museum, school or institution of higher learning, either supported by public appropriation or which is an accredited institution supported by private funds. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391.1.  
Secs. 22-33—22-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STUDIOS PROVIDING NUDE OR PARTIALLY NUDE MODELS 
 
Sec. 22-46. - To be closed during certain hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of providing live nude or partially nude models to be painted, sketched or photographed by the general public to remain open to such business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day. 
(Code 1965, § 23-61.4)  
Sec. 22-47. - Information to be filed with chief of police. 
(a)  Each person who shall engage in the business in the city of providing live nude or partially nude models to be painted, sketched or photographed, whether by appointment or otherwise, shall file with the chief of police his name, age and current residential address and business address, together with all residential addresses for the previous five (5) years. Such person shall also file with the chief of police the name, age, residential address and occupation of each model employed or to be employed in such business. 
(b)  Any person who shall fail or refuse to file with the chief of police the information required by subsection (a) above shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-61.1)  
Sec. 22-48. - Registration of customers. 
(a)  Each person who shall engage in the business in the city of providing live nude or partially nude models to be painted, sketched or photographed shall at all times keep and maintain therein a book or register in which shall be inscribed, with ink or indelible pencil, the name and address of each customer, in his or her own handwriting, with a clear and definite showing of the model or models painted, sketched or photographed, by name. Such book or register shall be maintained for a period of two (2) years from the date of each entry, and shall be open to inspection by the law-enforcement officers of the city at reasonable hours. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sign or cause to be signed, in the book or register referred to in subsection (a) above, a false or fictitious name when seeking to paint, sketch or photograph a model or models. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-61.2)  
Sec. 22-49. - Third person to be present when model being photographed or painted. 
In order to protect such models, it shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of providing live nude or partially nude models to be painted, sketched or photographed by the general public to allow or permit the painting, sketching or photographing of live nude or partially nude models in a room unless there be present in the room a responsible adult individual in addition to the model and the customer. 
(Code 1965, § 23-61.3)  
Sec. 22-50. - Obscene photographs or paintings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a business in the city which provides models or facilities for obscene sketching, painting or photographing of the human figure, where the nude or partially nude model's posture or the reproduction of the nude or partially nude model, whether by sketching, painting or photographing, appear in a manner which: 
(1)  Predominantly appeals to the prurient interests, 
(2)  Is patently offensive to contemporary community standards, and 
(3)  Is utterly without redeeming social value. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a nude or partially nude model or to present any posture whereby the reproduction thereof shall appear in a manner which: 
(1)  Predominantly appeals to the prurient interests, 
(2)  Is offensive to contemporary community standards, and 
(3)  Is utterly without redeeming social value. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause to be made, whether by photography, sketching, painting or otherwise, reproductions of any nude or partially nude model which shall appear in a manner which: 
(1)  Predominantly appeals to the prurient interests, 
(2)  Is patently offensive to contemporary community standards, and 
(3)  Is utterly without redeeming social value. 
(d)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-61)  
Chapter 23 - OFFENSES  
ARTICLE I. - MISCELLANOUS OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Attempt to commit misdemeanor. 
Every person who attempts to commit an offense which is a misdemeanor shall be punishable by the same punishment prescribed for the offense the commission of which was the object of the attempt. 
(Code 1965, § 23-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-27.  
Sec. 23-2. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) to be present on any street, road, alley, avenue, park or other public place in the city, or in any vehicle operating or parked thereon, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless accompanied by the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or control of such minor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or control of any minor under the age of eighteen (18) to permit, allow or encourage such minor to be present on any street, road, alley, avenue, park or other public place in the city, or in any vehicle operating or parked thereon, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. in violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Whenever any police or other officer charged with the duty of enforcing the laws of the state or ordinances of the city shall discover or has his attention called to the fact that any minor under eighteen (18) years of age is present on any street, road, alley, avenue, park or other public place in the city, or in any vehicle operating or parked thereon, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., such officer shall make an immediate investigation for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the presence of such minor is in violation of the provisions of this section. If such investigation reveals that the presence of such minor is in violation of the provisions of this section, the officer may charge the minor with a violation of this section and release the minor on a summons, or the officer may cause the minor to be taken to his home or place of residence, and released to his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or control of such minor. If the officer deems that it will be for the best interest of the minor, the minor may be taken to a nonsecure state certified crisis center or juvenile shelter, or the minor may be taken to the intake division of the juvenile and domestic relations district court of the city and thereafter be released or detained as provided in article 4, chapter 11, title 16.1 (§ 16.1-246 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia. In those cases where a summons is not issued, the officer may proceed as provided in article 5, chapter 11, title 16.1 ( § 16.1-259 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor who has been emancipated as provided by section 16.1-333 of the Code of Virginia, or to any minor engaged in the following activities: 
(1)  Any emergency errand reasonably necessary to safeguard life, limb or property; 
(2)  Lawful employment, including going directly from the minor's residence to the place of such employment or returning directly from the place of such employment to the minor's residence; 
(3)  Attendance at a specified engagement or performance, attendance at religious services or participation in any assembly or expressive activity protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution; provided that the minor shall have in his possession written permission including the signature, address and telephone number, of a parent, guardian or other adult person having care, custody or control of such minor to attend such activity or event, and shall return directly to his residence upon conclusion thereof; or 
(4)  Interstate travel through, beginning or terminating in the City of Virginia Beach. 
(e)  Any person violating any provision of subsection (b) of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. Any minor violating any provision of subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed to be a child in need of services, as defined by section 16.1-228 of the Code of Virginia. Such minor and his parent, guardian, legal custodian or other person stand in loco parentis shall be subject to the provisions of section 16.1-278.4 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1965, §§ 23-13.1—23-13.3; Ord. No. 1011, 12-10-79; Ord. No. 1028, 3-10-80; Ord. No. 1317, 8-23-82; Ord. No. 1857, 5-1-89; Ord. No. 2029, 1-15-91; Ord. No. 2223, 5-25-93) 
Cross reference— Minors in poolrooms, § 4-2; minors in family table top commercial recreation centers, § 4-55; employing or permitting minors to assist in violation of anti-obscenity provisions, § 22-12; sale or loan of obscene photographs, pictures, etc., to juveniles, § 22-28 et seq.  
Sec. 23-2.1. - Curfews after declarations of emergency. 
(a)  Pursuant to the police powers granted to the city by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1102, and in the interest of promoting public safety, the city manager or his designee is hereby authorized to impose a curfew after the declaration of an emergency, in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Curfew" means an order issued by the city manager prohibiting persons from being present on any street, road, alley, avenue, park or other public place in the city or any portion thereof designated by the city manager during specified times of the day or night; 
(2)  "City manager" means the city manager or his designee; 
(3)  "Natural disaster" means any hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water, wind-driven water, tidal wave, earthquake, drought, fire or other natural catastrophe resulting in damage, hardship, suffering or possible loss of life; and 
(4)  "Manmade disaster" means any condition following an attack by an enemy or foreign nation upon the City of Virginia Beach that results in substantial damage of property or injury to persons in the United States, and may be by use of bombs, missiles, shell fire, nuclear, radiological, chemical or biological means or other weapons or by overt paramilitary actions; terrorism, foreign and domestic; any industrial, nuclear or transportation accident, explosion, conflagration, power failure, or other condition such as sabotage, oil spills, and other injurious environmental contaminations that threaten or cause damage to property, human suffering, hardship or loss of life. 
(c)  The city manager may declare a curfew if he deems such action necessary for the preservation of life or property, the implementation of emergency mitigation, preparedness, response actions or recovery actions anticipated or resulting from the dangers caused by a natural or manmade disaster or the resulting effects thereof, pursuant to the following procedure: 
(1)  The authority conferred upon the city manager by this section shall arise only after either the state or the city declares an emergency in accordance with the provisions of Virginia Code section 44-146.19 or 44-146.21 for a geographical area located within the city; 
(2)  The curfew shall be announced in such manner as is reasonably calculated to provide notice to the public of the imposition of the curfew. Termination of curfew shall be in like manner; 
(3)  The declaration of a curfew, circumstances justifying its imposition, time and areas of the city in which the curfew is in effect, and the means and time of the public announcement of the curfew shall be recorded in a written document signed by the city manager and maintained in the records of the city; 
(4)  No curfew shall be imposed except in areas and at times that can be justified as necessary for the public safety. 
(5)  The action of the city manager in imposing a curfew during a natural or manmade disaster shall be ratified by the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(d)  After the declaration and public announcement of a curfew, it shall be unlawful for: 
(1)  Any person, after having been warned by a law-enforcement officer, to remain on any street, road, alley, avenue, park or other public place in the city, or in any vehicle operating or parked thereon, in any portion of the city designated by the city manager; and 
(2)  The owner or proprietor of any retail, wholesale or eating and drinking establishment, entertainment venue or similar establishment, or other person in control of such establishment, to allow any person to remain on the premises without the express written permission of the city manager; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to lodging establishments serving registered guests. 
(e)  The following persons shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while on duty or traveling to and from work: 
(1)  Hospital personnel; 
(2)  City employees and volunteers; 
(3)  Military personnel; 
(4)  Employees of public utility companies; 
(5)  Private emergency medical transport workers; and 
(6)  Other emergency workers as authorized by the city manager. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or restrict travel to a hospital in the event of a medical emergency, nor shall such travel be considered in violation of this section. 
(g)  A violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2895, 8-9-05; Ord. No. 3027, 6-3-08) 
Cross reference— Emergency management office, § 2-411 et seq.  
Sec. 23-3. - Prohibited trick or treat activities. 
(a)  If any person over the age of twelve (12) years shall engage in the activity commonly known as "trick or treat" or any other activity of similar character or nature under any name whatsoever, he shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting any parent, guardian or other responsible person, having lawfully in his custody a child twelve (12) years old or younger, from accompanying such child who is playing "trick or treat" for the purpose of caring for, looking after or protecting such child. 
(b)  If any person shall engage in the activity commonly known as "trick or treat" or any other activity of similar character or nature under any name whatsoever after 8:00 p.m., he shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, §§ 23-54.1, 23-54.2; Ord. No. 1660, 10-27-86)  
Sec. 23-4. - Aircraft—Minimum height. 
(a)  Except when taking off from or landing on an established landing field, airport or other property designated for that purpose by the owner, no person shall fly any aircraft in the city at a height less than the following: 
(1)  Over any congested area of the city, not less than one thousand (1,000) feet. 
(2)  Over any open-air assembly of people, not less than one thousand (1,000) feet. 
(3)  Elsewhere, not less than five hundred (500) feet. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-4)  
Sec. 23-5. - Same—Acrobatic flying. 
(a)  No person shall acrobatically fly any aircraft in the city: 
(1)  Over any congested area of the city. 
(2)  Over any open-air assembly of persons or below two thousand (2,000) feet in height, over any established civil airway, or at any height over any established airport or landing field, or within one thousand (1,000) feet horizontally thereof. 
(3)  Over any other place at a height less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet. 
(b)  The term "acrobatic flying", as used in this section, means intentional maneuvers not necessary to air navigation. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-5)  
Sec. 23-6. - Same—Exceptions to sections 23-4 and 23-5. 
The provisions of sections 23-4 and 23-5 shall not apply to aircraft used in interstate or foreign commerce, nor to aircraft flown over property or places belonging to or under the control of the United States of America or any of its agencies. 
(Code 1965, § 23-6)  
Sec. 23-7. - Misleading, obstructing, etc., city officers. 
(a)  If any person without just cause knowingly obstructs a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, witness, any law enforcement officer or animal control officer in the performance of his duties as such, or fails or refuses without just cause to cease such obstruction when requested to do so by such judge, magistrate, justice, juror, witness, law enforcement officer or animal control officer, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  If any person, by threats or force, knowingly attempts to intimidate or impede a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, witness, any law enforcement officer or animal control officer, lawfully engaged in his duties as such, or to obstruct or impede the administration of justice in any court, he shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person who knowingly and willfully makes any materially false statement or representation to a law-enforcement officer or animal control officer who is in the course of conducting an investigation of a crime by another is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(d)  Any person or persons who unreasonably or unnecessarily obstruct a member or members of an emergency medical services agency, whether governmental, private or volunteer, or who shall fail or refuse to cease such obstruction or move on when requested to do so by a member of an emergency medical services agency going to or at the site at which emergency medical services are required shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-37; Ord. No. 1267, 4-26-82; Ord. No. 1465, 7-2-84; Ord. No. 1893, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 2230, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 2398, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 2707, 6-25-02; Ord. No. 2771, 6-24-03; Ord. No. 3094, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 3432, 11-17-15) 
Cross reference— Interfering with firefighters, § 12-28; obstructing or interfering with enforcement of housing code, § 16-8; interference with police animals, § 27-7. 
State Law reference— Obstructing justice, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460.  
Sec. 23-7.1. - Providing identification to police officer. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person at a public place or place open to the public to refuse to identify himself by name and address at the request of a uniformed police officer or of a properly identified police officer not in uniform, or to provide false information in response to such a request, if the surrounding circumstances are such as to indicate to a reasonable man that the public safety requires such identification. 
(Ord. No. 1570, 12-16-85)  
Sec. 23-7.2. - Evasion of security device or check point. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person who enters a secured area of any building or other enclosure owned or leased by the city or school board when a metal detection device is being operated therein, or when a security check for the detection of unlawful items or substances is being conducted, to wilfully proceed so as to avoid such metal detection device, or otherwise to pass any security check point, unless such person receives permission to do so from the law enforcement officer or other security official on duty. 
(Ord. No. 2271, 6-14-94)  
Sec. 23-7.3. - Resisting lawful arrest; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who intentionally prevents or attempts to prevent a law-enforcement officer from lawfully arresting him, with or without a warrant, is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, intentionally preventing or attempting to prevent a lawful arrest means fleeing from a law-enforcement officer when (1) the officer applies physical force to the person or (2) the officer communicates to the person that he is under arrest and (i) the officer has the legal authority and the immediate physical ability to place the person under arrest, and (ii) a reasonable person who receives such communication knows or should know that he or she is not free to leave. 
(Ord. No. 2771, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 23-7.4. - Escape without force or violence or setting fire to jail. 
Except as provided in Virginia Code § 18.2-479.B, any person lawfully confined in jail or lawfully in the custody of any court, officer of the court, or of any law-enforcement officer for violation of his probation or parole or on a charge or conviction of a misdemeanor, who escapes, other than by force or violence or by setting fire to the jail, is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2885, 6-14-05)  
Sec. 23-7.5. - Duty to obey traffic signs and signals and orders of police officers. 
Pedestrians shall obey signs and signals erected on highways or streets for the direction and control of travel and traffic and they shall obey the orders of police officers engaged in directing travel and traffic on the highways and streets. Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 23-8. - Calling ambulance or fire fighting apparatus without cause; malicious activation of fire alarm in public building. 
Any person who, without just cause therefor, calls or summons, by telephone or otherwise, any ambulance or fire fighting apparatus, or any person who maliciously activates a manual or automatic fire alarm in any building, regardless of whether fire apparatus respond or not, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-7; Ord. No. 1003, 11-5-79; Ord. No. 3508, 6-20-17, eff. 7-1-17) 
Cross reference— Emergency medical vehicles, Ch. 10.5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212.  
Sec. 23-8.1. - Maliciously giving false report of crime, accident, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person maliciously to give, by telephone or otherwise, a false report as to (1) the commission of any crime, (2) the death of, accident to, injury to, illness of or disappearance of some third party, or (3) the present existence of any emergency reasonably requiring the response of law enforcement personnel, to any law enforcement personnel, to any law enforcement official, or to any "911" communications officer or public safety dispatcher. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person without intent to report an emergency, but with intent to harass, to call any "911" communications operator. Repeated calling of any "911" communications operator, without intent to report an emergency, and after having been acknowledged by such operator, shall constitute violation of this section. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violation of any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1793, 8-1-88)  
Sec. 23-8.2. - Imitation infectious biological, etc. substances. 
(a)  It shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to: 
(1)  Threaten injury to the person or property of another by the use of an imitation infectious biological, toxic or radioactive substance; 
(2)  Use an imitation infectious biological, toxic or radioactive substance in such manner as to place any person in reasonable apprehension of death or bodily harm, or with the intent to disrupt or interfere with the operations of any law enforcement agency, fire department, or other city services, or with the intent to cause the closing or evacuation of any residence, business, school or place of public gathering; 
(3)  Possess, manufacture, sell, give or distribute an imitation infectious biological, toxic or radioactive substance with the intent to place a person in reasonable apprehension of death or bodily harm; or 
(4)  Knowingly release or place, or cause or procure to be released or placed in, on or around any residence, place of business, school, or place of public gathering, any imitation infectious biological, toxic or radioactive substance with the intent to place any person in reasonable apprehension of death or bodily harm. 
(b)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Imitation infectious biological substance" means a substance, in any form whatsoever, which is not an infectious biological substance, and which: 
a.  By overall appearance, including color, shape, size, marking, packaging or by representations made, would cause a reasonable likelihood that such substance in any form whatsoever would be mistaken for an infectious biological substance; or 
b.  By express or implied representation purports to act like an infectious biological substance; 
(2)  "Infectious biological substance" means any bacteria, virus, fungi, protozoa, or rickettsiae capable of causing death; 
(3)  "Imitation toxic substance" means a substance, in any form whatsoever, which is not a toxic substance and which: 
a.  By overall appearance, including color, shape, size, marking, packaging or by representations made, would cause a reasonable likelihood that such substance in any form whatsoever would be mistaken for a toxic substance; or 
b.  By express or implied representation purports to act like a toxic substance; 
(4)  "Toxic substance" means any substance, including any raw materials, intermediate products, catalysts, final products, or by-products of any manufacturing operation conducted in a commercial establishment, that has the capacity, through its physical, chemical or biological properties, to pose a substantial risk of death or impairment either immediately or over time, to the normal functions of humans, aquatic organisms, or any other animal; 
(5)  "Imitation radioactive substance" means a substance, in any form whatsoever, which is not a radioactive substance, and which: 
a.  By overall appearance, including color, shape, size, marking, packaging or by representations made, would cause a reasonable likelihood that such substance in any form whatsoever would be mistaken for a radioactive substance; or 
b.  By express or implied representation purports to act like a radioactive substance; and 
(6)  "Radioactive substance" means any substance that emits ionizing radiation spontaneously. 
(Ord. No. 2674, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 23-8.3. - Reimbursement of expenses incurred in responding to terrorism hoax incident. 
Any person who is convicted of a violation of Code of Virginia § 18.2-46.6 subsection B or C when his violation of such section is the proximate cause of any incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, shall be liable at the time of sentencing or in a separate civil action, to the city, to any volunteer rescue squad, or both, which may provide such emergency response for the reasonable expense thereof, in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in the aggregate for a particular incident occurring in the city. In determining the "reasonable expense," the city may bill a flat fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or a minute-by-minute accounting of the actual costs incurred. As used in this section, "appropriate emergency response" includes all costs of providing law-enforcement, fire-fighting, rescue and emergency medical services. The provisions of this section shall not preempt or limit any remedy available to the commonwealth, to the city or to any volunteer rescue squad to recover the reasonable expenses of an emergency response to an incident not involving a terroristic hoax as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2885, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 3508, 6-20-17, eff. 7-1-17)  
Sec. 23-9. - Use, operation, etc., of device to automatically initiate call and deliver prerecorded message to telephone number of public safety service. 
(a)  No person shall use or operate, attempt to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, or arrange, adjust, program or otherwise operate any device or combination of devices that will, upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by other automatic means, initiate an intracity or intercity call and deliver a prerecorded message to any telephone number assigned to public safety services in the city. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 985, 9-10-79)  
Sec. 23-9.1. - Audible intruder alarms to be equipped with bell/siren cutoff. 
(a)  No person shall install, maintain, or operate, or cause to be installed, maintained, or operated, any intrusion alarm device or system which causes a siren, bell or other audible response to be sounded outside an enclosed building or other structure, unless such alarm device or system incorporates a functioning sound cutoff timer which shall automatically silence any audible signal after a period not exceeding ten (10) minutes in any location zoned for residential use, and fifteen (15) minutes in any other location. The provisions of this section shall become effective April 1, 1989. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1817, 10-31-88)  
Sec. 23-10. - Disturbing the peace generally. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to disturb the peace of others by violent, tumultuous or obstreperous conduct or by threatening, challenging to fight, assaulting, fighting or striking another. 
(Code 1965, § 23-17; Ord. No. 3302, 8-13-13)  
Sec. 23-11. - Assault and battery. 
(a)  Any person who shall commit a simple assault or assault and battery upon another person shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, and if the person intentionally selects the person against whom a simple assault is committed because of his race, religious conviction, color or national origin, the penalty upon conviction shall include a mandatory, minimum term of confinement of at least six (6) months, thirty (30) days of which shall not be suspended, in whole or in part. 
(b)  In addition, if any person commits a battery against another, knowing or having reason to know that such other person is a full-time or part-time employee of any public or private elementary or secondary school and is engaged in the performance of his duties as such, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and the sentence of such person upon conviction shall include a mandatory, minimum sentence of fifteen (15) days in jail, two (2) days of which shall not be suspended in whole or in part. However, if the offense is committed by use of a firearm or other weapon prohibited on school property, pursuant to § 18.2-308.1 [of the Code of Virginia], the person shall serve a mandatory, minimum sentence of confinement of six (6) months which shall not be suspended in whole or in part. 
(c)  "Simple assault" or "assault and battery" shall not be construed to include the use of, by any school security officer or full-time or part-time employee of any public or private elementary or secondary school while acting in the course and scope of his acting official capacity, any of the following: (i) incidental, minor or reasonable physical contact or other actions designed to maintain order and control; (ii) reasonable and necessary force to quell a disturbance or remove a student from the scene of a disturbance that threatens physical injury to persons or damage to property; (iii) reasonable and necessary force to prevent a student from inflicting physical harm on himself; (iv) reasonable and necessary force for self-defense or the defense of others; or (v) reasonable and necessary force to obtain possession of weapons or other dangerous objects or controlled substances or associated paraphernalia that are upon the person of the student or within his control. In determining whether a person was acting within the exceptions provided in this subsection, due deference shall be given to reasonable judgments that were made by a school security officer or full-time or part-time employee of any public or private elementary or secondary school at the time of the event. 
As used in this section, the term "school security officer" means an individual who is employed by the local school board for the purpose of maintaining order and discipline, preventing crime, investigating violations of school board policies and detaining persons violating the law or school board policies on school property, a school bus or at a school-sponsored activity and who is responsible solely for ensuring the safety, security and welfare of all students, faculty and staff in the assigned school. 
(Code 1965, § 23-9; Ord. No. 1003, 11-5-79; Ord. No. 2707, 6-25-02; Ord. No. 3353, 6-3-14, eff. 7-1-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-57.  
Sec. 23-11.1. - Objects, substances thrown from buildings, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor, for any person to throw, drop or project, or cause to be thrown, dropped or projected from any building or structure any object or substance wherein the impact of such object or substance shall be upon public property or the property of another or may constitute a hazard to the public. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to lawful construction, demolition, agricultural or commercial activities wherein appropriate precautions are taken for the protection of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1826, 1-30-89)  
Sec. 23-11.2. - Assault and battery against family or household member. 
(a)  Any person who commits an assault and battery against a family or household member shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  As used in this section, "family or household member" means (i) the defendant's spouse, whether or not he or she resides in the same home with the defendant; (ii) the defendant's former spouse, whether or not he or she resides in the same home with the defendant; (iii) the defendant's parents, stepparents, children, stepchildren, brothers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, grandparents and grandchildren regardless of whether or not such persons reside in the same home with the defendant; (iv) the defendant's mother-in-law, father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law who reside in the same home with the defendant; (v) any person who has a child in common with the defendant, whether or not the defendant and that person have been married or have resided together at any time; or (vi) any individual who cohabits or who, within the previous twelve (12) months, cohabited with the person, and any children of either of them residing in the same home with the defendant. 
(Ord. No. 2102, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 2169, 8-4-92; Ord. No. 3533, 2-20-18)  
Sec. 23-11.3. - Directing beam of laser pen, flashlight or similar device into eyes of another person; pointing laser at law-enforcement officer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to intentionally, and without good cause, direct the beam from a laser pen, flashlight or similar device into the eyes (or eye) of another person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 2 misdemeanor for any person, knowing or having reason to know another person is a law-enforcement officer as defined in Code of Virginia section 18.2-57, a probation or parole officer appointed pursuant to Code of Virginia section 53.1-143, a correctional officer as defined in Code of Virginia section 53.1-1, or a person employed by the state department of corrections directly involved in the care, treatment or supervision of inmates in the custody of the department engaged in the performance of his public duties as such, to intentionally project at such other person a beam or a point of light from a laser, a laser gun sight, or any device that simulates a laser. 
(Ord. No. 2504, 8-25-98; Ord. No. 2593, 6-27-2000; Ord. No. 3121, 3-23-10)  
Sec. 23-12. - Abusive language. 
If any person shall, in the presence or hearing of another, curse or abuse such other person, or use any violent abusive language to such other person concerning himself or any of his relations, or otherwise use such language under circumstances reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, he shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-416.  
Sec. 23-13. - Disorderly houses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to keep, maintain or operate, for himself or as an officer of or agent for any corporation, association, club, lodge or other organization, or under the guise of any corporation, association, club, lodge or other organization, any disorderly house or place where disorderly persons meet or may meet for the purpose of illegally dispensing or indulging in intoxicating liquors or illicit drugs, or to engage in boisterous or other disorderly conduct. In any prosecution for this offense, the general reputation of the place in question may be proved. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to frequent, reside in or visit any place referred to in subsection (a) of this section for the purpose of illegally dispensing or indulging in intoxicating liquors or illicit drugs, or to engage in boisterous or other disorderly conduct. 
(c)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class l misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-16; Ord. No. 2040, 3-5-91)  
Sec. 23-14. - Disorderly conduct in public places. 
(a)  No person shall be charged under this section if the offensive or disruptive conduct constitutes a violation under any other provision of this section or Code of Virginia, Tit. 18.2. 
(b)  A person is guilty of disorderly conduct and a class 1 misdemeanor if, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, he: 
(1)  In any street, highway, or public building, or while in or on a public conveyance or in a public place, engages in conduct having a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such conduct is directed; or 
(2)  Willfully, or being intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupts any meeting of the city council or any department, division or agency thereof, or of any school, literary society or place of religious worship, if such disruption: 
(i)  Prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of the meeting; or 
(ii)  Has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, the disruption is directed; or 
(3)  Willfully or while intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupts the operation of any school or any activity conducted or sponsored by any school, if the disruption; 
(i)  Prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of the operation or activity; or 
(ii)  Has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, the disruption is directed. 
However, the conduct prohibited under subsection (1), (2) or (3) shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words. 
(c)  The person in charge of any such building, place, conveyance, meeting, operation or activity may eject therefrom any person who violates any provision of this section, with the aid, if necessary, of any persons who may be called upon for such purpose. 
(Code 1965, § 23-14; Ord. No. 1993, 8-7-90; Ord. No. 3024, 5-27-08) 
Cross reference— Authority of mayor to clear chamber in case of disorderly conduct at council meeting, § 2-17. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions and authority of council to adopt above section, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415.  
Sec. 23-14.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1165, adopted April 27, 1981, relating to public meetings, amended the 1965 Code by adding § 20-90.1 thereto; at the editor's discretion, the ordinance has been designated § 23-14.1. The section was repealed by Ord. No. 2140, adopted June 9, 1992. See § 24-6.  
Sec. 23-15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3530, adopted January 9, 2018, repealed § 23-15, which pertained to begging on streets or beaches. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 23-16. - Obstructing free passage of others. 
Any person who, in any public place or on any private property open to the public, unreasonably or unnecessarily obstructs the free passage of other persons to and from or within such public place or private property, and who shall fail or refuse to cease such obstruction or move on when required to do so by the owner or lessee or agent or employee of such owner or lessee or by a duly authorized law-enforcement officer, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-36.1) 
Cross reference— Interference with traffic and blocking access to certain facilities, § 21-34; leaving scene of traffic accident when directed by police officer, § 21-502. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-404.  
Sec. 23-16.1. - Interference with operation of school buses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or interfere with the operation of a school bus in the transportation of pupils to and from school or other destination. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1286, 6-7-82)  
Sec. 23-17. - Riots and unlawful assemblies—What constitutes. 
(a)  For the purposes of sections 23-18 through 23-20, any unlawful use, by three (3) or more persons acting together, of force or violence which seriously jeopardizes the public safety, peace or order is a riot. 
(b)  For the purposes of sections 23-18 through 23-20, whenever three (3) or more persons assembled share the common intent to advance some lawful or unlawful purpose by the commission of an act or acts of unlawful force or violence likely to jeopardize seriously public safety, peace or order, and the assembly actually tends to inspire persons of ordinary courage with well-grounded fear of serious and immediate breaches of public safety, peace or order, then such assembly is an unlawful assembly. 
(Ord. No. 3401, 4-7-15) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-405, 18.2-406.  
Sec. 23-18. - Same—Participation in. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to participate in any riot or unlawful assembly within the city. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-405, 18.2-406, under which the offense is a felony, if the participant carries a dangerous weapon.  
Sec. 23-18.1. - Same—Restriction or regulation of persons and vehicles by chief of police. 
(a)  The chief of police, upon his determination that there exists an imminent threat of civil commotion or disturbance in the nature of a riot, constituting a clear and present danger to the public safety, may restrict or regulate the movement of persons and vehicles and may prohibit any assembly of persons in such areas as may be affected by the commotion or disturbance. 
(b)  Any person who shall willfully enter an area which is subject to such restriction, after having been lawfully warned not to do so, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1850, 4-3-89; Ord. No. 3401, 4-7-15)  
Sec. 23-19. - Same—Remaining at scene after warning to disperse. 
Every person, except the owner or lessee of the premises, his family and nonrioting guests, and public officers and persons assisting them, who remains at the place of any riot or unlawful assembly, after having been lawfully warned to disperse, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-407.  
Sec. 23-20. - Same—Dispersal. 
(a)  When any number of persons, whether armed or not, are unlawfully or riotously assembled, the police officials of the city shall go among the persons assembled, or as near to them as safety will permit, and command them, in the name of the state, to immediately disperse. If, upon such command, the persons unlawfully assembled do not disperse immediately, the police officials may use such force as is necessary to disperse them and to arrest those who fail or refuse to disperse. To this end, the police officials of the city may request and use the assistance and services of private citizens. 
(b)  Every endeavor must be used, both by the police officers and by the officer commanding any other force, which can be made consistently with the preservation of life, to induce or force persons unlawfully assembled to disperse before an attack is made upon such persons by which their lives may be endangered. 
(c)  No liability, criminal or civil, shall be imposed upon any person authorized to disperse or assist in dispersing a riot or unlawful assembly for any action of such person which was taken after those rioting or unlawfully assembled had been commanded to disperse, and which action was reasonably necessary, under all the circumstances, to disperse such riot or unlawful assembly or to arrest those who failed or refused to disperse. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-411, 18.2-412.  
Sec. 23-21. - Unlawful carrying of certain canes or walking sticks. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person, unless totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated, while on any public street or highway, to carry, in a raised or extended position, a cane or walking stick which is metallic or white in color or white tipped with red. 
(Code 1965, § 23-62) 
Cross reference— Duty of vehicle driver approaching pedestrian carrying metallic or white cane, § 21-467. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212.1.  
Sec. 23-22. - Public intoxication; transportation of public inebriates to detoxification center. 
If any person be intoxicated in public, whether such intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug or other intoxicant or drug of whatever nature, he shall be deemed guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. In any area in which there is located a court-approved detoxification center, the judge of the general district court may, by written order, authorize the transportation, by police or otherwise, of public inebriates to such detoxification center; provided, however, that no person shall be involuntarily detained in such center. 
(Code 1965, § 23-20; Ord. No. 1003, 11-5-79; Ord. No. 1934, 10-30-89; Ord. No. 1995, 8-7-90) 
Cross reference— Driving vehicle while under influence of alcohol, § 21-336 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388; authority of council to adopt above section, § 15.2-926.2.  
Sec. 23-22.1. - Drinking alcoholic beverages, or tendering to another, in public place. 
(a)  If any person shall take a drink of alcoholic beverage or shall tender a drink thereof to another, whether accepted or not, at or in any public place, as defined by Code of Virginia, § 4.1-100, or possess any opened alcoholic beverage containers in the local public parks, playgrounds, public streets, or any sidewalk adjoining any public street, he shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and punishable as a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage while driving a motor vehicle upon a public highway of this city. A rebuttable presumption that the driver has consumed an alcoholic beverage in violation of this section shall be created if (i) an open container is located within the passenger area of the motor vehicle, (ii) the alcoholic beverage in the open container has been at least partially removed and (iii) the appearance, conduct, odor of alcohol, speech or their physical characteristic of the driver of the motor vehicle may be reasonably associated with the consumption of an alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  This section shall not prevent any person from drinking or possessing alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof to another in any rooms or areas approved by the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board in a licensed establishment, provided such establishment or the person who operates the same is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages at retail for on-premises consumption and the alcoholic beverages drunk or offered were purchased therein. 
This section also shall not prevent any person from drinking or possessing alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof to another in any room or area approved by the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board at an event for which a banquet license or mixed beverage special events license has been granted. Nor shall this section prevent, upon authorization of the licensee, any person from drinking or possessing his own lawfully acquired alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof to another in approved areas and locations at events for which a coliseum or stadium license has been granted. 
(d)  In addition to the exceptions provided for in subsection (c), this section also shall not apply to parking areas designated by the city manager or his designee for use by persons attending a collegiate or professional sporting exhibition or event on the day of such exhibition or event. The application process for such designation shall be substantially similar to the process set forth for special events in City Code section 4-1, and shall include input from public safety entities. No such designation shall be valid unless the applicant has also obtained the required permit or permits from the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board. 
(Ord. No. 1402, 9-26-83; Ord. No. 1848, 4-3-89; Ord. No. 2707, 6-25-02; Ord. No. 2992, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 3157, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 3444, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 23-22.2. - Drinking or possession of alcoholic beverages in or on public school grounds. 
(a)  No person shall possess or drink any alcoholic beverage in or upon the grounds of any public elementary or secondary school during school hours or during school or student activities. 
(b)  No person shall drink and no organization shall serve any alcoholic beverage in or upon the grounds of any public elementary or secondary school after school hours, or after student activities, except for religious congregations using wine for sacramental purposes only. 
(c)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1402, 9-26-83; Ord. No. 2992, 6-26-07)  
Sec. 23-23. - Adultery generally. 
(a)  Any person, being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any person not his or her spouse shall be deemed guilty of adultery. 
(b)  If any person commits adultery, such person shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3631, 7-21-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3631, adopted July 21, 2020, amended § 23-23 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 23-23, pertained to adultery and fornication generally, and derived from § 23-2 of the 1965 Code. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-365.  
Sec. 23-24. - Sexual intercourse by persons forbidden to marry. 
If any person engages in sexual intercourse with any person whom he or she is forbidden by law to marry, such person shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to apply to a person who engages in sexual intercourse with his daughter or granddaughter, or with her son or grandson or with her father or his mother. 
(Ord. No. 3631, 7-21-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3631, adopted July 21, 2020, amended § 23-24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 23-24, pertained to adultery and fornication by persons forbidden to marry and derived from § 23-3 of the 1965 Code. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-366, which declares adultery or fornication by persons mentioned in the proviso to be a felony.  
Sec. 23-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3631, adopted July 21, 2020, repealed § 23-25, which pertained to lewd, and lascivious cohabitation and derived from § 23-29 of the 1965 Code; Ord. No. 1003, 11-5-79.  
Sec. 23-26. - Prostitution generally. 
(a)  Any person who, for money or its equivalent, (i) commits or performs any act in violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-361 or 18.2-346, or (ii) offers to commit or perform any act in violation of Code of Virginia § 18.2-361 or 18.2-346, and thereafter does any substantial act in furtherance thereof, shall be guilty of being a prostitute, or of prostitution, which shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who offers money or its equivalent to another for the purpose of committing or performing any sexual act as enumerated above and thereafter does any substantial act in furtherance thereof shall be guilty of solicitation of prostitution and shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-46; Ord. No. 2230, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 2526, 4-13-99; Ord. No. 2677, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 3631, 7-21-20) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-346.  
Sec. 23-26.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3631, adopted July 21, 2020, repealed § 23-26.1, which pertained to prostitution and immoral acts; solicitation and derived from Ord. No. 1508, 1-7-85.  
Sec. 23-27. - Bawdy places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to keep any bawdy place, or to frequent, reside in or at or visit, for immoral purposes, any bawdy place. Each and every day such bawdy place is kept, resided in or visited shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, "bawdy place" shall mean any place, within or without any building or structure, within this city which is used or is to be used for lewdness, assignation or prostitution. 
(c)  In a prosecution for a violation of this section, the general reputation of the place may be proved. 
(Code 1965, §§ 23-43, 23-44) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-347; houses of prostitution as nuisances, § 48-7 et seq.  
Sec. 23-28. - Aiding prostitution or illicit sexual intercourse. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or any officer, employee, or agent of any firm, association, or corporation, with knowledge of or good reason to believe the immoral purpose of such visit, to take or transport or assist in taking or transporting, or offer to take or transport, on foot or in any way, any person to a place, whether within or without any building or structure, used or to be used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution within this city; or to procure or assist in procuring for the purpose of illicit sexual intercourse, or any act in violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-361 or 18.2-348, or to give any information or direction to any person with intent to enable such person to commit an act of prostitution. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-45; Ord. No. 3631, 7-21-20) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-348.  
Sec. 23-29. - Using vehicle to promote prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any owner or chauffeur of any vehicle, with knowledge or reason to believe the same is to be used for such purpose, to use the same or to allow the same to be used for the purpose of prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse, or to aid or promote such prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse by the use of any such vehicle. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-349.  
Sec. 23-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2599, adopted July 11, 2000, repealed § 23-30, which pertained to physical contact with members of opposite sex at massage parlors, etc., and which derived from Code 1965, § 23-60; and from Ord. No. 1816, adopted Oct. 31, 1988; and Ord. No. 2188, adopted Nov. 10, 1992.  
Sec. 23-30.1. - Live exhibitions or performances. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall be construed as follows: 
Business establishment shall be deemed to include the real property of a business, as well as all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the grounds, private walkways and parking lots or garages adjacent thereto which are owned or controlled by the property owner, lessee, or employees or agents thereof. 
Direct line of sight means the ability to directly view an area without the benefit or assistance of a mirror, video camera or similar aid. 
Live exhibition or performance means modeling, dancing or any similar activity which involves a person or persons physically performing for the benefit of one or more other persons. 
Manager's station means any check-out counter, desk, or other place or position where an employee, agent, manager or owner of a business establishment sits or stands or is assigned to sit or stand. 
Performer means a person engaged in a live exhibition or performance in a business establishment. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, organization, or other legal entity. 
State of nudity means a state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof immediately below the top of the areola. 
Viewing area means any area within a business establishment where a live exhibition or performance is taking place. 
(b)  The City of Virginia Beach hereby finds and declares that the unregulated practice of live exhibitions or performances in private or semi-private rooms, booths, viewing areas or cubicles within business establishments (i) encourages criminal activities of a sexual nature including, but not limited to, masturbation, prostitution, public nudity and sodomy, (ii) facilitates sexual liaisons of a casual nature which create unhealthy conditions, and (iii) increases the likelihood that other criminal activities, such as sexual assaults and drug-related offenses, will occur. 
The concern over sexually-transmitted diseases, and the deleterious effect on both existing businesses and surrounding neighborhoods caused by increased crime and the downgrading of property values, demands reasonable regulation of live exhibitions or performances in business establishments which provide such exhibitions or performances in private or semi-private rooms, booths, viewing areas, or cubicles in order to (i) protect the health, safety and welfare of the city's citizens and visitors; (ii) protect citizens and visitors from increased crime; and (iii) preserve the quality of life, property values, the character of surrounding neighborhoods, and the city's tourism industry and other economic interests. 
The intent of this section is not to suppress any activities protected by the First Amendment, but is to enact content-neutral regulations which are specifically designed and intended to prevent the deleterious secondary effects associated with live exhibitions or performances in business establishments which provide such exhibitions or performances in private or semi-private rooms, booths, viewing areas or cubicles. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate for himself or herself, or as an officer, employee or agent, a business establishment where live exhibitions or performances take place, unless the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  No viewing area of the business establishment shall be obstructed by curtains, doors, walls, display racks or any other permanent or temporary enclosure or barrier. 
(2)  At least one employee other than the performer must be on duty at all times that any patron, customer or member of the audience is inside the business establishment, and such employee must have a direct line of sight of any viewing area during any live exhibition or performance. 
(3)  In any business establishment which is configured to include a manager's station, there must be an unobstructed view, from the manager's station, of all viewing areas and any other area of the business establishment, except restrooms, to which any patron, customer or member of the audience is permitted access for any purpose. If the business establishment has two (2) or more manager's stations, all viewing areas and any other area of the business establishment, except restrooms, to which any patron, customer or member of the audience is permitted access for any purpose must be visible from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(4)  No performer shall be permitted to touch the breasts, genitals, anus, buttocks or groin of any patron, customer or member of the audience, regardless of whether such parts of the body are fully or partially covered by clothing, or are uncovered. 
(5)  No patron, customer or member of the audience shall be permitted to touch the breasts, genitals, anus, buttocks or groin of any performer regardless of whether such parts of the body are fully or partially covered by clothing, or are uncovered. 
(6)  No sofa, futon, cot, bed, mattress or similar furnishing shall be located in any viewing area or in any other area of the establishment to which patrons, customers or members of the audience are permitted access. 
(7)  No performer shall appear in a state of nudity in the viewing area or in any other area of the establishment to which any patron, customer or member of the audience is permitted access. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any performer to touch the breasts, genitals, anus, buttocks or groin of any patron, customer or member of the audience, regardless of whether such parts of the body are fully or partially covered by clothing, or are uncovered. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any patron, customer or member of the audience to touch the breasts, genitals, anus, buttocks or groin of any performer, regardless of whether such parts of the body are fully or partially covered by clothing, or are uncovered. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to apply to the exhibition, presentation, showing or performance of any play, ballet, drama, tableau, production or motion picture in any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher learning or other establishment which is primarily devoted to such exhibitions, presentations, shows or performances as a form of expression of opinion, communication, speech, ideas, information, art or drama. 
(g)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(h)  If any subsection, clause or other portion of this section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2538, 6-1-99; Ord. No. 3631, 7-21-20)  
Sec. 23-31. - Petit larceny. 
(a)  Any person who: 
(1)  Commits larceny from the person of another of money or other thing of value of less than five dollars ($5.00), or 
(2)  Commits simple larceny not from the person of another of goods and chattels of the value of less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), shall be deemed guilty of petit larceny, which shall be punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor. Upon a second conviction of petit larceny, the court shall order participation in a local alcohol safety action program or substance abuse screening in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 19.2-299.2. 
(b)  Any person convicted of an offense under this section, when it is alleged in the warrant or information on which such person is convicted, and admitted, or found by the jury or judge before whom such person is tried, that such person has been before sentenced in the United States for any offense deemed to be larceny by the law of the sentencing jurisdiction, shall be confined in jail not less than thirty (30) days nor more than twelve (12) months. 
(Code 1965, § 23-27.1; Ord. No. 1080, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 1674, 3-30-87; Ord. No. 3037, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 3576, 12-11-18; Ord. No. 3634, 7-21-20) 
Cross reference— Concealment of book or other property while on premises of library; removal of book or other property from library, § 17-5. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-96.  
Sec. 23-32. - Shoplifting. 
(a)  Whoever, without authority, with the intention of converting goods or merchandise to his own or another's use without having paid the full purchase price thereof, or of defrauding the owner of the value of the goods or merchandise: 
(1)  Willfully conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment, or 
(2)  Alters the price tag or other price marking on such goods or merchandise, or transfers the goods from one container to another, or 
(3)  Counsels, assists, aids or abets another in the performance of any of the above acts, shall be deemed guilty of larceny and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as hereinafter provided. The willful concealment of goods or merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment, while still on the premises thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to convert and defraud the owner thereof out of the value of the goods or merchandise. 
(b)  Any person convicted for the first time of an offense under this section, when the value of the goods or merchandise involved in the offense is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), shall be punished as for a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person convicted of an offense under this section, when the value of the goods or merchandise involved in the offense is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and it is alleged in the warrant or information on which such person is convicted, and admitted, or found by the jury or judge before whom such person is tried, that such person has been before convicted in the Commonwealth of Virginia for a like offense, regardless of the value of the goods or merchandise involved in the prior conviction, or for a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-95 or 18.2-96 or section 23-31 of this Code, shall be confined in jail not less than thirty (30) days nor more than twelve (12) months. 
(d)  Any person who has been convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be civilly liable to the owner for the retail value of any goods and merchandise illegally converted and not recovered by the owner, and for all costs incurred in prosecuting such person under the provisions of this section. Such costs shall be limited to actual expenses, including the base wage of one employee acting as a witness for the prosecution, and suit costs. The total amount of allowable costs granted hereunder shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), excluding the retail value of the goods and merchandise. 
(e)  A merchant, agent or employee of the merchant, who causes the arrest of any person pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not be held civilly liable for unlawful detention, if such detention does not exceed one hour, slander, malicious prosecution, false imprisonment, false arrest or assault and battery of the person so arrested, whether such arrest takes place on the premises of the merchant or after close pursuit from such premises by such merchant, or the merchant's agent or employee; provided that, in causing the arrest of such person, the merchant, agent or employee of the merchant, had, at the time of such arrest, probable cause to believe that the person had shoplifted or committed willful concealment of goods or merchandise. For the purposes of this subsection, "agents of the merchant" shall include attendants at any parking lot owned or leased by the merchant, or generally used by customers of the merchant through any contract or agreement between the owner of the parking lot and the merchant. 
(Code 1965, § 23-27.2; Ord. No. 1081, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 1743, 10-19-87; Ord. No. 3576, 12-11-18; Ord. No. 3634, 7-21-20) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-103—18.2-106. See § 18.2-104 for conditions under which the above offense is a felony.  
Sec. 23-33. - Scalping tickets for public events. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to resell, for profit, any ticket for admission to any sporting event, theatrical production, lecture, motion picture or any other event open to the public for which tickets are ordinarily sold, except in the case of religious, charitable or educational organizations where all or a portion of the admission price reverts to the sponsoring group and the resale for profit of such ticket is authorized by the sponsor of the event and the manager or owner of the facility in which the event is being held. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 986, 9-17-79; Ord. No. 1755, 1-4-88; Ord. No. 2338, 6-13-95) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.3.  
Sec. 23-34. - Defrauding hotels, motels, campgrounds, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without paying therefor, and with the intent to cheat or defraud the owner or keeper to: 
(1)  Put up at a hotel, motel, campground or boardinghouse; 
(2)  Obtain food from a restaurant or other eating house; 
(3)  Gain entrance to an amusement park; or 
(4)  Without having an express agreement for credit, procure food, entertainment or accommodation from any hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant or eating house. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat or defraud the owner or keeper out of the pay therefor, to obtain credit at a hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant or eating house for food, entertainment or accommodations by means of any false show of baggage or effects brought thereto. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat or defraud, to obtain credit at a hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant, eating house or amusement park for food, entertainment or accommodations through any misrepresentation or false statement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat or defraud, to remove or cause to be removed any baggage or effects from a hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant or eating house while there is a lien existing thereon for the proper charges due from him for fare and board furnished. 
(b)  This section shall apply only if the value of the service, credit or benefit procured or obtained is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-21; Ord. No. 1003, 11-5-79; Ord. No. 1703, 6-8-87; Ord. No. 2230, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 3576, 12-11-18) 
Cross reference— Food and food establishments, Ch. 13; hotels and similar establishments, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-188, which makes the offense a felony, if the value of the service, credit or benefit is $100.00 or more.  
Sec. 23-35. - Fraudulent use of pay phones, parking meters and other coin-operated devices. 
Any person who shall operate, cause to be operated, or attempt to operate or cause to be operated any coin box, telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine that operates on the coin-in-the-slot principle, whether of like kind or not, designed only to receive lawful coins of the United States of America, in connection with the use or enjoyment of telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges or any other service, or the sale of merchandise or other property, by means of a slug, or any false, counterfeit, mutilated, sweated or foreign coin, or by any means, method, trick or device whatsoever, not authorized by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine; or who shall obtain or receive telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges, merchandise or any other service or property from any such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machines or other machine, designed only to receive lawful coins of the United States of America, without depositing in or surrendering to such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine lawful coins of the United States of America to the amount required therefor by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-13) 
Cross reference— License tax for coin-operated machines, and operators thereof, §§ 18-72, 18-73; parking meters, § 21-393 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-179.  
Sec. 23-36. - Purchase of junk, secondhand articles, etc., from minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person, whether licensed or unlicensed, to purchase, barter or exchange or in any manner obtain, from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, any kind of secondhand articles, junk, rags, metals or other like commodities. 
(b)  In addition to any punishment that may be imposed upon conviction for a violation of this section, upon such conviction of any pawnbroker, junk dealer or secondhand dealer, the judge of a court of competent jurisdiction may, at his discretion, revoke the license of the offender. 
(Code 1965, § 23-30) 
Cross reference— Pawnbrokers, junk and secondhand dealers, Ch. 25.  
Sec. 23-37. - Unlawful use of words "Official Tourist Information" or similar language. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in this city to use the words "Official Tourist Information" or "Official Information Service" or other similar language, for the purpose of informing tourists, motorists and other persons that the information offered is free of charge, or is sponsored by or offered under the authority of the state or any department or agency thereof or by any municipality or any chamber of commerce or any civic agency or group of this or any other state or the District of Columbia. Any person disseminating information as contemplated in this section must state on any signboards, billboards or other similar signs, in large, easily read and legible letters, and on any advertising or other publicity media, the names of the persons, firms or corporations represented or from whom any remuneration whatsoever is received. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or affect the giving or advertising of "official tourist information" or other such service by gasoline service stations or other organizations which offer such information without a charge and without any inducement to purchase any services or products. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-51) 
Cross reference— Advertising, Ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-211.  
Sec. 23-38. - Abusing any monument, memorial, statue or other items situated on public property; penalty 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person to climb, walk, jump, stand, sit, skate or ride upon any monument, memorial, statue or other item not specifically designed for such use that is situated on public property. Should this unlawful activity cause damage to the monument, memorial, statue or other item, then it shall be punished as described in State Code § 18.2-137. 
(Ord. No. 2936, 4-4-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2936, adopted April 4, 2006, amended § 23-38 of the Code in its entirety. Prior to amendment, § 23-38 pertained to damaging, defacing, etc., property generally and derived from the 1965 Code, § 23-27; Ord. No. 1003, adopted Nov. 5, 1979; Ord. No. 2835, adopted Aug. 10, 2004; and Ord. No. 2885, adopted June 14, 2005. 
Cross reference— Damaging library property, § 17-4; damaging traffic signs, § 21-299; damaging parking meters, § 21-406; damaging refuse receptacles, § 31-13. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-137.  
Sec. 23-39. - Cutting, etc., of trees, shrubs or other vegetation upon city property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 3 misdemeanor for any person to cut, trim, damage, deface or remove any tree, shrub or other vegetation upon city property, or to cause, procure or direct the cutting, trimming, damaging, defacing or removal of any such tree, shrub or other vegetation, without the written authorization of the landscape services administrator or the city arborist. If any person shall commit any of the acts prohibited herein upon more than one tree or shrub, a separate violation of this section shall be deemed to have occurred with respect to each such tree or shrub. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any cutting or trimming of vegetation required by section 23-50 of this Code or to routine trimming of shrubbery upon city property, and shall not apply to city personnel engaged in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 1837, 3-20-89; Ord. No. 2936, 4-4-06; Ord. No. 3122, 3-23-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2936, adopted April 4, 2006, repealed former § 23-39 of the Code in its entirety and renumbered former § 23-39.1 as § 23-39. Former § 23-39 pertained to damaging or defacing property in or on streets, lanes or public squares and derived from the 1965 Code, § 23-28.  
Sec. 23-40. - Altering surface of road or other public property; obstructing drainage. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to alter in any way the existing surface of any public road, right-of-way, drainage easement or other public property in the city, until such person obtains permission for such improvement from the planning commission. The planning commission or its agent shall specify any and all such improvements to be made and shall also specify the condition upon which improvements shall be made in order to insure the satisfactory completion of such work in the interest of the general public. This subsection shall be enforced by the planning commission or its agent. 
(b)  No person shall obstruct any ditch, road, swale, public right-of-way, watercourse or drainage easement in such a manner as to interfere with the natural flow of water or cause the stoppage or to impede the natural flow thereof across and along such ditch, road, swale, public right-of-way, watercourse or drainage easement. 
(c)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, §§ 23-18, 23-19)  
Sec. 23-41. - Injuring, tampering with, etc., vehicles, boats, etc. 
(a)  Any person who shall, individually or in association with one or more others, willfully break, injure, tamper with or remove any part of any vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, for the purpose of injuring, defacing or destroying such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or temporarily or permanently preventing its useful operation, or for any purpose against the will or without the consent of the owner of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or who shall in any other manner willfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who shall, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel or locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, climb into or upon such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel or locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, with intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto, or who, while a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel or locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad is at rest and unattended, shall attempt to manipulate any of the levers and starting crank or other device, brakes or mechanism thereof, or to set such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel or locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad in motion, with the intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. This subsection shall not apply when any such act is done in an emergency or in furtherance of public safety or by or under the direction of an officer in the regulation of traffic or performance of any other official duty. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a bona fide repossession of a vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel by the holder of a lien on such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or by agents or employees of such lienholder. 
(Code 1965, §§ 23-57—23-59; Ord. No. 1003, 11-5-79) 
Cross reference— Boats, Ch. 6; motor vehicles, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-146—18.2-148.  
Sec. 23-42. - Concealing, destroying, etc., city records. 
(a)  Whoever willfully and unlawfully conceals, removes, alters, mutilates, obliterates or destroys, or attempts to do so, or with intent to do so takes and carries away, any record, proceeding, map, book, paper, document or other thing filed or deposited in any public office of the city or with any public officer of the city shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Whoever, having the custody of any record, proceeding, map, book, document, paper or other thing belonging to the city, willfully and unlawfully conceals, removes, alters, mutilates, obliterates, falsifies or destroys the same, or permits another to do so, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and, in addition shall forfeit his office and be disqualified from holding any office with the city. 
(c)  Whoever having, or having had, access in an official capacity to any official record or report pertaining to any criminal investigation, including written documents, computer data and/or photographically recorded materials, who uses or knowingly permits another to use such record or report or portion thereof for any purpose not consistent with the exemptions permitted in section 2.1-342 of the Code of Virginia or other provision of state law or city ordinance, shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, §§ 23-48.2, 23-48.3; Ord. No. 1881, 6-19-89) 
Cross reference— Public records management, § 2-341 et seq. 
State Law reference— Theft, destruction, etc. of public records, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-107, 18.2-472.  
Sec. 23-43. - Trespass after having been forbidden to do so. 
(a)  If any person shall, without authority of law, go upon or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any part, portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, by the owner, lessee, custodian, or the agent of any such person, or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or after having been forbidden to do so by a sign or signs posted by or at the direction of such person or the agent of any such person or by the holder of any easement or other right-of-way authorized by the instrument creating such interest to post such signs on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof, at a place or places where it or they may be reasonably seen, or if any person, whether he is the owner, tenant or otherwise entitled to the use of such land, building or premises, goes upon, or remains upon such land, building or premises after having been prohibited from doing so by a court of competent jurisdiction by an order issued pursuant to Code of Virginia §§ 16.1-253, 16.1-253.1, 16.1-278.2 through 16.1-278.6, 16.1-278.8, 16.1-278.14, 16.1-278.15, 16.1-279.1, 19.2-152.8, 19.2-152.9, 19.2-152.10 or an ex parte order issued pursuant to Code of Virginia § 20-103, and after having been served with such order, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the provisions of Code of Virginia §§ 18.2-132 through 18.2-136. 
(b)  Any owner, lessee, custodian, or person lawfully in charge of real property may, in writing on a form prescribed by the chief of police, designate the police department as a "person lawfully in charge thereof," as those terms are used in subsection (a) of this section, for the purpose of forbidding another to go or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of such owner, lessee, custodian, or person lawfully in charge. Such designation shall include a description of the land(s), building(s) or premises to which it applies; shall reference the period of time during which it is in effect; and shall be kept on file in the office of the chief of police or in such other location within the police department as the chief of police deems appropriate. 
(Code 1965, § 23-52; Ord. No. 1748, 11-16-87; Ord. No. 2571, 2-22-00; Ord. No. 2707, 6-25-02; Ord. No. 3187, 6-28-11)  
Sec. 23-43.1. - Trespassing on public transportation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who enters or remains upon or within a vehicle operated by a public transportation service without the permission of, or after having been forbidden to do so by the owner, lessee, or authorized operator thereof is guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  "Public transportation service" means passenger transportation service provided by bus, rail or other surface conveyance that provides transportation to the general public on a regular and continuing basis. 
(Ord. No. 2990, 6-26-07)  
Sec. 23-43.2. - Nighttime use of city parks. 
(a)  Any person who remains, goes or enters upon any city park, or the park's parking areas, between sunset and sunrise shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not less than two hundred dollars ($200) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500). 
(b)  This section shall not apply during city-sponsored events or events authorized by city permit, nor shall it apply to any city employee or authorized agent while in the performance of official duties. 
(c)  As provided by Code of Virginia § 15.2-1124, city parks and parking areas are under city police jurisdiction for the enforcement of this section pertaining to the use and occupancy thereof. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, "city park" means any city-owned and operated property open to the public for general recreational use, including, but not limited to traditional park areas, canoe and kayak launch areas, and the disabled children's beach playground known as Grommet Park. The term "city park" does not include city-owned golf courses or city-owned and operated motor boat launch ramp areas. 
(Ord. No. 3153, 10-26-10)  
Sec. 23-44. - Instigating, etc., trespass by others; preventing service to persons not forbidden to trespass. 
If any person shall solicit, urge, encourage, exhort, instigate or procure another to go upon or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any part, portion or area thereof, knowing such other person to have been forbidden, either orally or in writing, to do so by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or knowing such other person to have been forbidden to do so by a sign posted on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof, at a place where it may reasonably be seen, or if any person shall, on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof, prevent or seek to prevent the owner, lessee, custodian, person in charge or any of his employees from rendering service to any person not so forbidden, he shall be deemed guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-53) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-120.  
Sec. 23-44.1. - Entering property of another for purpose of damaging it, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the land, dwelling, outhouse or any other building of another for the purpose of damaging such property or any of the contents thereof or in any manner to interfere with the rights of the owner, user or the occupant thereof to use such property free from interference. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1173, 5-11-81) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1173, adopted May, 11, 1981, enacted as § 23-53.1 to amend the 1965 Code; the editor has designated it as § 23-44.1 hereof. 
Cross reference— Damaging property generally, § 23-38. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212.  
Sec. 23-44.2. - Placement of unrequested materials on residential property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any commercial or noncommercial sample, handbill, dodger, brochure, circular, paper or other material of a similar nature on any private property on which there is conspicuously posted a "no solicitation" sign or any similar sign which clearly indicates that the owner or occupant of the property does not want to receive such materials. 
(b)  The materials set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall not be deemed to include (i) materials delivered or distributed by any federal, state or local governmental agency, or (ii) materials delivered or distributed pursuant to an active subscription. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2328, 5-23-95)  
Sec. 23-45. - Peeping toms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the property of another and secretly or furtively peep, spy or attempts to peep or spy into or through a window, door or other aperture of any building, structure or other enclosure of any nature occupied or intended to be occupied as a dwelling, whether or not such building, structure or enclosure is permanently situated or transportable, and whether or not such occupancy is permanent or temporary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a peephole or other aperture to secretly or furtively peep, spy or attempt to peep or spy into a restroom, dressing room, locker room, hotel room, motel room, tanning bed, tanning booth, bedroom or other location or enclosure for the purpose of viewing any nonconsenting person who is totally nude, clad in undergarments, or in a state of undress exposing the genitals, pubic area, buttocks or female breast and the circumstances are such that the person would otherwise have a reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to a lawful criminal investigation or a correctional official or local or regional jail official conducting surveillance for security purposes or during an investigation of alleged misconduct involving a person committed to the Department of Corrections or to a local or regional jail. 
(d)  As used in this section, "peephole" means any hole, crack or other similar opening through which a person can see. 
(e)  A violation of subsection (a) or (b) is a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-54; Ord. No. 1003, 11-5-79; Ord. No. 2169, 8-4-92; Ord. No. 2240, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 2555, 7-13-99) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-130.  
Sec. 23-45.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3038, adopted June 24, 2008, repealed § 23-45.1, which pertained to unlawful filming, videotaping or photographing of another and derived from Ord. No. 2555, 7-13-99; Ord. No. 2831, 6-22-04; Ord. No. 2885, 6-14-05.  
Sec. 23-46. - Nuisance generally. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "city manager" shall mean the city manager or such other employee of the city as may be designated by the city manager to perform the duties described in this section. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code or other ordinances of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create, allow, permit or maintain, upon any land or premises in the city in his possession or under his control, any public nuisance or any condition injurious to the public health or morals or endangering the life or property of others, including, but not limited to, the accumulation of stagnant water or any offensive, unwholesome, unsanitary or unhealthy substances. In addition to the foregoing, any condition of any land or premises which provides cover or harborage for rodents or vermin or breeds flies or mosquitoes, without proper treatment, shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(c)  Upon a determination by the city manager, that there exists on any land or premises within the city a public nuisance as set forth in subsection (a) hereof, notice shall be served on the owner of such land or premises or his agent, or on the occupant thereof, or both, to abate or remove such public nuisance from such land or premises within seven (7) days from the date of such notice. Provided, however, in the event the public nuisance involves the release or accumulation of a hazardous substance requiring response by the hazardous materials team of the Virginia Beach Fire Department to undertake measures to contain such substance or abate or otherwise mitigate the effects thereof upon the health or the environment, the notice requirement provided herein shall not apply. 
(d)  Service of the notice provided for in subsection (b) shall be by first-class mail, personal delivery or posting in a conspicuous place upon the land or premises; provided, however, that if the land or premises are unoccupied and the owner or his agent cannot be found by the exercise of due diligence or are unknown, such notice shall be sufficient against the owner if given by first-class mail to the owner's last known mailing address and posted in a conspicuous place upon the land or premises. The city manager is authorized to deliver or post such notice. 
(e)  A violation of any of the provisions of this section, or failure to comply with the terms of a notice issued and served as provided in this section within the time prescribed in such notice, shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. In addition to any penalties imposed hereunder, the city may institute legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this section and may remove or contract for the removal of such public nuisance, in which event the cost and expenses thereof, including an administrative fee in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner or occupant of the land or premises. Any such charge which is not paid within thirty (30) days of the date or which is billed to the person or persons named in the notice may be collected by an action at law or in any manner provided by law for the collection of taxes. 
(Code 1965, § 23-33; Ord. No. 2410, 8-6-96; Ord. No. 2550, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 3015, 5-13-08) 
Cross reference— Nuisance animals, § 5-9. 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, Code of Virginia, title 48; authority of city with reference to abatement of nuisances, §§ 15.1-14, 15.1-867.  
Sec. 23-46.1. - Nuisance structures. 
(a)  Any building or structure which is vacant and unsecured or open to entry through doors or windows, or which is determined by the code enforcement administrator to be unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate exit facilities, or to constitute a fire hazard or a hazard to health or safety by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment, or to lack required ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities, shall be declared unfit for occupancy by the code enforcement administrator. Upon making such determination, the code enforcement administrator shall cause to be posted in a conspicuous location up on the premises a placard stating "THIS STRUCTURE IS UNSAFE OR UNFIT FOR OCCUPANCY AND ITS USE OR OCCUPANCY IS PROHIBITED," or words to substantially the same effect. Any such building or structure is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance. 
(b)  Any person who enters in or upon any building or structure which constitutes a public nuisance and which has been placarded as provided in subsection (a) shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person having written authorization from the code enforcement administrator to enter in or upon such building or structure, or portion thereof, for the purposes of making required repairs, demolition or inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2027, 1-8-91; Ord. No. 2469, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 23-46.2. - Releases of hazardous substances. 
(a)  Any hazardous substance which is released or allowed to accumulate or remain upon any property within the city, except as prescribed or permitted by governmental law or regulation, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance subject to the provisions of section 23-46. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in the event of a response by the Hazardous Materials Team of the Virginia Beach Fire Department to a release or accumulation of a hazardous substance in which such team undertakes measures to contain such substance or to abate or otherwise mitigate the effects thereof upon health or the environment, the responsible party shall be liable to the city for all costs of such response; provided, however, that in the event the city shall be eligible for reimbursement by the commonwealth or the United States, or an agency thereof, the responsible party shall be liable to the city only to the extent such response costs are not so reimbursable. 
(c)  Monies recovered from responsible parties pursuant to subsection (b) shall be placed in a separate account in the general fund, and shall be used for the purpose of necessary replacement, purchase or upgrade of equipment used to contain, abate or otherwise mitigate releases of hazardous substances. 
(d)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Responsible party includes: 
a.  The owner of such substance or his agent; 
b.  The person transporting such substance at the time of its release; 
c.  Any person whose acts or omissions cause the release or accumulation of a hazardous substance in violation of the provisions of this section; and 
d.  In the event the identity or whereabouts of another responsible party cannot be determined despite the exercise of due diligence, the owner or occupant of the premises upon which a release or accumulation of a hazardous substance occurs; provided, however, that an owner or occupant of such premises who knowingly or negligently permits the release of a hazardous substance on such premises shall be deemed a responsible party notwithstanding the failure to determine the identity or whereabouts of any other responsible party. 
(2)  Hazardous substance means any material or substance, which now or hereafter is designated, defined or characterized as hazardous by law or regulation of the commonwealth or the United States. 
(3)  Release means spilling, leaking, emitting, discharging, leaching, disposing or otherwise escaping from a container approved by the United States Department of Transportation. 
(e)  Costs recoverable by the city in connection with a response for which recovery is sought pursuant to this section shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  Disposable materials and supplies acquired, consumed and expended specifically for the purpose of the response; 
(2)  Compensation of employees for the time and efforts devoted specifically to the response not otherwise provided for in the operating budget; 
(3)  Rental or leasing of equipment, such as protective equipment or clothing and scientific or technical equipment used specifically for the response; 
(4)  Replacement costs for equipment which is contaminated beyond reuse or repair during, and as a result of, the response; 
(5)  Decontamination of equipment contaminated during the response; 
(6)  Special technical services specifically required for the response, such as costs associated with the time and efforts of technical experts and specialists not otherwise provided for by the city; 
(7)  Other special services specifically required for the response, such as the relocation of utilities; 
(8)  Laboratory costs for purposes of analyzing samples taken during the response; and 
(9)  Costs associated with the services, supplies and equipment procured for a specific evacuation. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair, limit or otherwise alter the right of any responsible party to indemnity or contribution. 
(Ord. No. 2207, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 3117, 2-9-10)  
Sec. 23-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3120, adopted March 9, 2010, repealed § 23-47, which pertained to loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise and derived from Code 1965, § 23-32; Ord. No. 1326, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 1563, 10-28-85; Ord. No. 1827, 2-6-89.  
Sec. 23-48. - Open storage of rusted, junked, etc., machinery, equipment, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or leave, on any property in the city, any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery, equipment, building material or other item, which is either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition and which is not completely enclosed within a building. Any such item which remains on the property for a period of seven (7) days after notice of violation of this section is given to the owner of such property shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the city or its agents without further notice. In the event any such item is so removed, the cost of removal, including an administrative fee in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), shall be charged to the owner of the property. Any such charge which is not paid within thirty (30) days of the date on which it is billed to the owner shall constitute a lien upon the property and may be collected in any manner provided by law for the collection of taxes. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any licensed junk dealers or establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning or salvaging of equipment. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. In addition to any other remedy provided herein, the code enforcement administrator may institute legal action to enjoin the continuing violating of this section. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any parcel of land greater than one acre in size which is located in an agricultural zoning district and used principally for agricultural or horticultural purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-12(B), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 1917, 10-2-89; Ord. No. 1930, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 2130, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 2205, 2-9-93; Ord. No. 2469, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 3015, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 23-49. - Abandoned or discarded refrigerators and other airtight containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, abandon, leave or allow to remain in any place any icebox, refrigerator or other container, device or equipment of any kind with an interior storage area of more than two (2) cubic feet of clear space which is airtight, without first removing the door or hinges from such icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment which is being used for the purpose for which it was originally designed or is being used for display purposes by any retail or wholesale merchant or is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-26; Ord. No. 1016, § 17-12(C), 1-14-80) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-319.  
Sec. 23-50. - Accumulations of trash, garbage, etc., or excessive growth of weeds or grass. 
(a)  Upon determination by the director of housing and neighborhood preservation, the code enforcement administrator, or any inspector of the department of housing and neighborhood preservation, whether temporarily or permanently employed as such, that there exists upon any land or premises within the city, including the area between such land or premises and the nearer of (i) the curb line, including a sidewalk if one is present, (ii) a sound wall, or (iii) the edge of the pavement of any public street abutting such property in the absence of a curb or sound wall any trash, garbage, refuse, litter or similar substances, except as may be placed thereon for purposes of collection in accordance with chapter 31 of this Code, notice shall be served on the owner of such land or premises or his or her agent, or on the occupant thereof, or both, to cause such trash, garbage, refuse, litter or similar substances to be removed from such land or premises within seven (7) days from the date of such notice. For purposes of this section, "sound wall" means a wall or other noise attenuation structure installed as part of a city, state, or federally funded road project. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsections (e) and (f) hereof, upon determination by the director of housing and neighborhood preservation, the code enforcement administrator, or any inspector of the department of housing and neighborhood preservation, whether temporarily or permanently employed as such, that there exists on any land or premises within the city, including the area between such land or premises and the nearer of (i) the curb line, including a sidewalk if one is present, (ii) a sound wall, or (iii) the edge of the pavement of any public street abutting such property in the absence of a curb or sound wall, any grass, weeds, brush or similar vegetation in excess of ten (10) inches in height, notice shall be served on the owner of such land or premises or his or her agent, or on the occupant thereof, or both, to cause such grass, weeds, brush or similar vegetation to be cut and removed from such land or premises within seven (7) days from the date of such notice. 
(c)  Service of the notice provided for in subsections (a) and (b) shall be by first-class mail, personal delivery or posting in a conspicuous place upon the land or premises; provided, however, that if the land or premises are unoccupied and the owner or his or her agent cannot be found by the exercise of due diligence or are unknown, such notice shall be sufficient against the owner if given by first-class mail to the owner's last known mailing address and posted in a conspicuous place upon the land or premises. The code enforcement administrator and inspectors of the department of housing and neighborhood preservation are hereby authorized to deliver or post such notices. One notice (as provided for in subsection (b)) per growing season is hereby deemed reasonable notice to owners of vacant developed or undeveloped property to authorize the city to remove or contract for the removal of any excessive growth of grass, weeds, brush or similar vegetation for the entire growing season. 
(d)  Failure to comply with the terms of a notice issued and served as provided in this section within the time prescribed in such notice shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. In addition to any penalties imposed hereunder, the city may institute legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this section and may remove or contract for the removal of such trash, garbage, refuse, litter or similar substances or grass, weeds, brush or similar vegetation, in which event the cost and expenses thereof, including an administrative fee in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner or occupant of the land or premises. Any such charge which is not paid within thirty (30) days of the date on which it is billed to the owner of such land or premises shall constitute a lien upon the property and may be collected in any manner provided by law for the collection of taxes; provided, however, that no such lien shall be valid against any owner of land or premises who was not served with the notice prescribed in subsection (a) or (b) hereinabove, as the case may be. 
(e)  The provisions of subsection (b) shall not apply to any parcel of land zoned for or in active farming operation. 
(f)  The provisions of subsection (b) shall not apply to the following areas: 
(1)  Portions of undeveloped lots, parcels or tracts of land which are not located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a paved road; 
(2)  Portions of undeveloped lots, parcels or tracts of land which are not located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any other property, developed or undeveloped, located in a Residential, Apartment, Business, Office, Resort Tourist or Industrial Zoning District; 
(3)  Portions of undeveloped lots, parcels or tracts of land which are inaccessible to power mowing equipment; 
(4)  Areas required by the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance [appendix F] or the Southern Watersheds Management Ordinance [appendix G] to be vegetated; 
(5)  Vegetated wetlands, as defined in the Wetlands Zoning ordinance [appendix A, article 14]; 
(6)  Nontidal wetlands located within Resource Protection Areas; 
(7)  Coastal primary sand dunes; 
(8)  State-designated Wildlife Habitat Areas; 
(9)  Banks of detention ponds, streams, and other bodies of water, natural or manmade; 
(10)  Banks of drainage easements; 
(11)  Wooded areas, including understory vegetation; and 
(12)  Any other area required to be vegetated by reason of the application of the City Zoning Ordinance [appendix A], Subdivision Ordinance [appendix B], Site Plan Ordinance [appendix C], Stormwater Management Ordinance [appendix D], Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance [appendix F], Southern Rivers Watershed Management Ordinance [appendix G], or any other ordinance or provision of law. 
(g)  As used in this section, the term "developed" shall refer to any lot, parcel or tract of land upon any portion of which there has been placed any building, structure or other improvement or upon any portion of which there has been any land-disturbing activity, including, without limitation, paving, filling, grading, dredging, clearing or excavating. 
(Code 1965, §§ 17-25, 17-26, 17-28, 17-30—17-32; Ord. No. 1016, § 17-12(A), 1-14-81; Ord. No. 1232, 11-2-81; Ord. No. 1750, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 1918, 10-2-89; Ord. No. 1952, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 2197, 12-8-92; Ord. No 2469, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 2645, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 3015, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3140, 6-22-10; Ord. No. 3373, 9-16-14; Ord. No. 3385, 12-9-14; Ord. No. 3536, 3-20-18; Ord. No. 3599, 9-17-19) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, Ch. 31.  
Sec. 23-50.1. - Removal of certain trees. 
(a)  Upon determination by the code enforcement administrator or the city arborist, or the officers or employees of their respective departments, that there exists upon any land or premises within the city any tree which, by reason of disease, death, injury, infirmity or other condition, presents a danger to property or to the health and safety of persons or other trees or vegetation, notice shall be served upon the owner of such land or premises or his or her agent or upon the occupant thereof to cause such tree to be removed within a reasonable period of time, not less than seven (7) days nor more than thirty (30) days, specified in such notice. If the danger presented by such tree may be eliminated by the removal of a portion of such tree, the notice shall specify the portion or portions of the tree to be so removed. For purposes of this section, the term "tree" shall be construed to include the plural of the term. 
(b)  Service of the notice provided for herein shall be by personal service or by certified or registered mail. In the event the land or premises are vacant and the owner thereof or his or her agent cannot be found by the exercise of due diligence, such notice shall be given by certified or registered mail to the last-known residence or post office box address of the owner and, in addition thereto, shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises. Service of such notice upon one owner or occupant in any manner provided for herein shall be sufficient in the event such land or premises is owned or occupied jointly. 
(c)  Failure to comply with the terms of a notice issued and served as provided in this section within the time prescribed by such notice shall be punishable as a Class 4 misdemeanor. In addition to any fine imposed hereunder, the code enforcement administrator may, in the name of the city, institute legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this section and may remove or contract for the removal of any such tree or portion thereof, in which event the cost of such removal, including an administrative fee in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), shall be charged to the person or persons named in the notice and collected by action at law or as delinquent real estate taxes are collected, or both. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative in nature. 
(Ord. No. 1675, 4-13-87; Ord. No. 1919, 10-2-89; Ord. No. 1931, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 2130, 5-12-92; Ord. No 2469, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 3015, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3599, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 23-51. - Tattooing and tattoo parlors. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall be construed as follows: 
(1)  Tattoo: To place any design, letter, scroll, figure, symbol or any other mark upon or under the skin or any person with ink or any other substance resulting in the permanent coloration of the skin, including permanent make-up or permanent jewelry, by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin. 
(2)  Tattoo artist: Any person who actually performs the work of tattooing. 
(3)  Tattoo parlor: Any place in which is offered or practiced the placing of designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin of any person with ink or any other substance, resulting in the permanent coloration of the skin, including permanent make-up or permanent jewelry, by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin. 
(4)  Tattoo operator: Any person who controls, operates, conducts or manages any tattoo parlor, whether actually performing the work of tattooing or not. 
(b)  No person shall control, operate, conduct or manage any tattoo parlor or shall perform tattooing on any person without complying with the requirements of this section. 
(c)  No person shall control, operate, conduct or manage any tattoo parlor, whether actually performing the work of tattooing or not, without first obtaining a permit from the department of public health. such an application shall be made on an application form provided by the city manager or his designee. 
(d)  The permit fee shall be one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) for a one-year licensing period from January 1 to December 31. All permits issued during the course of a calendar year shall expire on December 31 of that year, regardless of the date issued. For any person required to obtain a permit under the provisions of this section after the first day of January, the permit fee shall be prorated as follows: between January 1 and on or before March 31, the full permit fee shall be paid; between April 1 and on or before June 30, three-fourths of the permit fee shall be paid; between July 1 and on or before September 30, one-half of the permit fee shall be paid; and after September 30 of the licensing year, one-fourth of the permit fee shall be paid. 
(e)  Every tattoo artist shall provide one of the following to the department of public health: 
(1)  Proof of completion of the full Hepatitis B vaccine; 
(2)  Proof of Immunity by blood titer; or 
(3)  Written declination of refusal of the full Hepatitis vaccine. 
(f)  Every tattoo artist and tattoo operator shall at all times comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All tattooing-related procedures shall be carried out in a clean, safe and sanitary manner as approved by the department of public health so as to minimize the potential of disease transmission. All tattoo artists shall complete annual blood borne pathogen training approved by the department of public health. 
(2)  All areas of the tattoo parlor shall be constructed and maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary manner in compliance with all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, codes and ordinances of the city and the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(3)  All walls, ceilings and floors shall be smooth and easily cleaned. The floors shall not be carpeted, and neither rugs nor fabrics of any kind shall be placed on the floors. Walls and ceilings shall be painted a light color. Walls, ceilings and floors shall be kept clean and free from dust and debris. The floors shall be swept and mopped daily. The walls, ceilings or floors shall not be swept or cleaned while tattooing is occurring. 
(4)  Adequate light and ventilation shall be provided. 
(5)  Adequate toilet and hand-washing facilities shall be available in the tattoo parlor separate and isolated from the business area in which tattooing is performed, for the use of customers and personnel of the tattoo parlor. Toilets and washing facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition at all times. Smoking, eating, or drinking is prohibited in the area in which tattooing is performed. 
(6)  All areas of the tattoo parlor shall be accessible for inspection by the department of public health and its authorized representatives. The department of public health is hereby authorized to conduct unannounced inspections of tattoo parlors. 
(7)  All inks, dyes, pigments, needles and equipment shall be specifically manufactured for performing tattooing and shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The mixing of approved tattooing inks, dyes or pigments or their dilutions with potable water shall be permitted. Immediately before a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the dye to be used shall be transferred from the dye bottle and placed into single-use paper or plastic cups. Upon completion of the procedure, such cups and their contents shall be discarded in the manner prescribed in subdivision (8) hereof. 
(8)  All cleaned, non-disposable instruments used in connection with the preparation for or process of tattooing shall be sterilized before each use in a steam autoclave or dry-heat sterilizer approved by the department of public health. Such sterilization shall be performed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, a copy of which shall be submitted, with contact information, as part of the permit application. The tattoo operator shall be responsible for maintaining a log which indicates that the autoclave or other sterilizer has been checked during each cycle and has been sterilized in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. All cleaned and ready-to-use needles and instruments shall be stored in a protective manner to prevent subsequent contamination. Sterile equipment shall not be used after the expiration date or if the package has been breached. If disposable instruments are used, those instruments shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable laws. The skin surface to be tattooed and any jewelry to be used shall be cleaned and sanitized using processes and materials approved by the department of public health. All hazardous waste, body fluids, and medical waste of any kind shall be disposed of in accordance with the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality's Regulated Medical Waste Regulations, 9 VAC 20-120-10 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. Single-use items shall not be used on more than one (1) client for any reason. After use, all single-use needles, razors, and other sharps shall be immediately disposed of in accordance with the aforesaid regulations. 
(9)  Records for each patron shall be maintained by the tattoo operator. Such records shall be maintained for a minimum period of four (4) [years], except if the patron is under eighteen (18) years of age, in which event these records shall be maintained for a minimum of four (4) years from the eighteenth birthday of said patron and shall include the following information: 
(i)  Name, address, sex and age of the person tattooed; 
(ii)  Date of tattooing; 
(iii)  Physical location and description of tattooing; 
(iv)  Name, address and telephone number of the person performing the tattooing; 
(v)  Parent or legal guardian written consent form for minors; and 
(vi)  Name and address of the manufacturer of the dyes used as well as identifying information about the dye solutions and types of dyes used. If a customer has need for this information, then the tattoo parlor operator shall release it to the customer. 
At such time as the tattoo parlor ceases doing business or is removed from the city or changes its name or has a change in management or ownership, copies of all such records shall be provided to the department of public health. 
(10)  More than one (1) set of sterilized needles, tubes and tips or alternate approved sterilization method shall be kept on the premises at all times. 
(11)  No person, customer or patron having any visible skin infection or other disease of the skin or any communicable disease shall have tattooing performed, and no person having any skin infection or disease of the skin shall perform tattooing. All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing which become known to the tattoo operator shall promptly be reported to the department of public health by the person owning or in charge of the tattoo parlor, and the infected client shall be referred to a physician. 
(12)  No tattooing shall be performed on any person under the age of eighteen (18) years without the written consent of his or her parent or guardian, and such written consent shall be kept on file for at least four (4) years at the tattoo parlor from the eighteenth birthday of the minor. Where there is doubt about such an age, written proof of age shall be obtained before the tattooing is done. Written proof of age shall be photocopied and kept by the tattoo operator. All customers under eighteen (18) years of age shall be accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. Both customer and parent or guardian shall sign a consent form and a driver's license or other appropriate form of identification of both the customer and the parent or guardian shall be photocopied and attached to the consent form. 
(13)  Tattoo artists and tattoo operators shall refuse service to any person whom the tattoo artist or tattoo operator knows, or has reason to believe, is intoxicated. 
(14)  No person shall state or imply in any advertisement or publication, written or oral and prepared or uttered for the purpose of soliciting business, that the tattoo parlor is endorsed, regulated or approved by the city or by any of its departments or is conducted in compliance with the terms of this section. 
(15)  Immediately after tattooing a patron the tattoo artist shall advise the patron of the care of the tattooed area and shall instruct the patron to consult a physician at the first sign of infection. 
(16)  The tattoo artist shall wash his or her hands between customers and between tattooing different parts of the body on the same person. The tattoo artist shall wear protective, disposable latex or vinyl gloves while tattooing, and shall wear a new pair of gloves for each client and when tattooing different parts of the same client. 
(17)  The name, address and telephone number of the tattoo parlor shall be on the heading of all waivers, care sheets, consent and other forms utilized by the tattoo parlor. 
(18)  The tattoo operator shall file with the department of public health annually with the license application and any renewal thereof a list of the following information for each employee: Name, permit number, home address, home phone number, and position or job title. With respect to tattoo artists, the tattoo operator shall also submit proof annually of vaccination and testing as required by subsection (e). The tattoo operator shall amend the list accordingly and submit it to the department of public health immediately upon the addition of an employee or termination of an employee. 
(19)  No tattoo artist or tattoo operator shall tattoo the genitals, pubic area, or buttocks of any member of the opposite sex, nor shall any male tattoo artist or male tattoo operator tattoo any portion of the breast of any female below the aureole. 
(g)  No person shall perform tattooing on any client unless he or she complies with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's guidelines for "Universal Blood and Body Fluid Precautions" and provides the client with the following disclosure: 
(1)  Tattooing is an invasive procedure in which the skin is penetrated by a foreign object. 
(2)  If proper sterilization and antiseptic procedures are not followed by tattoo artists, there is a risk of transmission of bloodborne pathogens and other infections, including, but not limited to, human immunodeficiency viruses and hepatitis B or C viruses. 
(3)  Tattooing may cause allergic reactions in persons sensitive to dyes or the metals used in ornamentation. 
(4)  Tattooing may involve discomfort or pain for which appropriate anesthesia cannot be legally made available by the tattoo artist unless such person holds the appropriate license from a Virginia health regulatory board. 
(h)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. Any second or subsequent violation of this section shall be punished as a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(i)  This section shall not apply to medical doctors, veterinarians, registered nurses or any other medical services personnel, licensed pursuant to Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia, in performance of their professional duties. 
(Code 1965, § 23-49, 23-50; Ord. No. 2629, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 2643, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 2710, 7-2-02; Ord. No. 3325, 2-11-14)  
Sec. 23-52. - Water and sewer utilities to maintain employees on call at all times for emergencies. 
(a)  Every individual, partnership or corporation engaged in the business of providing utility service of delivery of water through pipes or the removal and treatment of sewage shall maintain, at all times, an employee on call to respond to failures in the system. Such employee shall be stationed at the main plant or office of such utility, or shall be capable of being reached by telephone through a telephone list furnished to the chief of police. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-46.1) 
Cross reference— Sewers, Ch. 28; water supply, Ch. 37.  
Sec. 23-53. - Barred or locked premises upon which food or drink served. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to operate any club, restaurant, place of amusement, dancehall or similar establishment open to the public in the city where beverages (including alcoholic, but not limited thereto) or food is served, dispensed or otherwise made available to the occupants behind barred or locked doors and on premises made inaccessible for proper health, safety and fire inspections at all times during its operating hours. 
(Code 1965, § 23-10.1; Ord. No. 1058, 7-14-80) 
Cross reference— Food and food establishments, Ch. 13.  
Sec. 23-53.1. - Body piercing. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall be construed as follows: 
(1)  Body piercing: The act of penetrating the skin to make a hole, mark, or scar, generally permanent in nature. "Body piercing" does not include the use of a mechanized, pre-sterilized ear-piercing system that penetrates the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear or both. 
(2)  Body piercer: Any person who actually performs the work of body piercing. 
(3)  Body piercing establishment: Any place in which a fee is charged for the act of penetrating the skin to make a hole, mark, or scar, generally permanent in nature. "Body piercing" does not include the use of a mechanized, pre-sterilized ear-piercing system that penetrates the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear or both. 
(4)  Body piercing operator: Any person who controls, operates, conducts or manages any body piercing establishment, whether actually performing the work of body piercing or not. 
(b)  No person shall control, operate, conduct or manage any body piercing establishment or shall perform body piercing on any person without complying with the requirements of this section. 
(c)  No person shall control, operate, conduct or manage any body piercing establishment, whether actually performing the work of body piercing or not, without first obtaining a permit from the department of public health. Such an application shall be made on an application form provided by the city manager or his designee. 
(d)  The permit fee shall be one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) for a one-year licensing period from January 1 to December 31. All permits issued during the course of a calendar year shall expire on December 31 of that year, regardless of the date issued. For any person required to obtain a permit under the provisions of this section after the first day of January, the permit fee shall be prorated as follows: between January 1 and on or before March 31, the full permit fee shall be paid; between April 1 and on or before June 30, three-fourths of the permit fee shall be paid; between July 1 and on or before September 30, one-half of the permit fee shall be paid; and after September 30 of the licensing year, one-fourth of the permit fee shall be paid. 
(e)  Every body piercer shall submit proof annually to the department of public health that he or she has received a tuberculosis assessment or PPD skin test and shall submit proof of a completed hepatitis B series by a competent medical authority approved by the director of public health. 
(f)  Every body piercer and body piercing operator shall at all times comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All body piercing related procedures shall be carried out in a clean, safe and sanitary manner as approved by the department of public health so as to minimize the potential of disease transmission. All body piercers shall complete annual blood borne pathogen training approved by the department of public health. 
(2)  All areas of the body piercing establishments shall be constructed and maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary manner in compliance with all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, codes and ordinances of the city and the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(3)  All walls, ceilings and floors shall be smooth and easily cleaned. The floors shall not be carpeted, and neither rugs nor fabrics of any kind shall be placed on the floors. Walls and ceilings shall be painted a light color. Walls, ceilings and floors shall be kept clean and free from dust and debris. The floors shall be swept and mopped daily. The walls, ceilings or floors shall not be swept or cleaned while body piercing services are occurring. 
(4)  Adequate light and ventilation shall be provided. 
(5)  Adequate toilet and hand-washing facilities shall be available in the body piercing establishment separate and isolated from the business area in which body piercing is performed, for the use of customers and personnel of the body piercing establishment. Toilets and washing facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition at all times. Smoking, eating or drinking is prohibited in the area in which body piercing is performed. 
(6)  All areas of the body piercing establishment shall be accessible for inspection by the department of public health and its authorized representatives. The department of public health is hereby authorized to conduct unannounced inspections of body piercing establishments. 
(7)  All cleaned, non-disposable instruments used in connection with the preparation for or process of body piercing shall be sterilized before each use in a steam autoclave or dry-heat sterilizer approved by the department of public health . Such sterilization shall be performed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, a copy of which shall be submitted, with contact information, as part of the permit application. The body piercing operator shall be responsible for maintaining a log which indicates that the autoclave has been checked during each cycle and has been sterilized in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. All cleaned and ready-to-use needles and instruments shall be stored in a protective manner to prevent subsequent contamination. Sterile equipment shall not be used after the expiration date or if the package has been breached. If disposable instruments are used, those instruments shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable laws. The skin surface to be pierced as well as the jewelry to be used shall be cleaned and sanitized using processes and materials approved by the department of public health. All hazardous waste, body fluids, and medical waste of any kind shall be disposed of in accordance with the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality's Regulated Medical Waste Regulations, 9 VAC 20-120-10 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. 
(8)  Records for each patron shall be maintained by the body piercing operator. These records shall be maintained for a minimum period of four (4) years except if the patron is under eighteen (18) years of age, in which event these records shall be maintained for a minimum of four (4) years from the eighteenth birthday of said patron and shall include the following information: 
(i)  Name, address, sex and age of the person body pierced; 
(ii)  Date of body piercing; 
(iii)  Physical location and description of body piercing; 
(iv)  Name, address and telephone number of the person performing the body piercing; and 
(v)  Parent or legal guardian written consent form for minors. 
At such time when a body piercing establishment ceases doing business or is removed from the city or changes its name or has a change in management or ownership, copies of all such records shall be provided to the department of public health. 
(9)  More than one (1) set of sterilized needles, tubes and tips or alternate approved sterilization method shall be kept on the premises at all times. 
(10)  No person, customer or patron having any visible skin infection or other disease of the skin or any communicable disease shall have body piercing performed, and no person having any skin infection or disease of the skin shall perform body piercing. All infections resulting from the practice of body piercing which become known to the body piercing operator shall promptly be reported to the department of public health by the body piercing operator, and the infected client shall be referred to a physician. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful to perform body piercing on any person under the age of eighteen (18) years without written consent of his/her parent or guardian, and such written consent shall be kept on file for at least four (4) years at the body piercing establishment from the eighteenth birthday of the minor. Where there is doubt about such an age, written proof of age shall be obtained before the body piercing is done. Written proof of age shall be photocopied and kept by the body piercing operator. All customers under eighteen (18) years of age shall be accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. Both customer and parent or guardian must sign a consent form and a driver's license or other appropriate form of identification of both the customer and the parent or guardian shall be photocopied and attached to the consent form. 
(12)  Body piercers and body piercing operators shall refuse service to any person whom the body piercer or body piercing operator knows, or has reason to believe, is intoxicated. 
(13)  No person shall state or imply in any advertisement or publication, written or oral and prepared or uttered for the purpose of soliciting business, that the body piercing establishment is endorsed, regulated or approved by the city or by any of its departments or is conducted in compliance with the terms of this section. 
(14)  Immediately after body piercing a patron, the body piercer shall advise that patron of the care of the body pierced area and shall instruct the patron to consult a physician at the first sign of infection. 
(15)  The body piercer shall wash his or her hands between customers and between piercing different parts of the body on the same person. The body piercer shall wear protective, disposable latex or vinyl gloves while performing body piercing, and shall wear a new pair of gloves for each client and when piercing different parts of the same client. 
(16)  The name, address and telephone number of the body piercing establishment shall be on the heading of all waivers, care sheets, consent and other forms utilized by the body piercing establishment. 
(17)  The body piercing operator shall file with the department of public health annually with the license application and any renewal thereof a list of the following information for each employee: Name, permit number, home address, home phone number, and position or job title. With respect to body piercers, the body piercing operator shall also submit proof annually of vaccination and testing as required in subsection (e). The body piercing operator shall amend the list accordingly and submit it to the department of public health immediately upon the addition of an employee or termination of an employee. 
(18)  No body piercer shall body pierce the genitals, pubic area, or buttocks of any member of the opposite sex, nor shall any male body piercer pierce any portion of the breast of any female below the aureole. 
(g)  No person shall perform body piercing on any client unless he or she complies with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's guidelines for "Universal Blood and Body Fluid Precautions" and provides the client with the following disclosure: 
(1)  Body piercing is an invasive procedure in which the skin is penetrated by a foreign object. 
(2)  If proper sterilization and antiseptic procedures are not followed by body piercers, there is a risk of transmission of bloodborne pathogens and other infections, including, but not limited to, human immunodeficiency viruses and hepatitis B or C viruses. 
(3)  Body piercing may cause allergic reactions in persons sensitive to the metals used in ornamentation. 
(4)  Body piercing may involve discomfort or pain for which appropriate anesthesia cannot be legally made available by the person performing the body piercing unless such person holds the appropriate license from a Virginia Health Regulatory Board. 
(h)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. Any second or subsequent violation of this section shall be punished as a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(i)  This section shall not apply to medical doctors, veterinarians, registered nurses or any other medical services personnel, licensed pursuant to Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia, in performance of their professional duties. 
(Ord. No. 2596, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 2626, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 2644, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 2710, 7-2-02)  
Sec. 23-54. - Sleeping in automobiles. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person to use an automobile for sleeping quarters, in lieu of hotel, tourist cabin, boardinghouse, rooming house or other similar accommodations, within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48) 
Cross reference— Sleeping on beach, § 6-4.  
Sec. 23-55. - Sleeping in public parks or other public property. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person to sleep in any public park or in or on other public property between the hours of 8:00 p.m., and 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1.1) 
Cross reference— Sleeping on beach, § 6.4; parks, Ch. 24.  
Sec. 23-56. - Overnight occupancy of camper vehicle on public property. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person to park on public property and occupy overnight any camper vehicle, self propelled or trailed, except in areas or sites designated for such occupancy and use. 
(Code 1965, § 23-48.1)  
Sec. 23-57. - Barbershops, beauty parlors, nail salons and barber and beauty culture schools; maintenance requirements, etc. 
(a)  Floors in barbershops, beauty parlors, nail salons, barber schools or beauty culture schools shall be cleaned every day and all furniture, walls, woodwork and windows therein shall be kept clean and in good repair at all times. Each barbershop, beauty parlor, nail salon, barber school or beauty culture school shall be provided with a toilet and wash basins properly trapped and connected to an approved sewer system. Adequate soap, clean towels and toilet tissue shall be available at all times. All basins, sinks and toilets shall be kept in clean and in good repair at all times. The use of powder puffs and sponges is prohibited. No alum or other astringent shall be used in stick form in any barbershop, beauty parlor, nail salon, barber school or beauty culture school. If used therein to stop the flow of blood, it shall be applied in liquid or powdered form. 
(b)  Terms used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in section 18-56 of this Code. 
(c)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1091, 69-22-80; Ord. No. 3156, 12-14-10) 
Cross reference— License tax for establishments referred to above, § 18-56.  
Sec. 23-58. - Commercial parking lots. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "commercial parking lot" means any lot, or portion thereof, used for the parking of motor vehicles for a fee or other consideration, but not including parking garages or similar structures. The provisions of this section shall apply to all commercial parking lots located in any Resort Tourist Zoning District or the OR Oceanfront Resort District. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to operate a commercial parking lot in violation of any of the provisions of this section. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any fine imposed hereunder, and not in lieu thereof, the continuing violation of any of the provisions of this section may be enjoined or restrained by injunction. 
(c)  Application for a permit required by this section shall be made to the city manager or his designee. Each application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant and, if different, the name and address of the owner of the property upon which the proposed commercial parking lot is to be located, and shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  A nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
(2)  An approved site plan prepared in accordance with the Site Plan Ordinance and showing all elements required by this section; and 
(3)  A sign plan showing the design, size, color and materials of all signs to be located on the lot. 
(d)  Upon approval of an application, the permittee shall be issued a self-adhesive sticker which shall serve as the permit and shall be affixed to one (1) of the entrance signs required by subsection (i) of this section. 
(e)  It shall be a condition of every permit issued hereunder that the city or its agents shall have the authority to enter upon the commercial parking lot and perform any acts required to bring the property into compliance with the provisions of this section in the event the owner or operator, after being given notice of, and a reasonable opportunity to correct, any condition of noncompliance shall fail to do so. 
(f)  Commercial parking lots shall at all times, whether or not they are in operation: 
(1)  Have a paved surface, inclusive of all drive aisles, which meets the requirements of the Public Works Design Standards Manual and the Site Plan Ordinance; provided, that any commercial parking lot in operation as of July 1, 2002 shall not be required to provide curbing so long as wheel stops composed of concrete or asphalt are provided and maintained in good condition and repair at all times; 
(2)  Contain perimeter landscaping meeting the requirements of section 5A of the Parking Lot Landscaping Specifications and Standards where adjacent to any public right-of-way or other publicly-owned property. The perimeter may also be enclosed by fencing meeting the requirements for fences set forth in section 201(e) of the City Zoning Ordinance; provided, however, that such fencing shall not exceed four (4) feet in height and shall consist of materials, such as black vinyl-coated chain link, white vinyl picket or black wrought iron, which are generally recognized within the industry as maintenance-free. Wood split-rail fences shall not be permitted. Such fencing and landscaping shall at all times be maintained in good condition and repair; 
(3)  Where such lot is greater than twenty-four thousand (24,000) square feet in area, contain additional landscaping, which may consist of city-approved plant containers, located at the end of all parking aisles not adjacent to a public right-of-way or other publicly-owned property and which shall be maintained in good condition and repair at all times; 
(4)  Be secured at all points of ingress and egress by a gate, consisting of materials, such as black vinyl-coated chain link, white vinyl picket or black wrought iron, which are generally recognized within the industry as maintenance-free, except during hours of operation; 
(5)  Contain no less than one (1) trash receptacle, plainly visible and marked as such, for every three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of lot area or fraction thereof; 
(6)  Have upon the premises, from dusk until one-half (½) hour after closing or until the last vehicle has exited the lot, whichever is earlier, at least one (1) attendant. If any type of shelter is provided for attendants, such shelter shall at all times be maintained in good condition and repair. Alternately, or in addition to, automated fee collection machines may be utilized provided that a current contact number is provided and such contact can be present at the commercial parking lot with thirty (30) minutes; 
(7)  Be maintained in a clean and orderly condition at all times. All trash receptacles shall be emptied and the contents thereof properly disposed of at the close of operation daily and at such other times as receptacles become full; and 
(8)  Be in compliance with all other applicable requirements of federal, state and local law including, without limitation, the handicapped parking space requirements of the Americans With Disabilities Act. 
(g)  Notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance or regulation, commercial parking lots shall have one (1) sign, not exceeding nine (9) square feet in surface area per face, at each principal entrance. Each entrance sign shall contain the name of the establishment, if any, and times of operation and shall otherwise comply with all applicable city sign regulations and specifications for public signs in the Resort Area. Entrance signs may contain removable numbers for purposes of displaying rates. The square footage of such entrance signs shall not be counted against the maximum square footage allowed for commercial signs under the City Zoning Ordinance. 
(h)  Commercial parking lots shall be subject to inspection by the city manager or his designee for purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this section, and no person shall obstruct or interfere with such personnel as are authorized by the city manager to enforce this section in the lawful discharge of their duties. 
(i)  During the period from April 1 to September 30, inclusive, except where a commercial parking lot is accessory to a business which remains open after 2:00 a.m., is used solely by patrons of such business, and is supervised by the operator of such business, no vehicle shall be permitted to enter any commercial parking lot after 2:00 a.m. . All such lots shall be secured at all points of ingress and egress, as required by subdivision (3) of subsection (f) hereof, by no later than 2:30 a.m. and shall remain closed until no earlier than 5:00 a.m. 
(j)  The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be severable, and if any of the provisions hereof are adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this section shall remain in full force and effect and its validity shall remain unimpaired. 
(k)  The city manager or his designee is authorized, upon application by the owner of a commercial parking lot, to grant a variance from the provisions of this section when: 
(1)  Strict application of the provisions of this section will effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the use of the property. For purposes of this section, it shall be presumed that the loss of ten (10) percent or more of existing parking spaces meeting the dimensional requirements of section 203 of the City Zoning Ordinance by reason of the application of the landscaping requirements set forth in subsection (f)(2) of this section shall constitute an unreasonable restriction upon the use of the property; or 
(2)  The granting of such variance will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship approaching confiscation, as distinguished from a special privilege. 
In granting a variance, the city manager or his designee may impose such conditions as may be necessary in the public interest; provided, however, that the city manager or his designee shall not grant a variance from any condition or requirement of a conditional use permit granted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 4-3-89; Ord. No. 2522, 3-2-99; Ord. No. 2703, 6-25-02; Ord. No. 3232, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 3249, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3523, 12-5-17; Ord. No. 3619, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 23-59. - Off-site parking facilities. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "off-site parking facility", shall mean any lot which is used principally for the parking of motor vehicles, except commercial parking lots as defined in section 23-58. The provisions of this section shall apply to all off-site parking facilities located in any Resort Tourist District or the OR Oceanfront Resort District. 
(b)  Off-site parking facilities shall at all times, whether or not they are in operation: 
(1)  Have a paved surface, inclusive of all drive aisles, which meets the requirements of the Specifications and Standards of the Department of Public Works and the Site Plan Ordinance; provided, that any off-site parking facility in operation as of July 1, 2002 shall not be required to provide curbing so long as wheel stops composed of concrete or asphalt are provided and maintained in good condition and repair at all times; 
(2)  Contain perimeter landscaping meeting the requirements of section 5A of the Parking Lot Landscaping Specifications and Standards where adjacent to any public right-of-way or other publicly-owned property. The perimeter may also be enclosed by fencing meeting the requirements for fences set forth in section 201(e) of the City Zoning Ordinance; provided, however, that such fencing shall not exceed four (4) feet in height and shall consist of materials, such as black vinyl-coated chain link, white vinyl picket or black wrought iron, which are generally recognized within the industry as maintenance-free. Wood split-rail fences shall not be permitted. Such fencing and landscaping shall at all times be maintained in good condition and repair; 
(3)  Contain, no less than one trash receptacle, plainly visible and marked as such, for every three thousand, five hundred (3,500) square feet of lot area or fraction thereof; 
(4)  Be maintained in a clean and orderly condition at all times. All trash receptacles shall be emptied and the contents thereof properly disposed of at the close of operation daily and at such other times as receptacles become full; 
(5)  Shall, notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance have one sign, not exceeding six (6) square feet in surface area per face, at each principal entrance. Each sign shall contain the name of the establishment or establishments for which the lot is used for off-site parking and times of operation. Signs shall otherwise comply with all applicable city sign regulations; 
(6)  Where such lot is greater than twenty-four thousand (24,000) square feet in area, contain additional landscaping, which may consist of city-approved plant containers, located at the end of all parking aisles not adjacent to a public right-of-way or other publicly-owned property and which shall be maintained in good condition and repair at all times; and 
(7)  Be in compliance with all other applicable requirements of federal, state and local law including, without limitation, the handicapped parking space requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(c)  Off-site parking facilities shall be subject to inspection by the city manager or his designee for purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this section, and no person shall obstruct or interfere with such personnel as are authorized by the city manager to enforce this section in the lawful discharge of their duties. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be severable, and if any of the provisions hereof are adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this section shall remain in full force and effect and its validity shall remain unimpaired. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to operate an off-site parking facility in violation of any of the provisions of this section. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any fine imposed hereunder, and not in lieu thereof, the continuing violation of any of the provisions of this section may be enjoined or restrained by injunction. 
(Ord. No. 1847, 4-3-89; Ord. No. 3249, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3490, 3-7-17)  
Sec. 23-60. - Vending machines on private property. 
(a)  Every vending machine located on private property within the RT-1, RT-3, or RT-4 Resort Tourist District shall, when located outside of the enclosed physical structure of a building or establishment, be located in such a manner as to comply with the following: 
(1)  No more than one vending machine shall be located on any lot or parcel. 
(2)  The vending machine shall be accessory to a permitted use and structure. 
(3)  The vending machine shall be enclosed on three (3) sides. 
(4)  The open side of the vending machine enclosure shall not face the boardwalk, any city park or any improved connector street plaza. 
(5)  The vending machine shall be set back a minimum of three (3) feet from any public right-of-way and shall not interfere with any building entrance or exit. 
(b)  When a vending machine has been located in accordance with subsection (a) above, the owner of the vending machine, or the owner or operator of the business or establishment in control of the vending machine, may display, or cause to be displayed, a sign, visible from the public right-of-way, in letters no higher than three (3) inches, for the purpose of indicating the location of the vending machine. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a vending machine shall be defined as any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the provision or delivery, by sale or otherwise, of consumable and/or nonconsumable products. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to newspaper vending machines or coin-operated telephones. 
(e)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1845, 4-3-89; Ord. No. 1859, 5-1-89; Ord. No. 3249, 7-10-12) 
Cross reference— Vending machines on public property, § 33-18.  
Sec. 23-61. - Adult movie arcades. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall be construed as follows: 
(1)  Adult movie arcade. The term "adult movie arcade" means any business wherein an electronic viewing device is operated, generally for the purpose of viewing sexually oriented images. 
(2)  Electronic viewing device. The term "electronic viewing device" includes but is not limited to any electrical or mechanical device in a business, which projects or displays any live feed, digital image, film, videotape or reproduction into a viewing area obscured by a curtain, door, wall, or other enclosure which is designed for occupancy by no more than five (5) persons, and is not visible from a continuous main aisle. 
(3)  Viewing area. The term "viewing area" means the area where a patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while watching images from an electronic viewing device. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to own, maintain or operate, for himself or as an employee or agent an adult movie arcade where the viewing area is not visible from a continuous main aisle and is obscured by any curtain, door, wall, or other enclosure. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2206, 3-9-93; Ord. No. 3123, 3-23-10)  
Sec. 23-62. - Display of certain merchandise at business establishments in areas accessible to juveniles. 
(a)  The City of Virginia Beach hereby finds and declares that juveniles are confronted on a daily basis by the public display and sale of merchandise which graphically depicts or describes sexual activities or organs in an indecent manner and which is, therefore, inappropriate for their viewing. By adoption of this section, it is the intent of the city to aid parents in the exercise of their primary responsibility for the health and welfare of their children and to help protect the physical and psychological well-being of juveniles by shielding juveniles from the harmful influences of exposure to such merchandise in businesses which are open to the general public. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Juvenile shall mean any person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
Knowingly shall mean having general knowledge of, or a reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry as to, the age of a juvenile. 
Merchandise shall be deemed to include, but shall not be limited to, any banner, button, clothing (including hats), figurine, game, greeting card, magnet, photograph, postcard, poster, sculpture, souvenir, sticker, towel or similar item, whether or not the item is offered for sale. 
To depict or describe sexual activities or organs in an indecent manner shall mean to graphically depict or describe, by visual representation and/or language, sexual intercourse, masturbation, sadomasochistic abuse, sexual penetration with an inanimate object, sodomy, bestiality, uncovered genitals, buttocks, or female breasts, covered genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, or the fondling or other erotic touching of genitals, the pubic region, buttocks or the female breast. 
(c)  Any person who owns, leases or manages a business establishment which displays and/or offers for sale merchandise which depicts or describes sexual activities or organs in an indecent manner shall be required to place such merchandise in an area of the establishment whereby the merchandise is inaccessible to, and out of the plain view of, juveniles; and no person to whom this subsection applies shall knowingly permit a juvenile to enter any such area or to purchase any such merchandise unless the juvenile is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person having care, custody or control of such juvenile. 
(d)  Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. Furthermore, in addition to the penalty imposed for violation of this section, the city may seek injunctive relief in the circuit court of the City of Virginia Beach, pursuant to section 15.1-904 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, to enjoin a continuing violation hereof. 
(e)  It is the intent of this section to regulate the display of inappropriate and indecent materials to juveniles; this section shall not be deemed to supersede any provision of chapter 22 of this Code pertaining to the display or sale of obscene materials to juveniles, nor shall this section be interpreted to authorize the display or sale of obscene materials. 
(Ord. No. 2380, 4-23-96)  
ARTICLE II. - NOISE 
 
Sec. 23-63. - Declaration of findings and policy. 
City council hereby finds and declares that excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, peace and safety and the quality of life; that a substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be substantially abated; that the people have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from excessive sound that may jeopardize the public health, welfare, peace and safety or degrade the quality of life; and that it is the policy of the city to prevent such excessive sound to the extent such action is not inconsistent with a citizen's First Amendment rights. 
(Ord. No. 3082, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 3180, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 23-64. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
Audible and discernable means the sound can be heard by the human ear, and the sound is sufficiently distinct such that its source can be clearly identified. 
Background noise level shall mean the aggregate of all sound sources impacting at the place where a specific sound generation is measured or evaluated, excluding the specific sound generation itself. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micropascals (twenty (20) micronewtons per square meter). 
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical injury or illness or property damage that requires immediate action. 
Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical injury or illness or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) means the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination weight rating (GCWR), which is the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used. 
Instrument, machine or device means and refers to any musical instrument, radio, phonograph, compact disc player, cassette tape player, amplifier or any other machine or device for producing, reproducing or amplification of sound. 
Motor carrier vehicle engaged in interstate commerce means any vehicle for which regulations apply pursuant to section 18 of the Federal Noise Control Act of 1972 (P.L. 92-574), as amended, pertaining to motor carriers engaged in interstate commerce. 
Motorcycle means any motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground and any four-wheeled vehicle weighing less than five hundred (500) pounds and equipped with an engine of less than six (6) horsepower, excepting farm tractors. 
Motor vehicle means any self-propelled device or device designed for self-propulsion, upon or by which any person or property is or may be drawn or transported upon a street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary wheels or tracks. 
Noise means any audible sound which disturbs or tends to disturb humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
Public area means any real property owned by the government, including, but not limited to, public rights-of-way, sidewalks, parks, and buildings. 
Residential dwelling means any building or other structure in which one or more persons resides on a permanent or temporary basis, including, but not limited to, houses, apartments, condominiums, hotels, and motels. 
Restaurant means any building or structure where in the normal course of business food or drink is available for eating on the premises, in consideration for payment. For purposes of this chapter, the term restaurant includes, but is not limited to, bars, lounges, taverns, coffee shops and cafes. 
Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
Sound generation means any conduct, activity or operation, whether human, mechanical, electronic or other, and whether continuous, intermittent or sporadic, and whether stationary or ambulatory in nature, which produces or results in an audible sound. 
Sound level means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and the A-frequency weighting network, as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters. 
Sound level meter means an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels. 
(Ord. No. 3082, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 3180, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 23-65. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The police department may issue a summons for enforcement of the noise control program established by this article and may be assisted by other city departments as required. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall preclude a private citizen from obtaining a magistrate's summons based upon a probable cause determination by the magistrate's office. 
(Ord. No. 3082, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 3180, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 23-66. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor for a first offense. Any person who violates a provision of this article within one (1) year after a previous conviction under this article shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The person operating or controlling a noise source shall be guilty of any violation caused by that source. If that cannot be determined, any owner, tenant, resident or manager physically present on the property where the violation is occurring is rebuttably presumed to be operating or controlling the noise source. 
(c)  In addition to and not in lieu of the penalties prescribed in this section, the city may apply to the circuit court for an injunction against the continuing violation of any of the provisions of this article and may seek any other remedy or relief authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 3082, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 23-67. - Exceptions. 
No provisions of this article shall apply to (1) the emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; (2) the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work; (3) activities sponsored by the city; (4) activities authorized by a permit issued pursuant to sections 4-1 or 24-6; or (5) activities for which the regulation of noise has been preempted by federal law. 
(Ord. No. 3082, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 3180, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 23-68. - Use of sound level meters. 
The decibel level of any noise regulated on a decibel basis by this article shall be measured by a sound level meter. The test results shall be prima facie evidence if administered in accordance with Code of Virginia § 19.2-270.7. In order to implement and enforce this article effectively, the chief of police shall promulgate standards and procedures for using and testing sound level meters used in the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3082, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 3180, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 23-69. - Maximum sound levels and residential dwellings. 
(a)  Nighttime. No person shall permit, operate or cause any source of sound to create a sound level that can be heard in another person's residential dwelling during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in excess of 55 dBA when measured inside the residence at least four (4) feet from the wall nearest the source, with doors and windows to the receiving area closed. 
(b)  Daytime. No person shall permit, operate or cause any source of sound to create a sound level in another person's residential dwelling during the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. in excess of 65 dBA when measured inside the residence at least four (4) feet from the wall nearest the source, with doors and windows to the receiving area closed. 
(c)  Measurements in multifamily dwellings or mixed use structures. In a structure used as a multifamily dwelling or a mixed use structure, the police department may take measurements to determine sound levels from indoor common areas or other dwelling units within the structure , when requested to do so by a residential occupant in possession and control thereof. Such measurement shall be taken at a point at least four (4) feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source, with doors and windows to the receiving area closed. 
(d)  Exemptions. The following activities or sources of noise shall be exempt from the daytime prohibition set forth in subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  Band performances or practices, athletic contests or practices and other school-sponsored activities on the grounds of public or private schools, colleges, or universities. 
(2)  Athletic contests and other officially sanctioned activities in city parks or facilities. 
(3)  Activities related to the construction, repair, maintenance, remodeling or demolition, grading or other improvement of real property. 
(4)  Gardening, lawn care, tree maintenance or removal, and other landscaping activities. 
(5)  Agricultural activities. 
(6)  Church bells, carillons, or calls to worship by other sound-producing devices. 
(7)  Religious or political gatherings to the extent that those activities are protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(8)  Public transportation, refuse collection and sanitation services. 
(Ord. No. 3082, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 3180, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 23-70. - Motor vehicle maximum sound levels; amplified sound from vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated a public or private motor vehicle or motorcycle on a public right-of-way at any time in such a manner that the sound level emitted by the operation of the motor vehicle or motorcycle, when measured at a distance of one-hundred (100) feet or more is audible and discernable or exceeds the level set forth in the following table: 
	Sound level in dBA 
Vehicle Class 	Speed limit 35 MPH or less 	Speed limit over 35 MPH 
All motor vehicles of GVWR or GCWR of 6,000 lbs. or more 	86 	90 
Any motorcycle 	82 	86 
Any other motor vehicle or any combination of vehicles towed by any motor vehicle 	76 	82 
 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any motor carrier vehicle engaged in interstate commerce. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section or article, it shall be unlawful for any person to play or operate, or permit the playing, use or operation of, any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of sound, which is located within a motor vehicle being operated or parked on public or private property within the city, including any public or private street or alley, in such a manner as to be audible and discernable at a distance of one hundred (100) or more feet from the vehicle in which it is located. 
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles driven in a duly authorized parade, nor to motor vehicle alarms or other security devices, nor to the emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
(Ord. No. 3082, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 3180, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 23-71. - Specific prohibitions. 
The following acts are declared to be violations of this article. This enumeration shall not be construed to limit, in any way, the general prohibitions contained in section 23-69: 
(a)  Vehicle horns, signaling devices and similar devices. Sounding any horn, signaling device, or similar device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any right-of-way or in any public space continuously or intermittently for more than ten (10) consecutive seconds, except when the sounding of any such device is intended as a danger warning. 
(b)  Nonemergency signaling devices. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any amplified signal continuously or intermittently from any bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device intended primarily for nonemergency purposes from any one location for more than ten (10) consecutive seconds in any hourly period; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to the sounding of such devices by religious uses or by public bodies or agencies for testing, traffic control or other public purposes. 
(c)  Emergency signaling devices, security, burglar and fire alarms, etc. Sounding or permitting the continuous or intermittent sounding outdoors of any emergency signaling device, or any security, burglar or fire alarm, siren, whistle, or similar device, including without limitation any motor vehicle security alarm, siren, whistle, or similar device, for a period in excess of ten (10) minutes in any residential area and fifteen (15) minutes in any other area, except in response to a burglary, attempted burglary, fire, or other emergency. 
(d)  Audio and audio-visual devices, musical instruments, amplified sound etc., excluding those in motor vehicles. The playing or operation of any television, boombox, stereo, phonograph, radio, tape player, compact disc player, MP3 player, video player, musical instrument, drum, amplifier or any other device that produces, reproduces or amplifies sound except for those located in motor vehicles, where the sound, when measured in any public area including but not limited to any public street or sidewalk, or from other private property between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. exceeds eighty (80) dB(A), or between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. exceeds seventy-five (75) dB(A); provided, however that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any outdoor performance, parade, gathering, dance, concert, show, sporting event, or other event sponsored by the city or for which the city has granted a permit. 
(e)  Noise-sensitive areas. The making of any unreasonably loud and raucous noise within two hundred (200) feet of any school, place of worship, court, hospital, nursing home, or assisted-living facility while the same is being used as such, that substantially interferes with the workings of the institution. 
(f)  Construction equipment. The operation of any bulldozer, crane, backhoe, front loader, pile driver, jackhammer, pneumatic drill, or other construction equipment between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except as provided in section 23-67 above, or as specifically deemed necessary and authorized by a written document issued by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 3082, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 3180, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 23-72. - Sound levels; restaurants. 
No person shall permit, operate or cause any source of sound to create a sound level emanating from a restaurant during the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. in excess of eighty (80) dB(A), or between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in excess of seventy-five (75) dB(A) when measured from any public area including, but not limited to, any public streets or sidewalks, or other private property. 
(Ord. No. 3082, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 3180, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 23-73. - Severability. 
A determination of invalidity or unconstitutionality by a court of competent jurisdiction of any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts thereto. 
(Ord. No. 3082, 5-12-09)  
Chapter 24 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Amusements, Ch. 4; beaches, boats and waterways, Ch. 6; sleeping in public parks, § 23-55; overnight occupancy of camper vehicle on public property, § 23-56; public swimming pools, § 34-21 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to establish and maintain parks, playgrounds and recreation systems, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-15, 15.1-271, 15.1-272. See also, § 15.1-886. 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Creation and composition of department. 
There is hereby created a department of parks and recreation, which shall consist of the director of parks and recreation and such other employees as may be prescribed by the council or by the orders of the city manager consistent therewith. 
(Code 1965, § 2-144) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create departments, §§ 3.05(b), 7.01.  
Sec. 24-2. - Functions of department. 
The department of parks and recreation shall be responsible for operating and maintaining all public parks, playgrounds and recreation facilities and grounds within the city government and organizing and conducting recreation programs, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the council. 
(Code 1965, § 2-145; Ord. No. 2824, 5-25-04)  
Sec. 24-3. - Fees, policies, procedures, rules and regulations pertaining to the use of city parks, recreational facilities, and parks and recreation equipment. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the director of parks and recreation is hereby authorized to (i) establish reasonable fees, and (ii) adopt and enforce reasonable policies, procedures, rules and regulations, pertaining to the use of city parks, recreational facilities, and parks and recreation equipment, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(b)  The director of the Virginia Beach convention and visitors bureau is hereby authorized to (i) establish reasonable fees, and (ii) adopt and enforce reasonable policies, procedures, rules and regulations, pertaining to the use of city parks located in the resort area adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1965, § 2-1.1; Ord. No. 2454, 7-8-97; Ord. No. 2763, 5-13-03)  
Secs. 24-4, 24-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2454, adopted July 8, 1997, amended Ch. 24 by deleting provisions formerly codified as §§ 24-4 and 24-5, which set out fees for boating and fishing on lakes of Mount Trashmore Park and rules and regulations for use in lakes of Mount Trashmore Park, and which derived from Code 1965, §§ 6-11.3 and 6-11.4.  
Sec. 24-6. - Permit requirements for use of city parks. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall hold, organize, or sponsor any assemblage or gathering (hereinafter "event") in any city park (i) that will be attended by two hundred (200) or more persons, or (ii) that, regardless of the number of persons anticipated to be in attendance, will require the normal operations of the city park to be altered, unless a permit therefor has been granted by the director of parks and recreation. This permit shall be in addition to (i) any other permit that may be required by federal, state or local law, and (ii) payment of the applicable fee or fees, if any, established pursuant to section 24-3. 
(b)  Application: Contents and fee. An application for any permit required by this section shall be made to the director of parks and recreation, accompanied by the applicable nonrefundable processing fee established pursuant to section 24-3. The application must be submitted to the director of parks and recreation not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the proposed event, and not more than twelve (12) months prior to the date of the proposed event. The application shall contain the following information, utilizing a form provided by the department of parks and recreation: 
(1)  The name of the park; 
(2)  The nature, date, duration and estimated attendance of the event; 
(3)  Provisions for sanitation facilities, crowd, noise and traffic control, and parking; 
(4)  The designation of an individual or individuals who shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with (i) the provisions of this section, (ii) applicable policies, procedures, rules and regulations of the department of parks and recreation adopted pursuant to section 24-3, and (iii) any specific conditions of the permit; and 
(5)  Such other information as may reasonably be required by the director of parks and recreation. 
(c)  Application: Submission and processing requirements: 
(1)  A completed application shall be processed and either granted or denied within a reasonable time, but not more than forty-five (45) days following receipt thereof. A decision to deny an application shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for denial, and shall be provided to the applicant either in person or at the address stated in the application. 
(2)  If an application is submitted to the city less than thirty (30) days prior to a proposed event, the director of parks and recreation may modify the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) upon a demonstration by the applicant, in writing, that circumstances giving rise to the proposed event did not reasonably allow the applicant to apply for a permit within the time prescribed. 
(d)  Permit approval process. Except as provided in subsection (i) of this section, the permit shall be granted by the director of parks and recreation if the proposed use of the city park: 
(1)  Will not generate excessive or unreasonable traffic or noise or otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare; and 
(2)  Will not be so extensive or require the use of such portion of the city park as to unreasonably interfere with the primary use or uses for which such park is designed or intended. 
(e)  Permit requirements: 
(1)  The permittee shall comply with all policies, procedures, rules and regulations for pertaining to the use of city parks as adopted by the director of parks and recreation. 
(2)  The director of parks and recreation may impose, as conditions to granting a permit, such further requirements and restrictions as may be determined to be reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, peace and order. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
(i)  The payment of a reasonable fee for the use of such park, based upon the additional maintenance and/or other costs incurred by the city in relation to such use, not to exceed the actual costs incurred by the city; 
(ii)  The provision of adequate security personnel and parking attendants; 
(iii)  The posting of a performance bond or other surety securing payment of the aforesaid fee and compliance with any and all conditions of the permit; 
(iv)  Proof of liability insurance underwritten by insurers acceptable to the city, indemnifying the applicant against any perils, suits, claims and losses which may arise in connection with the proposed activity. Such coverage shall be in amounts consistent with a standard schedule approved by the city, based upon risks associated with each type of event, in consideration of anticipated attendance; 
(v)  A limitation upon the number of persons who may assemble in the requested area; 
(vi)  Designation of an area compatible with anticipated crowd size and proposed activities; 
(vii)  Any of the additional requirements for special events set forth in section 4-1 of this code. 
(f)  Notice of denial; hearing. In the event the application fails to meet any one (1) or more of the criteria set forth in subsections (d) and (e) of this section, the permit shall be denied; however, prior to any final decision to deny a permit, the applicant shall be apprised of the reason(s) for such denial and shall be entitled to a hearing before the city manager or his designee. 
(g)  Grant of permit subject to terms and conditions. If a permit is denied because the proposed use of a park is so extensive or requires the use of such portion thereof as will substantially interfere with the primary use or uses for which such park is designed or intended, the city council may, in its discretion, direct that the permit be granted, subject to such terms and conditions as the city council may deem proper. No such action shall be taken by the city council except upon public notice and hearing. Such notice shall be by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city not less than seven (7), nor more than fourteen (14), days prior to the hearing and by posting of a sign at the proposed place of gathering. The cost of such notice shall be borne by the applicant. 
(h)  Exceptions for expressive activities: 
(1)  Liability insurance, payment of the permit fee and administrative costs, and provision of security personnel and parking attendants may be partially or completely waived for any noncommercial event which is held strictly for the purpose of expressive activity upon a demonstration, in writing, by the applicant (i) that the applicant is financially unable to pay the costs of such fees and services and (ii) that the right to engage in expressive activity would be unreasonably curtailed by failure to waive such requirements; provided, however, that insurance may be required for collateral activities such as food service and the use of structures and equipment which present a demonstrable risk or hazard. 
(2)  Upon a demonstration that enforcement of the limitation provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section would unreasonably restrict the right of free expression, the director of parks and recreation shall waive the time prescribed for advance notice of an event and impose only such provisions as will not unreasonably restrict the element of timeliness of the expressive activity. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, the term "expressive activity" means a public gathering, procession or parade, the primary purpose of which is the exercise of the rights of assembly and free speech as guaranteed by the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States. 
(i)  Denial or revocation of permit: 
(1)  The director of parks and recreation shall have the authority to deny an application or to revoke a permit for any of the following reasons: 
(i)  Violation of any of the provisions of this section; 
(ii)  Violation of any applicable policies, procedures, rules and/or regulations adopted by the director of parks and recreation pursuant to section 24-3 of this code; 
(iii)  Violation of any specific condition(s) of the permit; 
(iv)  A material misrepresentation, intentional or otherwise, made on or in connection with the application; or 
(v)  When denial of an application or revocation of a permit is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, or is necessary for environmental considerations. 
(2)  In the event a permit is revoked, the director of parks and recreation shall so notify the sponsor, or the individual(s) designated pursuant to subsection (b)(4), who shall cause the persons who are attending the event to immediately leave the city park at which the event is being held. 
(j)  Administration. The city manager may designate one (1) or more officers or employees of the city to administer the provisions of this section. 
(k)  Violation. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2137, 6-9-92; Ord. No. 2454, 7-8-97)  
Chapter 25 - PAWNBROKERS; JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Records to be kept by dealers in secondhand bicycles and mopeds, § 7-6; dealers not to purchase secondhand bicycles and mopeds from minors, § 7-7; license tax of dealers in precious metals and gems, § 18-76.1; license tax for junk and secondhand dealers, § 18-86; license tax for pawnbrokers, § 18-92; purchase of junk or secondhand articles from minors, § 23-36. 
State Law reference— Junk and secondhand dealers, Code of Virginia, §§ 54-825—54-836; pawnbrokers, §§ 54-840—54-859. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 25-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Junk dealer. The term "junk dealer" means any person who purchases, sells, barters or exchanges any kind of secondhand articles, junk, rags, rag cullings, bones, bottles, puer, scrap, metals, metal drosses, steel, iron, old lead or lead pipe, old bathroom fixtures, old rubber, old rubber articles or other like commodities, except paper and except furniture, clothes, shoes and stoves intended to be resold for use as such. 
Pawnbroker. The word "pawnbroker" means any person who shall, in any manner, lend or advance money or other things for profit on the pledge and possession of personal property or other valuable things, other than securities or written or printed evidences of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable things on condition of selling the same back to the seller at a stipulated price. 
Secondhand dealer. The term "secondhand dealer" means any person who buys, sells, barters or exchanges used or secondhand articles, such as firearms, jewelry, office machines, household appliances, radios, television sets, electronic equipment, sporting equipment, photographic equipment, heating or plumbing fixtures or supplies, electrical fixtures or wiring, gas fixtures or appliances, water faucets, pipes, locks, bathtubs or any other secondhand merchandise intended to be resold for use as such. This definition does not include those persons who exclusively buy, sell, barter or exchange used or secondhand clothing, furniture and non-electronic children's articles. 
(Code 1965, § 24-1; Ord. No. 3257, 8-14-12) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions of "junk dealer" and "pawnbroker," Code of Virginia, §§ 54-825, 54-840.  
Sec. 25-2. - Violations of article generally. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to any penalty that may be imposed for a violation of this article, upon conviction of any pawnbroker, junk dealer or secondhand dealer of a violation of this article, the judge of a court of competent jurisdiction may, at his discretion, revoke the license of the offender. 
(Code 1965, § 24-13)  
Sec. 25-3. - Exceptions from article. 
Nothing contained in this article shall apply to any licensed retail merchant accepting secondhand merchandise as partial payment or as trade-in on new merchandise of the same or similar type or to (1) any nonprofit, charitable, religious or educational organization; (2) any corporation that operates a retail store on behalf of a nonprofit, charitable, religious, or educational organization; or (3) any properly licensed antique dealer; provided, however, that this exception does not apply to those who deal primarily in new and used firearms. 
(Code 1965, § 24-12; Ord. No. 3439, 4-5-16)  
Sec. 25-4. - Identification of persons from whom property received. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer to purchase, barter or exchange or in any manner obtain from any person any articles described in section 25-1 without first requiring such person to exhibit sufficient evidence of his identity. 
(Code 1965, § 24-2)  
Sec. 25-5. - Certain transactions prohibited between 10:00 p.m. and sunrise. 
(a)  No pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall purchase, barter or exchange any of the articles referred to in section 25-1 between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and sunrise of the following morning. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 24-11; Ord. No. 2423, 9-24-96) 
State Law reference— Purchases by junk dealers to be made only between sunrise and sunset, Code of Virginia, § 54-828.  
Sec. 25-6. - Daily reports to chief of police. 
(a)  All pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers and junk dealers shall furnish daily, by noon, to the chief of police or his designee, a true and correct report, of all items pawned, purchased, sold, bartered or exchanged or otherwise coming into his possession, during the preceding business day, except such as is purchased at public auction. Each item included in the report shall be described as accurately as possible and shall include any brand name, model number, serial number, initial or name or any other identifying marks found on the item. The report shall include the full name of the person pawning, pledging, or selling the goods, article, or thing; residence address; telephone number; the identification card type, number, and issuing agency recorded from a government-issued identification card bearing a photograph of the pledger or seller presented during the transaction; a photograph or digital image of the form of identification used by the pledger or seller; and a description of the pledger or seller, including the height, weight, date of birth, race, gender, hair and eye color, and any other identifying marks, of such person. The report shall be submitted in an electronic format as provided by the chief of police or his designee. 
(b)  If the purchase, sale or acquisition occurs during a weekend or holiday, then the submittal of the electronic report required in subsection (a) above shall be made no later than noon the next regular business day. 
(c)  For each loan or transaction, a pawnbroker, junk dealer or secondhand dealer may charge a service fee for making daily electronic reports as required above. Such fee shall not exceed five (5) percent of the amount of the loan or transaction, or three dollars ($3.00), whichever is less. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 24-8; Ord. No. 2851, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 3101, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 3404, 4-21-15, eff. 6-1-15) 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers' reports, Code of Virginia, § 54-853.  
Sec. 25-7. - Duty to allow removal of stolen property. 
Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall, upon reasonable demand and with just cause, after obtaining a proper receipt, allow the removal of any merchandise suspected of being, or identified as, stolen property, by any police officer. 
(Code 1965, § 24-9)  
Sec. 25-8. - Pawnbroker's records. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of each loan or transaction in the course of his business, including transactions in which secondhand goods, wares, or merchandise is purchased for resale. The account shall be recorded at the time of the loan or transaction and shall include: 
(1)  A description, serial number, and a statement of ownership of the goods, article or thing pawned or pledged or received on account of money loaned thereon or purchased for resale; 
(2)  The time, date, and place of the transaction; 
(3)  The amount of money loaned thereon at the time of pledging the same or paid as the purchase price; 
(4)  The rate of interest to be paid on such loan; 
(5)  The fees charged by the pawnbroker, itemizing each fee charged; 
(6)  The full name, residence address, telephone number, and driver's license number or other form of identification of the person pawning or pledging or selling the goods, article or thing, together with a particular description, including the height, weight, date of birth, race, gender, hair and eye color, and any other identifying marks of such person; 
(7)  Verification of the identification by the exhibition of a government-issued identification card bearing a photograph of the person pawning, pledging, or selling the goods, article, or thing, such as a driver's license or state identification card. The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon; 
(8)  A digital image of the form of identification used by the person involved in the transaction; 
(9)  As to loans, the terms and conditions of the loan, including the period for which any such loan may be made; and 
(10)  All other facts and circumstances respecting such loan or purchase. 
(b)  The chief of police shall promulgate regulations specifying the nature of the particular description for the purposes of subsection (6) above and he shall promulgate regulations specifying the nature of identifying credentials of the person pawning, pledging, or selling the goods, article, or thing. Such credentials shall be examined by the pawnbroker, and an appropriate record retained thereof. 
(c)  The records, either written or electronic, required to be kept by this section shall, at all reasonable times, be open to inspection by judges of the criminal courts and all law-enforcement officers. If maintained electronically, a pawnbroker shall retain the electronic records for at least one (1) year after the date of the transaction. 
(d)  For each loan or transaction, a pawnbroker may charge a service fee for making the daily electronic reports to the appropriate law-enforcement officers, creating and maintaining the electronic records required under this section, and investigating the legal title to property being pawned or pledged or purchased. Such fee shall not exceed five (5) percent of the amount loaned on such item or paid by the pawnbroker for such item or three dollars ($3.00), whichever is less. 
(e)  No goods, article, or thing shall be pawned or pledged or received on account of money loaned or purchased for resale if the original serial number affixed to the goods, article, or thing has been removed, defaced, or altered. 
(f)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, §§ 24-5, 24-6; Ord. No. 1991, 7-9-90; Ord. No. 2851, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 3404, 4-21-15, eff. 6-1-15) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 54-851, 54-852.  
Sec. 25-9. - Note or memorandum of pawn to include schedule of interest and charges. 
Before delivering the note or memorandum required by section 54-846 of the Code of Virginia to a person pawning or pledging any goods, articles or things, a pawnbroker shall enter, on the back of such note or memorandum, a schedule of the rate of interest and charges allowed to such pawnbroker by law. 
(Code 1965, § 24-10)  
Sec. 25-10. - Junk dealer's records. 
Every junk dealer and every merchant and foundryman who deals in junk, bronze metals, bronze plaques, bronze statuaries, old metals and similar articles shall keep, at his place of business, and every canvasser shall carry and keep with him, a book in which shall be fairly written in English, at the time of each transaction in the course of his business, an accurate account of such transaction, except as to the purchase of rags, bones, old iron and paper, setting forth a description of the goods, articles or other thing purchased, the time of receiving the same, the name and residence of the person selling or delivering the same, the terms and conditions of purchase or receipt thereof and all other facts and circumstances respecting such purchase or receipt. Such book shall, at all times, be subject to the inspection of the judges of the criminal courts and all law-enforcement officers. 
(Code 1965, § 24-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-832.  
Sec. 25-11. - Search of premises; seizure of missing or stolen property. 
Every junk dealer and canvasser, every merchant and foundryman referred to in section 25-9 and every pawnbroker and employee of a pawnbroker shall admit to his premises, at any time, any judge of a criminal court or any law-enforcement officer to examine any books or other records on the premises or in his possession, as well as the articles purchased, pledged, pawned or received, and to search for and take into possession any article known by such judge or officer to be missing or known or believed by him to be stolen, without the formality of a search warrant or any other process, and such search or seizure is hereby authorized. 
(Code 1965, §§ 24-4, 24-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 54-834, 54-854.  
Sec. 25-12. - Limitation as to number of pawnshops. 
(a)  No more than fifteen (15) pawnshops shall be licensed to operate in the city at any one time. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), any pawnshop licensed to operate in the city as of the date of adoption of this section may remain so licensed as long as such pawnshop shall remain continuously in operation. 
(c)  The commissioner of revenue shall not issue any license to operate a pawnshop, except to renew any license in good standing, unless the number of pawnshops licensed has been reduced below the maximum prescribed herein. 
(d)  When the number of pawnshops in the city has reached the maximum prescribed herein, the commissioner of revenue shall file a statement with the circuit court that the maximum number of pawnshops authorized to be operated in the city has been reached. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, the term "pawnshop" shall be deemed to include pawnbrokers' sales stores. 
(Ord. No. 2191, 11-10-92)  
Secs. 25-13—25-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS, JUNKYARDS AND DUMPS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— License tax for wrecking or salvaging automobiles, § 18-116; provisions of traffic code relative to abandoned, inoperative, etc., vehicles, §§ 21-376, 21-377; solid waste, Ch. 31; city refuse disposal areas, § 31-61 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate operation and maintenance of automobile graveyards and junkyards, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 25-23. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Automobile graveyard. The term "automobile graveyard" means any lot or parcel which is exposed to the weather and upon which more than five (5) motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, and which it would not be economically practical to make operative, are placed, located or found. 
Dump. The term "dump" means any lot or parcel of land, water or part thereof used for the disposal, by abandonment, dumping, burial, burning or any other means, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery or waste materials of any kind. 
Junkyard. The term "junkyard" means any lot or parcel of land, structure or part thereof used for the collection, storage and sale of wastepaper, rags or scrap metal or discarded material, or for the collection, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition and for the sale of parts thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 24-14) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions of "automobile graveyard" and "junkyard," Code of Virginia, § 33.1-348.  
Sec. 25-24. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 25-25. - Fencing. 
Each automobile graveyard, junkyard and dump located in the city shall be completely enclosed by a board or masonry fence, eight (8) feet or more in height, which shall be kept neatly painted and in good repair for the purpose of excluding the premises from the public view. Such fence shall not be constructed closer than fifty (50) feet to the nearest right-of-way and shall not be used for the purpose of advertising anything other than the place of business and such advertising shall be limited to four (4) feet by eight (8) feet. 
(Code 1965, § 24-15) 
State Law reference— Screening of junkyards and automobile graveyards adjacent to highways, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-348.  
Sec. 25-26. - Contents of premises not to extend above height of fence. 
The contents of an automobile graveyard, junkyard or dump shall not be placed or deposited to a height greater than the height of the fence required by section 25-25. 
(Code 1965, § 24-15)  
Sec. 25-27. - Abutting streets and sidewalks to be kept clear of junked vehicles and waste matter. 
Sidewalks and streets abutting an automobile graveyard, junkyard or dump shall be kept clear of all vehicles incapable of being operated under their own power and trash or other waste matter. 
(Code 1965, § 24-16) 
Cross reference— General duty of property owners and occupants to keep abutting streets and sidewalks free of litter, § 33-13.  
Sec. 25-28. - Record of purchases to be kept by proprietor of automobile graveyard. 
The proprietor of an automobile graveyard shall maintain an accurate record, open for inspection to all city officials and law-enforcement officers, showing the make, state license number, state certificate of title, motor number, body number, style and seating capacity of vehicles purchased, together with such other information concerning such property as may be necessary to establish the ownership of all such vehicles. 
(Code 1965, § 24-17)  
Secs. 25-29—25-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— General authority of city as to permits, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-906. 
 
Sec. 25-36. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, locate, operate or maintain any automobile graveyard, junkyard or dump within the city, unless he has a current permit so to do issued pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1965, § 24-18)  
Sec. 25-37. - Application. 
Application for a permit required by this division shall be made to the secretary of the planning commission. Such application shall contain a plat or drawing showing the location of the proposed automobile graveyard, junkyard or dump with relation to highway rights-of-way, street names and ownership of land involved, size of lot or parcel, location of homes in the area and such other pertinent data as may be required by the secretary of the planning commission. 
(Code 1965, §§ 24-19, 24-20)  
Sec. 25-38. - Fee. 
Every application for a permit under this division shall be accompanied by a fee in the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), payable to the city treasurer, to be used to defray the costs of investigation and of processing the application in question. Such fee shall not be refundable. 
(Code 1965, § 24-21)  
Sec. 25-39. - Procedure for issuance or denial. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit under this division, the secretary of the planning commission shall transmit the same to the planning commission for study and report. The planning commission shall then transmit such application, together with its recommendations thereon, to the city council, which shall either authorize the issuance of the permit or deny the application. 
(Code 1965, § 24-19)  
Sec. 25-40. - Expiration and renewal. 
A permit required by this division shall be issued for the calendar year in which application is made and shall expire on December thirty-first of the year in which issued. Such permit shall be renewed within thirty (30) days following the expiration date. If not renewed, the use for which the permit was issued shall be discontinued within sixty (60) days after such permit has expired. The procedure provided by this division for obtaining permits shall apply to any person making application for the re-establishment of an automobile graveyard, junkyard or dump after such use has been so discontinued. 
(Code 1965, §§ 24-22, 24-23)  
Sec. 25-41. - Revocation. 
If any automobile graveyard, junkyard or dump operated pursuant to a permit issued under this division is found to be causing a hardship through location and is found to be impairing the health, safety or morals of the public, the permit in question shall be revoked by the city council and the automobile graveyard, junkyard or dump in question shall be removed, at the expense of the owner, as directed by the director of public works. 
(Code 1965, § 24-24)  
Secs. 25-42—25-50. - Reserved.  
Chapter 25.1 - PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALERS 
 
Sec. 25.1-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning: 
"Coin" means any piece of gold, silver or other metal fashioned into a prescribed shape, weight and degree of fineness, stamped by authority of a government with certain marks and devices, and having a certain fixed value as money. 
"Dealer" means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaged in the business of (i) purchasing secondhand precious metals or gems; (ii) removing in any manner precious metals or gems from manufactured articles not then owned by the person, firm, partnership, or corporation; or (iii) buying, acquiring, or selling precious metals or gems removed from manufactured articles. "Dealer" includes all employers and principals on whose behalf a purchase is made, and any employee or agent who makes any purchase for or on behalf of his employer or principal. 
The definition of "dealer" shall not include persons engaged in the following: 
(1)  Purchases of precious metals or gems directly from other dealers, manufacturers, or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories, provided that the selling dealer has complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Purchases of precious metals or gems from a qualified fiduciary who is disposing of the assets of an estate being administered by the fiduciary. 
(3)  Acceptance by a retail merchant of trade-in merchandise previously sold by the retail merchant to the person presenting that merchandise for trade-in. 
(4)  Repairing, restoring or designing jewelry by a retail merchant, if such activities are within his normal course of business. 
(5)  Purchases of precious metals or gems by industrial refiners and manufacturers, insofar as such purchases are made directly from retail merchants, wholesalers, dealers, or by mail originating outside the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(6)  Persons regularly engaged in the business of purchasing and processing nonprecious scrap metals which incidentally may contain traces of precious metals recoverable as a by-product. 
"Gems" means any item containing precious or semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry. 
"Precious metals" means any item except coins composed in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum, or platinum alloys. 
(Ord. No. 3219, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)  
Sec. 25.1-2. - Permit required; method of obtaining permit; no convictions of certain crimes; approval of weighing devices; renewal; permanent location required; bond required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the activities of a dealer as defined in section 25.1-1 without first obtaining a permit from the Virginia Beach Police Department Pawn Unit. 
(b)  To obtain a permit, the dealer shall file an application form which includes the dealer's full name, any aliases, address, age, date of birth, sex, and fingerprints; the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant's employer, if any; and the location of the dealer's place of business. The dealer shall include a valid copy of the business lease agreement, or proof of building ownership, with the permit application. Upon filing this application and the payment of the application fee set forth in section 27-3(b)(5), the dealer shall be issued a permit by the Chief of Police or his designee, provided that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within seven (7) years prior to the date of application and has no such charges pending court disposition. The permit may be denied if the applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked under any other local ordinance or state statute similar in substance to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Before a permit may be issued, the dealer must have all weighing devices used in his business inspected and approved by local or state weights and measures officials and present written evidence of such approval to the Virginia Beach Police Department Pawn Unit. 
(d)  This permit shall be valid from the date issued through December 31 st of the issue year and may be renewed in the same manner as such permit was initially obtained with the annual permit fee set forth in section 27-3(b)(5). No permit shall be transferable to any other location or individual. 
(e)  Every dealer at the time of obtaining such permit shall obtain and provide to the city a bond secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this Commonwealth, in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned upon strict compliance with the terms of this chapter. In lieu of a bond, a dealer may cause to be issued by a bank authorized to do business in the Commonwealth a letter of credit in favor of the city for ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(f)  If the business of the dealer is not operated without interruption, with Saturdays, Sundays, and recognized holidays excepted, the dealer shall notify the Virginia Beach Pawn Unit of all closings and reopenings of such business. The business of a dealer shall be conducted only from the fixed and permanent location specified in his application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. 3219, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12; Ord. No. 3463, 9-20-16)  
Sec. 25.1-3. - Penalties; first and subsequent offenses. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor for the first offense. Upon conviction of any subsequent offense he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Upon the first conviction of a dealer for violation of any provision of this chapter, the Chief of Police may revoke or suspend the dealer's permit for up to one full year from the date the conviction becomes final. Upon a second conviction, the Chief of Police shall revoke the permit for two (2) full years from the date the conviction becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 3219, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)  
Sec. 25.1-4. - Records to be kept; daily electronic report to police. 
(a)  Every dealer shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of each purchase of precious metals or gems. The record of each purchase shall be retained by the dealer for at least twenty-four (24) months and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  A complete description of all precious metals or gems purchased from each seller. The description shall include all names, initials, serial numbers or other identifying marks or monograms on each item purchased, the true weight and purity, if known, of any precious metal, the true weight or carat of any gem, the color of any gem or precious metal, and the price paid for each item; 
(2)  The date, time and place of receiving the items purchased; 
(3)  The full name, residence address, work place, home and work telephone numbers, date of birth, sex, race, height, weight, hair and eye color, and other identifying marks of the seller; 
(4)  Verification of the identification of the seller by the exhibition of a government-issued identification card with a photograph of the seller, such as a driver's license or state identification card. The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the identification card number thereon; 
(5)  A statement of ownership from the seller; and 
(6)  A digital image of the form of identification used by the seller. 
(b)  The information required by subdivisions (1) through (5) of subsection (a) of this section shall appear on each bill of sale for all precious metals and gems purchased by a dealer. 
(c)  The information required by subdivisions (1) through (4) and the digital image of the form of government-issued identification used by the seller required by subdivision (6) of subsection (a) of this section shall be submitted in an electronic format to the Chief of Police as specified by the Chief of Police or his designee. The electronic transaction report shall be submitted by noon the following day, except on weekends and holidays, when the electronic transaction report shall be submitted by noon the next regular business day. Faxing the information is not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 3219, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12; Ord. No. 3298, 7-9-13; Ord. No. 3404, 4-21-15, eff. 6-1-15)  
Sec. 25.1-5. - Officers may examine records or property; warrantless search and seizure authorized. 
Every dealer or his employee shall admit to his place of business during regular business hours any Virginia Beach police officer or any law-enforcement officer of the state or federal government. The dealer or his employee shall permit the officer to (i) examine all records required by this chapter and any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer to be missing, stolen or the focus of an inspection conducted by officers assigned to the Virginia Beach Pawn Unit and (ii) search for and take into possession any article known to him to be missing, or known or believed by him to have been stolen. 
(Ord. No. 3219, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)  
Sec. 25.1-6. - Prohibited purchases. 
(a)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who is under the age of eighteen. 
(b)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who the dealer believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of such items, unless the seller has written and duly authenticated authorization from the owner permitting and directing such sale. 
(c)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems without first (i) ascertaining the identity of the seller by requiring an identification issued by a governmental agency with a photograph of the seller thereon, and at least one other corroborating means of identification, and (ii) obtaining a statement of ownership from the seller. 
(Ord. No. 3219, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)  
Sec. 25.1-7. - Dealer to retain purchases. 
(a)  The dealer shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a minimum of fifteen (15) calendar days from the date the electronic daily report required under section 25.1-4 above is received by the Virginia Beach Police Department Pawn Unit. Until the expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter, or dispose of a purchased item in whole or in part, or remove it from the City of Virginia Beach. 
(b)  If a dealer performs the service of removing precious metals or gems, he shall retain the metals or gems removed and the article from which the removal was made for a period of fifteen (15) calendar days after receiving such article and precious metals or gems. 
(Ord. No. 3219, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)  
Sec. 25.1-8. - Record of disposition. 
Each dealer shall maintain for at least twenty-four (24) months an accurate and legible record of the name and address of the person, firm, or corporation to which he sells any precious metal or gem in its original form after the waiting period required by section 25.1-7. This record shall also show the name and address of the seller from whom the dealer purchased the item. 
(Ord. No. 3219, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)  
Sec. 25.1-9. - Exemptions from chapter. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the sale or purchase of coins. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any bank, branch thereof, trust company or bank holding company, or any wholly owned subsidiary thereof, engaged in buying and selling gold and silver bullion. 
(Ord. No. 3219, 2-28-12, eff. 4-1-12)  
Chapter 26 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Permit for sales and solicitations on boardwalk and adjacent areas, § 6-8; street vendors of food products, § 13-36 et seq.; license tax for agents selling books, magazines and periodicals, § 18-47; license taxes for peddlers, §§ 18-93—18-98; license tax for solicitors for photographers, film developers, etc., § 18-100; disturbing noise by peddlers, § 23-47(a)(4). 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate or prohibit peddling, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-866. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Violations of chapter generally. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1410, 10-24-83)  
Sec. 26-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1410, adopted Oct. 24, 1983, deleted the provisions of § 26-2, "Going on residential premises without invitation," which had derived from Code 1965, § 18-1.  
Sec. 26-3. - Peddling or selling on or in public parks, public buildings, or on public property in the Resort Tourist or Oceanfront Resort Districts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of selling or offering for sale, renting, or offering for rent or taking orders for, goods, wares, merchandise, beverages, foods, prepackaged or otherwise, or any service whatsoever, to or from any prospective customers or passersby while such person, prospective customer or passerby is in any public park, on the grounds of the city municipal complex, in any city-owned or - leased building, or on public property in the RT-1, RT-3, or RT-4 Resort Tourist Districts or the OR Oceanfront Resort District without obtaining a permit from the city manager or his or her designee as set forth in subsection (d) of this section. Such permit shall be in addition to any other permit required by this Code. 
(b)  The restriction set forth in subsection (a) above shall not be applicable to: 
(1)  Special events conducted pursuant to a permit granted under section 4-1 of this Code; 
(2)  Events conducted pursuant to the city's contract for general entertainment and major events; 
(3)  Duly licensed or permitted concessions granted by the city pursuant to a competitive procurement process; 
(4)  Franchises granted in accordance with section 15.2-2100 et seq. of the Code of Virginia; or 
(5)  Activities commonly associated with expression as guaranteed by the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Public property in the RT-1, RT-3, or RT-4 Resort Tourist Districts or the OR Oceanfront Resort District shall include, without limitation, the boardwalk, the grassy area adjacent thereto, streets, alleys, sidewalks, bicycle paths, parks, the sand beach, city-owned or operated facilities, and all other public property. 
(2)  The terms selling, offering for sale, renting, offering for rent, or taking orders for shall include selling or taking orders for goods, wares, merchandise, food, beverages, prepackaged or otherwise, or any service whatsoever from a walk-up window or an opening on private property adjacent to a public right-of-way, public alley, or other public property. 
(d)  An application for a permit required by this section shall be filed with the city manager's office, on forms provided by the city, and processed as follows: 
(1)  A completed application shall be processed and either granted or denied within thirty (30) days of receipt of such application. All decisions shall be in writing, setting forth the conditions of the permit, if granted, or the reasons for denial. 
(2)  No permit shall be granted unless the city manager or his or her designee finds that: 
(i)  In consideration of factors such as public safety, noise, and vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the proposed activity will not unreasonably interfere with the normal and intended use of the public property by the city or the general public; 
(ii)  The proposed activity will not adversely affect the city's efforts to protect the general welfare and to promote tranquility and the high quality of life associated with resort community living and recreation; and 
(iii)  The proposed activity is not inconsistent with city policies for the use of the public property at the particular location. 
(3)  The city manager or his or her designee may impose, as conditions to granting a permit, such further requirements and restrictions as will reasonably protect the public health, safety, welfare, peace, and order. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
(i)  A limitation on the dates and hours of operation, the number of peddlers or salespersons, or location of the peddling or sales activity; and/or 
(ii)  The provision of adequate crowd and traffic control, food handling, waste and refuse disposal, and noise restrictions. 
(4)  The city manager or his or her designee is authorized to revoke or suspend any permit previously granted: (i) for violation of any provision of this code or of any condition of the permit; (ii) for damage to city property; (iii) for any material misrepresentation, intentional or otherwise, made in connection with the application; (iv) when weather conditions render the subject activity unsafe; or (v) when revocation or suspension is required in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare, or environmental considerations. In the event a permit is revoked or suspended, the permittee shall immediately discontinue, or cause to be discontinued, the activity for which the permit was granted, but shall be thereafter entitled to a hearing before the city manager or his or her designee concerning the revocation or suspension within ten (10) days of the date of such revocation or suspension. 
(6)  A permit granted under the provisions of this section shall expire after such period as determined by the city manager or his or her designee, not to exceed one (1) year from the date of issuance. The holder of the permit may thereafter apply for a new permit as set forth in subsection (d) (1). 
(7)  No permit issued under this section shall be transferred to another person or entity without the approval of the city manager or his or her designee. Such approval, if granted, shall be granted in the same manner as for original applications for permits. 
(8)  In addition to any penalty imposed under section 26-1, the city may institute legal action to enjoin a continuing violation of any of the provisions of this section or any terms and conditions of a permit issued pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1965, § 18-1.1; Ord. No. 1410, 10-24-83; Ord. No. 1990, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 2483, 4-24-98; Ord. No. 3252, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 26-3.1. - Peddling or selling on public property in the resort area during the prime resort season. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of selling or offering for sale, or renting or offering for rent, any goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, refreshments or other kinds of property or services whatsoever in the "resort area" during the "prime resort season" while such person or any table, stand, cart, trailer, or similar structural component of such person's activity is located on public property. 
(b)  The restriction set forth in subsection (a) above shall not be applicable to: 
(1)  Special events conducted pursuant to a permit granted under section 4-1 of this Code; 
(2)  Events conducted pursuant to the city's contract for general entertainment and major events; 
(3)  Duly-licensed or permitted concessions granted by the city pursuant to a competitive procurement process; 
(4)  Franchises granted in accordance with section 15.2-2100 et seq. of the Code of Virginia; or 
(5)  The sale, or offer for sale, of publications of general circulation. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Public property shall include, without limitation, the boardwalk, the grassy area adjacent thereto, streets, alleys, sidewalks, bicycle paths, parks, the sand beach, city-owned or operated facilities, and all other public property. 
(2)  Publication of general circulation shall mean a publication which is published at regular intervals primarily for the dissemination of news, intelligence and opinions on recent events or newsworthy items of a general nature and which is available to the general public. 
(3)  Resort area shall mean the area bordered on the north by the northernmost curb line of 38th Street, on the east by the mean low water line of the Atlantic Ocean, on the south by Rudee Inlet, and on the west by the imaginary line running north to south, fifteen (15) feet to the west of the westernmost curb line of Pacific Avenue. 
(4)  Prime resort season shall mean the period from, and including, the fifteenth day of April, to and including, the thirtieth day of September of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2385, 5-14-96; Ord. No 2484, 4-28-98)  
Secs. 26-4—26-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COMMERCIAL SOLICITATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-16. - Purpose statement. 
Soliciting, selling or taking orders for goods, wares, merchandise, publications, any article for future delivery, or any service or commodity whatsoever upon the premises of any private residence, apartment house, or other place of human habitation not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant thereof, presents an opportunity for greater deception, confusion and fraud that is not present in other commercial transactions. The city believes that reasonable measures, including a permit program, will serve the purpose of discouraging fraud, protecting privacy, deterring crime and promoting the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 3480, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 26-17. - General restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person selling, soliciting or taking orders pursuant to a permit issued under this article to solicit, sell or take orders by using any unreasonably loud or disturbing or unnecessary noise or language of such character, intensity or duration as to disturb or annoy the quiet, comfort or repose of any person or neighborhood, or by touching or interfering with the person or freedom of prospective customers or passersby. In no event shall such person so selling, soliciting or taking orders interfere in any manner with the orderly flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1965, § 18-3; Ord. No. 1410, 10-24-83) 
Cross reference— General prohibition against interference with traffic, § 21-34.  
Sec. 26-18. - Responsibility and liability of employers of solicitors. 
Any person who employs others to sell, solicit or take orders under a permit issued under this article, as well as the employer of a group of persons selling, soliciting or taking orders without a permit, shall be held responsible and liable for the acts of his employees and shall be deemed in violation of this article in the same manner as though he were the actual employee in question. 
(Code 1965, § 18-19; Ord. No. 1410, 10-24-83)  
Secs. 26-19—26-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Permit for sales and solicitations on boardwalk and adjacent areas, § 6-8. 
State Law reference— General authority of city with respect to permits, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-906. 
 
Sec. 26-26. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in soliciting, selling or taking orders for goods, wares, merchandise, publications, any article for future delivery, or any service or commodity whatsoever upon the premises of any private residence, apartment house, or other place of human habitation not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant thereof, in the city, unless he has a current permit so to do from the Police Department (hereinafter "Department"). 
(b)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to those who sell or offer for sale in person or by their employees ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, fish, oysters, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature or farm products grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale; persons licensed by the state under Code of Virginia (1950), title 38.1, as amended; persons licensed by the Virginia Real Estate Commission, pursuant to Code of Virginia (1950), § 54-749, as amended; such activities when they are conducted on behalf of a nonprofit charitable, civic or religious organization; outdoor sales and exchanges which occur as an incidental part of the retail sales activity of a merchant regularly conducting business from a permanent building where such sales are conducted on the premises of the building and in close proximity to said building; occasional garage sales in residential areas; sales made at flea markets duly licensed by the city; or sales by wholesale merchants to retail merchants or industrial or commercial establishments. 
(c)  Soliciting with a valid permit upon a private residence that displays a "No Solicitation" or similar sign shall constitute a class three misdemeanor for a first offense and a class two misdemeanor for a second or subsequent offense within a twelve-month period. 
(Code 1965, § 18-4; Ord. No. 1410, 10-24-83; Ord. No. 1456, 6-4-84; Ord. No. 3480, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 26-27. - Filing and contents of application. 
Any person desiring a permit required by this division shall make application thereof to the Police Chief or his authorized designee (hereafter "Police Chief") in writing on a form to be furnished by the Department, which application shall show: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and of each employee who will operate under the permit; 
(2)  The name and address of the firm or corporation which such applicant represents; 
(3)  The kind of goods, ware or merchandise offered for sale; 
(4)  Whether such applicant, upon any order obtained, will demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery; 
(5)  The period of time during which such applicant wishes to solicit, sell and take orders in the city; 
(6)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, the nature of the offense or violation, the penalty or punishment imposed, the date and jurisdiction of the conviction, and other pertinent details thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 18-6; Ord. No. 1410, 10-24-83; Ord. No. 3480, 12-13-16)  
Secs. 26-28, 26-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3480, adopted December 13, 2016, repealed §§ 26-28, 26-29, which pertained to applicant's references and filing of fingerprints of applicant and employees. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 26-30. - Photographs of applicant and employees required. 
Upon receipt of application, the police department shall take a photograph of the applicant for use in the solicitation permit. 
(Code 1965, § 18-11; Ord. No. 1410, 10-24-83; Ord. No. 3480, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 26-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3480, adopted December 13, 2016, repealed § 26-31, which pertained to applicant's bond. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 26-32. - Fee. 
An application filed under this division shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00). Such fee shall be for the purpose of covering administration costs and is not to be returned to the applicant if a permit is refused. 
(Code 1965, § 18-8; Ord. No. 1410, 10-24-83; Ord. No. 3480, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 26-33. - Investigation. 
(a)  The Police Chief shall investigate the criminal record of the applicant prior to issuing any permit. The cost of such record check is set forth in section 27-3. In reviewing the record, the Police Chief shall pay specific attention to any felonies, violent crimes against the person, crimes of moral turpitude or crimes involving fraud and/or misrepresentation, such conviction being entered within seven (7) years preceding the date of application. The Police Chief shall follow section 26-34 in response to this investigation. 
(b)  Such investigation shall take place during a reasonable period of time. If such investigation is to exceed a period of fifteen (15) days, the Police Chief shall provide the applicant with a written statement specifying the reasons for the delay in acting upon the application. 
(Code 1965, § 18-12; Ord. No. 1410, 10-24-83; Ord. No. 3480, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 26-34. - Denial. 
(a)  The Police Chief shall refuse to issue a permit applied for under this division (i) to any person who has a criminal history of fraud, misrepresentation or unlawful conduct, (ii) an applicant who falsifies information on the application, (iii) an applicant who has been denied a permit under this division within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the Police Chief that the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist; 
(b)  Evidence of a criminal history of fraud, misrepresentation or unlawful conduct includes but is not limited to the conviction of a felony, a crime of moral turpitude, violent crimes against the person, or a crime involving fraudulent practices or misrepresentation within the seven (7) years immediately proceeding the date of the application; 
(c)  The Police Chief's disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be notified in writing that the application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form or personally delivered to the applicant; and 
(d)  Any appeal of an adverse decision by the Police Chief shall follow the process stated in section 26-39. 
(Code 1965, § 18-13; Ord. No. 1410, 10-24-83; Ord. No. 3480, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 26-35. - Permittee's and employee's registration or identification card. 
(a)  Upon the issuance of a permit under this division, there shall be issued to the holder of such permit and to each of his employees a registration or identification card. A photograph of the person to whom the card is issued, as referred to in section 26-30, shall be attached to such registration or identification card. A fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be charged for the issuance of each identification or registration card. 
(b)  Each person selling, soliciting or taking orders pursuant to a permit issued under this division shall, while so engaged in such soliciting, selling or taking such orders, carry with him the registration or identification card issued under this section. It shall be the duty of such person to prominently display such card while engaged in soliciting activities. 
(Code 1965, §§ 18-16, 18-17; Ord. No. 1410, 10-24-83; Ord. No. 3480, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 26-36. - Maximum term. 
No permit required by this division shall be issued for a longer period than twelve (12) months. All permits expire on December 31 st of the year in which they are issued. 
(Code 1965, § 18-14; Ord. No. 1410, 10-24-83; Ord. No. 3484, 2-7-17)  
Sec. 26-37. - Revocation. 
(a)  The Police Chief may revoke a permit issued under this division for any of the following reasons: 
i.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a permit; 
ii.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the permittee in the course of conducting solicitation or sales activities; 
iii.  Conducting solicitation or sales activities contrary to the provisions contained in the permit; 
iv.  Conviction of any felony or crime of moral turpitude; or 
v.  Conducting solicitation or sales activities in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace or endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Such revocation shall result in the invalidation of the registration or identification card issued pursuant to section 26-35. 
(c)  The permittee shall be informed of the revocation of the permit and the reason for such revocation. The revocation shall be effective, pending appeal as provided in subsection (e), for the remaining permit period. In no event shall the revocation deny the applicant the opportunity to re-apply for a permit at the end of the permit period in which such permit was revoked. Any subsequent permit application will be evaluated according to section 26-33; 
(d)  Written notice of revocation shall be either personally delivered or mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form; and 
(e)  Any appeal from an adverse decision by the city shall follow the process stated in section 26-39. 
(Code 1965, § 18-15; Ord. No. 1410, 10-24-83; Ord. No. 3480, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 26-38. - Compliance with other laws. 
Nothing herein shall exempt any person conducting an activity of the type described herein from the requirements of section 13-36 et seq., section 33-6 or any other applicable provision of the law. The Police Department shall coordinate with the Commissioner of the Revenue to encourage any applicant to obtain a business license. 
(Ord. No. 1410, 10-24-83; Ord. No. 3480, 12-13-16) 
Cross reference— Street vendors of food products, § 13-36 et seq.; sales conducted on or adjacent to the public right-of-way, § 33-6.  
Sec. 26-39. - Appeal of adverse determination. 
(a)  In the event of a denial of an application or the revocation of a permit issued under this division, the applicant/permittee is entitled to an appeal of the adverse determination; 
(b)  The appeal of the adverse determination must be in writing and filed with the City Manager's Office within fifteen (15) days of the adverse determination; 
(c)  In the event that the appeal is not submitted in writing and filed with the City Manager's Office within fifteen (15) days of the adverse determination, the right to an appeal is waived by the applicant; and 
(d)  If an appeal is filed according to subsection (b), the City Manager or his authorized designee shall schedule a hearing of such appeal on a date not later than ten (10) days after the filing of the appeal; provided, however, that such hearing may, at the discretion of the City Manager or his designee, be rescheduled for good cause shown. The decision of the City Manager or his designee is final. 
(Ord. No. 3480, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 26-40. - Transfer prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the permittee to use or wear any permit or badge issued under the provisions of this division. A violation of this provision shall be a class two misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3480, 12-13-16)  
Secs. 26-41—26-48. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3483, adopted February 7, 2017, amended article III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article III, §§ 26-49—26-72, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
State Law reference— Solicitations of contributions, Code of Virginia, § 57-48 et seq.; ordinances regulating charitable organizations soliciting within city, § 57-63. 
 
Sec. 26-49. - Definitions. 
All definitions of words and phrases contained in the Code of Virginia § 57-48 are hereby adopted and shall apply to such words and phrases when used in this article, unless clearly indicated to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 3483, 2-7-17)  
Sec. 26-50. - Exemptions from article generally. 
The following organizations are exempt from the registration requirements of this article: 
(a)  The American Red Cross or any of its local chapters; 
(b)  A charitable organization registered with the state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services or if such organization is a chapter, branch or affiliate included in the consolidated report of an organization or federated organization which is so registered; 
(c)  A church or political organization; 
(d)  Educational institutions that are accredited by the Board of Education, by a regional accrediting association or by an organization affiliated with the National Commission on Accrediting, the Association of Montessori Internationale, the Virginia Independent Schools Association, or any similar organization; 
(e)  Organizations which have no office within the city and which solicit in the city from without the commonwealth solely by means of telephone or telegraph, direct mail or advertising in national media; 
(f)  Organizations which solicit only within the membership of the organization by the members thereof; 
(g)  Health care institutions defined herein as any facilities that have been granted tax-exempt status under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that are (i) licensed by the Department of Health or the Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services; (ii) designated by the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) as federally qualified health centers; (iii) certified by the HCFA as rural health clinics; or (iv) wholly organized for the delivery of health care services without charge; and any supporting organization which exists solely to support any such health care institutions. For purposes of clause (iv), "delivery of health care services without charge" includes the delivery of dental, medical or other health services where a reasonable fee is charged to cover administrative expenses; 
(h)  Civic organizations; 
(i)  Any museum that has registered with the Commissioner as required by Code of Virginia § 57-49; and 
(j)  Organizations that have been granted tax-exempt status under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and that are organized wholly as Area Health Education Centers in accordance with Code of Virginia § 32.1-122.7. 
(Ord. No. 3483, 2-7-17)  
Sec. 26-51. - Licensing of charitable organizations; prohibition against support of terrorists. 
(a)  If an entity not subject to this chapter by operation of the definitions contained in Code of Virginia § 57-48 or section 26-50 of this article wishes to voluntarily obtain a license at no cost, such organization shall submit, before any solicitation, to the commissioner of the revenue or designee, on form to be prescribed by him or her, the name, address and purpose of the organization and a statement setting forth the reason for the claim for exemption. If exempted, the commissioner of the revenue or designee shall issue a letter of exemption which may be exhibited to the public. The letter of exemption shall remain in effect as long as the organization continues to solicit in accordance with its claim for exemption. 
(b)  Every charitable organization, except as otherwise provided herein, which intends to solicit contributions within the city, or have funds solicited on its behalf, shall, prior to any solicitation, file an initial license application with the office of the commissioner of the revenue upon forms acceptable to him. Each license application shall thereafter be refiled on or before the first day of the fourth calendar month of the next and each following fiscal year in which such charitable organization is engaged in solicitation activities within the city. It shall be the duty of the president, chairman or principal officer of such charitable organization to file the license application required herein. Such license application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the organization and the purpose for which it was organized and the name of any fictitious names of such organization. 
(2)  The principal address of the organization, the address of any offices in the city and its designated agent for process within the commonwealth. If no such agent is designated, the organization shall be deemed to have designated the secretary of the commonwealth. If the organization does not maintain an office, the statement shall include the name and address of the person having custody of its financial records. 
(3)  The names and addresses of any chapters, branches or affiliates in the city. 
(4)  The place where and the date when the organization was legally established, the form of the organization, and a reference to any determination of its tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code. 
(5)  The names and addresses of the officers, directors, trustees and the principal salaried executive staff officer. 
(6)  The general purpose or purposes for which the contributions to be solicited shall be used. 
(7)  A statement indicating whether the organization, or any officer, professional solicitor or professional fund raiser thereof, has ever been convicted of a felony and, if so, a description of the pertinent facts. 
(c)  Every license application shall include the following language: 
"No funds have been or will knowingly be used, directly or indirectly, to benefit or provide support, in case or in kind, to terrorists, terrorist organizations, terrorist activities, or the family members of any terrorist." 
(d)  No person shall be licensed by the commissioner of the revenue to solicit funds that are intended to benefit or support terrorists, terrorist organizations or terrorist activities. 
(e)  The registration forms shall be signed by an authorized officer of the charitable organization. 
(f)  Every charitable organization which submits an independent registration to the office of the commissioner of the revenue shall pay an annual license fee of ten dollars ($10.00). A parent organization filing on behalf of one or more chapters, branches or affiliates or a federated fund-raising organization filing on behalf of its member agencies shall pay a single annual license fee. All fees paid hereunder shall be credited to the office of the commissioner of the revenue for reimbursement of administrative expenses. 
(Ord. No. 3483, 2-7-17)  
Sec. 26-52. - Time and effect of licensure. 
(a)  Licenses by charitable organizations are effective, if complete, when approved by the commissioner of the revenue. Incomplete license application forms and license application forms lacking required accompanying documents shall not be approved until completed or until the required accompanying documents are received by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(b)  If the commissioner of the revenue at any time determines that (i) the requirements of section 26-51 have not been met or (ii) the licensee is violating any requirement of section 26-57, then the commissioner of the revenue may suspend the license until the licensee meets the requirements or complies and provides evidence thereof satisfactory to the commissioner of the revenue. If the licensee does not provide sufficient evidence to reinstate the license within 30 days of the suspense, the license shall be revoked, and such revocation shall be final subject to section 26-60. 
(Ord. No. 3483, 2-7-17)  
Sec. 26-53. - Charitable solicitation dis-closure. 
Every professional solicitor who solicits contributions from a prospective contributor in the city: (i) shall identify himself and his employer; (ii) shall disclose that he is a paid solicitor; and (iii) shall notify the prospective contributor that a financial statement for the last fiscal year is available from the State Office of Consumer Affairs. Such disclosure shall comply with the requirements set forth in the Rules Governing the Solicitation of Contributions promulgated by the Board of the Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
(Ord. No. 3483, 2-7-17)  
Sec. 26-54. - Records to be kept by organizations. 
Every charitable organization required to be licensed with the city shall keep true fiscal records for all fiscal years in accordance with the standards set out in Code of Virginia § 57-53. Such records shall be retained for a period of at least three (3) years after the end of the period to which they relate. 
(Ord. No. 3483, 2-7-17)  
Sec. 26-55. - Reciprocal agreements with other municipalities. 
The commissioner of the revenue may enter into a reciprocal agreement with the appropriate authority of any other locality within the commonwealth for the purpose of exchanging information with respect to charitable organizations. Pursuant to such agreements, the commissioner of the revenue may accept information filed by charitable organizations with the appropriate authority of another locality within this commonwealth, in lieu of the information required to be filed by pursuant to section 26-51. 
(Ord. No. 3483, 2-7-17)  
Sec. 26-56. - Information filed under article to constitute public records; charge for copies thereof. 
License application and all other documents and information required to be filed under this article shall become public records in the office of the commissioner of the revenue, and shall be open to the general public for inspection at such time and under such conditions as the commissioner of the revenue may prescribe. A charge, not exceeding one dollar ($1.00) per page, may be made for any copy of such documents and information as may be furnished any person by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Ord. No. 3483, 2-7-17)  
Sec. 26-57. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No charitable organization shall use or exploit the fact of licensing under this article so as to lead the public to believe that such license in any manner constitutes an endorsement or approval by the city. The use of the following statement shall not be deemed a prohibited exploitation, "Licensed with the commissioner of the revenue is required by law. Licensure does not imply endorsement of a public solicitation for contributions." 
(b)  No person shall, in connection with the solicitation of contributions or the sale of tangible personal property or services represent, or lead anyone by any manner, means, practice or device whatsoever to believe, that the person on whose behalf such solicitation or sale is being conducted is a bona fide charitable organization or that the proceeds of such solicitation or sale will be used for charitable purposes, if he has reason to believe such not to be the fact. 
(c)  No person shall, in connection with the solicitation of contributions or the sale of tangible personal property or services for charitable purposes, represent or lead anyone by any manner, means, practice or device whatsoever to believe, that any other person sponsors or endorses such solicitation of contributions, sale of tangible personal property or services for charitable purposes or approves of such charitable purposes or a charitable organization connected therewith when such other person has not given written consent to the use of his name for these purposes. 
Any member of the board of directors or trustees of a charitable organization or any other person who has agreed either to serve or to participate in any voluntary capacity in the campaign shall be deemed thereby to have given his consent to the use of his name in said campaign. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the publication of names of contributors without their written consents, in an annual or other periodic report issued by a charitable organization for the purpose of reporting on its operations and affairs to its membership or for the purpose of reporting contributions to contributors. 
(d)  No person shall denominate any membership fee or purchase price of goods or services sold, as a contribution or as a donation or in any other manner represent or imply that the member or the purchaser of such goods or services will be entitled to an income tax deduction for his cost or any portion thereof unless: 
(1)  There shall have been first obtained a signed opinion of counsel or an Internal Revenue Service ruling or determination letter holding such cost to be deductible; or 
(2)  The member or purchaser is informed in writing that such cost may not be deductible. 
No person shall represent or imply that a contributor will be entitled to an income tax deduction for his contribution unless a signed opinion of counsel or an Internal Revenue Service ruling or determination letter holding gifts to such organization to be so deductible has been obtained. 
(e)  No person shall make any representation that he is soliciting contributions for or on behalf of a charitable organization or shall use or display any emblem, device or printed matter belonging to or associated with a charitable organization for the purpose of soliciting or inducing contributions from the public without first being authorized to do so by the charitable organization. 
(f)  No professional solicitor shall solicit in the name of or on behalf of any charitable organization unless such solicitor has: 
(1)  Written authorization of two officers of such organization, a copy of which shall be filed with the commissioner of the revenue. Such written authorization shall bear the signature of the solicitor and shall expressly state on its face the period for which it is valid, which shall not exceed one year from the date issued. 
(2)  Such authorization with him when making solicitations and exhibits the same on request to persons solicited, or police officers. 
(g)  No charitable organization shall accept any contribution exceeding five dollars ($5.00) in cash or tangible property without providing, on request of the donor, a written receipt acknowledging such contribution on behalf of the organization. 
(h)  No person, and no organization of which such person is an officer, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor, shall solicit within this locality if: 
(1)  Such person has been convicted in any jurisdiction of embezzlement, larceny or other crime involving the obtaining of money or property by false pretenses or the misapplication of funds impressed with a trust, unless such person has received a pardon for such offense or the public is informed of such conviction in a manner approved in writing by the commissioner of the revenue before any solicitation occurs; or 
(2)  Such person has ever been enjoined by any court or otherwise prohibited from soliciting in any jurisdiction, unless the commissioner of the revenue first determines in writing that such person is entitled to solicit in such jurisdiction at the time of soliciting within the city or that the reason for such injunction or prohibition does not involve moral turpitude. 
(i)  No person shall solicit within this locality for the benefit of any other person located without the locality, if such other person refuses to supply any information which the commissioner of the revenue deems necessary to assure himself that the provisions of this chapter are complied with. A solicitation shall be deemed to be on behalf of every person who or which receives, directly or indirectly, more than ten (10) percent of the gross amount collected. 
(j)  No charitable organization shall allow a professional solicitor to solicit on its behalf if the professional solicitor has not registered with the Commissioner of the Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services pursuant to Code of Virginia § 57-61. 
(k)  No professional solicitor shall solicit in the city on behalf of a charitable organization if the professional solicitor has not registered with the Commissioner of the Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services pursuant to Code of Virginia § 57-61. 
(l)  No charitable organization shall solicit in this locality without being duly licensed or exempt under this chapter. 
(m)  No person shall employ in any solicitation or collection of contributions for a charitable purpose any device, scheme or artifice to defraud or obtain money or property by any misrepresentation or misleading statement. 
(n)  No officer, agent, director or trustee of any charitable organization, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor shall refuse or fail, after notice, to produce to the commissioner of the revenue any books and records of such organization. 
(o)  No person shall use or permit the use of the funds raised by a charitable solicitation for any purpose other than the solicited purpose or, with respect to funds raised by general appeals, the general purposes of the charitable organization on whose behalf the solicitation was made. 
(p)  No person shall knowingly and willfully make any false statements in any license application or statement, report or other disclosure required by this article. 
(q)  No professional solicitor shall solicit in the city on behalf of a charitable organization unless the charitable organization has submitted the appropriate license application as required by section 26-51 of this article or is qualified for an exemption under section 26-50 of this article, and the charitable organization has registered with the Commissioner of the Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services pursuant to Code of Virginia § 57-49, or the charitable organization has been granted the appropriate exemption by the Commissioner of the Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services pursuant to Code of Virginia § 57-60. 
(r)  No person shall represent, in any solicitation, that tickets to events will be donated for use by another unless he complies with the following requirements: 
(1)  He shall have obtained commitments, in writing, from persons or charitable organizations stating that they will accept donated tickets and specifying the number of persons for whom they are willing to accept tickets; 
(2)  He shall not collect or accept more contributions for donated tickets than the number of ticket commitments he has received from persons or charitable organizations; 
(3)  He shall have printed in advance on each ticket the exact number of persons to be admitted by the ticket and the dollar price or value of each ticket; 
(4)  He shall distribute the tickets in a timely fashion to those having given commitments; and 
(5)  He shall maintain during the solicitation and for a period of three years thereafter: (i) records reflecting the name and address of each contributor and the amount of money and number of tickets donated by each such contributor; and (ii) the written commitments of each person or charitable organization to accept tickets and specifying the number of persons on whose behalf tickets were to be accepted, as required in paragraph (1) of this subsection. 
(s)  No person shall knowingly use or permit the use of funds raised by a solicitation or by contribution to benefit or provide support, directly or indirectly, in cash or in kind, to terrorists, terrorist organizations, terrorist activities or to family members of any terrorist. 
(Ord. No. 3483, 2-7-17)  
Sec. 26-58. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who willfully and knowingly violates or causes to be violated any provision of this article, or who willfully and knowingly gives false or incorrect information to the commissioner of the revenue in filing license applications or reports required by this article, whether such report or license application is verified or not, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished for the first offense by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by confinement in jail for not more than six months, or both, and for the second and any subsequent offense by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or by confinement in jail for not more than one year, or both. 
The following property shall be subject to lawful seizure by any law-enforcement officer charged with enforcing the provisions of this article: all moneys or other property, real or personal, together with any interest or profits derived from the investment of such money and used in substantial connection with an act of terrorism as defined in Code of Virginia § 18.2-46.4. All seizures and forfeitures under this section shall be governed by the procedures contained in Chapter 22.1 (§ 19.2-386.1 et seq.) of Title 19.2 Code of Virginia. 
(b)  Whenever the commissioner of the revenue has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter may have occurred, the commissioner of the revenue, upon his own motion or upon complaint of any person, may investigate any charitable organization, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor to determine whether such charitable organization, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor has violated the provisions of this article or has filed any application or other information required under this chapter which contains false or misleading statements. In the conduct of such investigation, the commissioner of the revenue may: 
(1)  Require or permit any person to file a statement in writing, under oath or otherwise as the commissioner of the revenue determines, as to all facts and circumstances concerning the matter to be investigated. 
(2)  Administer oaths or affirmations and, upon his motion or upon request of any party, subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance, take evidence, and require the production of any matter which is relevant to the investigation, including the existence, description, nature, custody, condition, and location of any books, documents, or other tangibles and the identity and location of persons having knowledge of relevant facts or any other matter reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of material evidence. 
Any proceedings or hearings by the commissioner of the revenue under this article, where witnesses are subpoenaed and their attendance is required for evidence to be taken or any matter is to be produced to ascertain material evidence, shall take place within the city. 
Upon failure to obey a subpoena and upon reasonable notice to all persons affected thereby, the commissioner of the revenue may apply to the Circuit Court of the city for an order imposing punishment for contempt of the subpoena or compelling compliance. 
(c)  Whenever the City Attorney or the attorney for the Commonwealth has reason to believe that any charitable organization, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor is operating in violation of the provisions of this chapter or is about to operate in violation of the provisions of this chapter, in addition to all other actions authorized by law, the City Attorney, or the attorney for the Commonwealth may bring an action in the name of the city or the Commonwealth against such charitable organization and its officers, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor or their officers, directors or other agents to enjoin the continuation of such violation, solicitation or collection, or engaging therein, or the conducting of any acts in furtherance thereof and for such other relief as the court deems appropriate. 
(d)  In any action brought under subsection (c), the court may also award to the Commonwealth a civil penalty of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation, to be paid to the Literary Fund, reasonable expenses incurred by the state or local agency in investigating and preparing the case, not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation, and attorney's fees. Such expenses and attorney's fees shall be paid into the general fund of the city which such attorney represented. 
(Ord. No. 3483, 2-7-17)  
Sec. 26-59. - Article does not authorize unlawful acts or omissions or decrease liability imposed by law. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as making lawful any act or omission which is now unlawful, or as decreasing the liability, civil or criminal, of any person imposed by existing laws. 
(Ord. No. 3483, 2-7-17)  
Sec. 26-60. - Appeals from orders under article. 
Any person aggrieved by any final order of the commissioner of the revenue under this article, denying such person any right to which he is entitled under law, may, within fifteen (15) days from the date of such order, apply for relief to the circuit court of the city. Either party may appeal any final order of such court in the same manner as provided by law in cases other than cases of appeals of right. 
(Ord. No. 3483, 2-7-17)  
Chapter 27 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— High constable, § 1-11; mandatory retirement age for police officers, § 2-81; resisting or obstructing law-enforcement officer, § 23-7; providing identification to police officer, § 23-7.1; use, operation, etc., of device to automatically initiate call and deliver prerecorded message to telephone number of city public safety services, § 23-9. 
State Law reference— General powers and duties of local police force, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-138. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 27-1. - Composition of department. 
The department of police shall consist of a chief of police, who shall be the head of the department, together with such other officers and personnel as are authorized by the council. 
(Code 1965, § 2-48)  
Sec. 27-2. - Departmental rules and regulations; duty assignments. 
(a)  The chief of police, with the approval of the city manager, shall make rules and regulations concerning the operation of the department of police, the conduct of the officers and employees thereof and their uniforms, arms, other equipment and training. 
(b)  The chief of police shall assign all members of the department of police to their respective posts, shifts, details and duties. 
(c)  The chief of police and the sheriff are authorized to permit police officers and deputy sheriffs, respectively, to engage in off-duty employment which may occasionally require the use of police powers in the performance of such employment, and to promulgate rules and regulations concerning such off-duty employment. 
(Code 1955, §§ 2-49, 2-50; Ord. No. 2183, 10-6-92; Ord. No. 2560, 9-7-99)  
Sec. 27-3. - Authority of department to furnish copies of records, perform certain services, etc., and fees therefor. 
(a)  The department of police is hereby authorized to release forensic photographs after all criminal charges are resolved and when such release is provided by law, to furnish photostatic copies of accident reports and offense reports, and to allow such reports to be viewed by proper persons consistent with the provisions of the Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia § 2.2-3700. 
(b)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to make record checks and reports (local record only) and take fingerprints of individuals on request. For the processing of applications for permits required by law, the following fees shall be charged: 
(1)  Record check and report by name (local) .....$ 15.00 
(2)  First fingerprint card requested by individuals .....10.00 
(3)  Subsequent fingerprint cards requested by individuals .....5.00 
(4)  Certificate for public convenience and necessity .....50.00 
(5)  Precious metals permit .....550.00 
(c)  If a permit issued by the department of police requires a record check of the applicant, the fee for such record check shall be equal to the fee set forth in (b)(1) of this section 
(Code 1965, §§ 2-56.1—56.3; Ord. No. 1162, 4-20-81; Ord. No. 1278, 5-17-82; Ord. No. 1294, 6-28-82; Ord. No. 2093, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 2139, 6-9-92; Ord. No. 2342, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 2789, 10-28-03; Ord. No. 2879, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 2888, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 3131, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 3451, § 1, 5-10-16, eff. 7-1-16; Ord. No. 3482, 12-13-16) 
Cross reference— Fees for copies of city documents, manuals, etc., § 2-2; fees for copies of fire department reports, § 12-30.  
Sec. 27-3.1. - Vehicle escort service; traffic control. 
(a)  The department of police is authorized to provide police vehicle escorts and related traffic control for funeral processions, house moving and other events for which such services may be requested. 
(b)  For vehicle escort service and traffic control for house moving and other events for which such services may be requested, the department shall charge, for each police officer, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first hour, or portion thereof, and, thereafter, twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) for each one-half hour or portion thereof. There shall be no charge for providing police vehicle escorts and related traffic control for funeral processions. 
(Ord. No. 2093, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 2222, 5-11-93)  
Sec. 27-4. - Auxiliary police. 
The chief of police is hereby authorized to appoint auxiliary police officers as he deems necessary, not to exceed one hundred (100) in number. The chief of police, with the approval of the city manager, shall make rules and regulations concerning the operation of the auxiliary police officers, their uniforms, arms, other equipment and training. Such rules and regulations shall be subject to ratification by the council. 
(Code 1965, § 2-56.4; Ord. No. 1385, 7-11-83) 
Cross reference— Recognition of auxiliary police as part of city safety program, § 2-4; issuance of vehicle license plates or decals to auxiliary policemen, § 21-79. 
State Law reference— Auxiliary police, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-159.2 et seq.  
Sec. 27-5. - Service charge for false alarms to which police are required to respond. 
There is hereby established a service charge of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) to be paid by each residence upon the third false alarm call within a twelve month period and for each false alarm call thereafter to which the police of the city are required to respond. Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is hereby charged to each business, industrial user for each false alarm caused by negligence to which the police of the city are required to respond upon the third false alarm call within a twelve month period and each call thereafter. Such charge shall be payable to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 983, 9-10-79; Ord. No. 3013, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3377, 10-7-14)  
Sec. 27-5.1. - Permits required for alarm systems using third-party alarm companies to notify police. 
(a)  Permit required: No person shall use an alarm system that relies on a third-party alarm company to notify the police department in the event the alarm is activated without first obtaining a permit to operate such a system from the police department. A ten-dollar ($10.00) fee shall be charged for such a permit. 
(b)  Application: The permit application shall be submitted by the alarm user on a form obtained from the police department. For the purpose of this section, the "alarm user" is any person who is in physical possession of any premises where an installed alarm system is monitored by a third-party alarm company. 
(c)  Transfer of premises possession: Alarm permits are not transferable. Alarm permits issued by the police department shall expire when the alarm user, as identified on the alarm permit application, vacates possession of said premises. Any person in possession of said premises after the expiration of the alarm permit shall be required to obtain a new alarm permit. 
(d)  Reporting updated information: Whenever any information provided to the police department on the alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide the updated information to the police department within thirty (30) days. 
(e)  Multiple alarm systems or users: In the event an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures that have either different addresses or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each structure and/or tenant. 
(f)  Notice: 
(1)  All third-party alarm companies that notify the police department in the event of an alarm activation on behalf of clients/subscribers located in the city, shall provide notice of the requirements of this section to all such clients/subscribers located in the city. 
(2)  After police provide a response to a third-party alarm company's call for service to a location where a person or persons in possession of such property has not obtained the required alarm permit, the police department may provide no further responses requested by a third-party alarm company's call for service until the required permit is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 3049, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 3234, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 27-6. - Impersonation. 
Any person who falsely assumes or exercises the functions, powers, duties and privileges incident to the office of sheriff, police officer, marshal or other peace officer, or who falsely assumes or pretends to be any such officer, is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor upon conviction of a first offense. 
(Code 1965, § 23-38; Ord. No. 1003, 11-5-79; Ord. No. 3293, 6-11-13) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-174.  
Sec. 27-7. - Interference with police animals. 
Any person who willfully torments, beats, kicks, strikes, injures or otherwise mistreats an animal owned by the department of police or who willfully interferes with the lawful performance of such animal in a police activity shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. Any person who willfully touches such animal in any manner after being directed not to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1323, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 1523, 4-1-85)  
Sec. 27-8. - Law enforcement jurisdiction. 
Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 15.2-1725.1, for purposes of public safety regulatory authority and enforcement, the territorial limits of the city extends from its costal shoreline, the coastal shorelines of Camp Pendleton, the coastal shorelines of First Landing State Park, and the coastal shorelines of False Cape State Park in a perpendicular direction for three miles into the Atlantic Ocean and Chesapeake Bay waters. This territorial jurisdiction is concurrent with the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth, but this authority does not extend to the regulatory authority of the Virginia Marine Resources Commission. 
(Ord. No. 3243, 6-26-12, eff. 7-1-12)  
Secs. 27-9—27-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY IN CUSTODY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1331, adopted Sept. 27, 1982, amended art. II to read as set out in §§ 27-21—27-23. Former art. II consisted of §§ 27-21—27-25, concerning the same subject, as derived from Code 1965, §§ 2-53—2-56. 
Cross reference— Unclaimed bicycles or mopeds in custody of police department to be disposed of in accord with this article, § 7-8. 
State Law reference— Authority for article, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-133.01. 
 
Sec. 27-21. - Disposal of unclaimed property in possession of police. 
(a)  Any unclaimed personal property which has been in the possession of the department of police and remains unclaimed for a period of more than sixty (60) days may be sold at public auction or retained for use by the Police Department in accordance with the provisions of this article. As used herein, "unclaimed personal property" shall be any personal property belonging to another which has been acquired by a law enforcement officer pursuant to his duties, which is not needed in any criminal prosecution, which has not been claimed by its rightful owner and which the state treasurer has indicated will be declined if remitted under the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, bicycles and lost/found property may be disposed of in accordance with sections 27-24 and 27-25. 
(c)  Any unclaimed personal property, as described in subsection (a) above, that has insubstantial commercial value may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of after it remains unclaimed for a period of more than ninety (90) days. For the purpose of this subsection "insubstantial commercial value" includes items that are unsuitable for resale, or items deemed to have a value less than the cost of giving notice and holding a sale. 
(Ord. No. 1331, 9-27-82; Ord. No. 1498, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 3222, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 27-22. - Requirements prior to sale or retention by police department. 
(a)  Prior to the sale or retention by Police Department of any unclaimed item the chief of police or his duly authorized agent shall make reasonable attempts to notify the rightful owner of the property, obtain from the commonwealth's attorney in writing a statement advising that the item is not needed in any criminal prosecution, and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the locality once a week for two (2) successive weeks, notice that there will be a public sale of unclaimed personal property. Such property shall be described generally in the notice, together with the date, time and place of the sale. The chief of police, or his duly authorized agent, shall pay from the proceeds of the sale the cost of advertisement, removal, storage and investigation as to ownership and liens, and notice of sale. The balance of the funds shall be held by such officer for the owner and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. 
(b)  Any unclaimed item retained for use by the Police Department shall become the property of the City and shall be retained only if, in the opinion of the chief of police or his designee, there is a legitimate use for the property by the department and retention of the item is a more economical alternative than purchase of a similar or equivalent item. 
(Ord. No. 1331, 9-27-82; Ord. No. 3222, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 27-23. - Disposition of funds from sale. 
If no claim has been made by the owner for the proceeds of such sale within sixty (60) days of the sale, the remaining funds shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the city within three (3) years from the date of the sale and, if timely application is made therefor, the city shall pay the remaining proceeds of the sale to the owner without interest or other charges. No claim shall be made nor any suit, action or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds after three (3) years from the date of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 1331, 9-27-82)  
Sec. 27-24. - Disposal of bicycles and other wheeled devices or vehicles. 
Any bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, electric-powered wheeled device, gas-powered wheeled device, golf cart, surrey or moped which has been in the possession of the department of police, unclaimed, for more than thirty (30) days may be sold at public auction or donated to a charitable organization. If such wheeled device or vehicle is sold at public auction, the provisions of sections 27-22 and 27-23 shall apply. If such wheeled device or vehicle is donated to a charitable organization, the notice provisions of section 27-22 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1498, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 2850, 10-26-04) 
Cross reference— Bicycles and other wheeled devices, Ch. 7.  
Sec. 27-25. - Disposal of lost/found property. 
Any person who initially found and turned over to the department of police, property which otherwise remains unclaimed for a period of sixty (60) days (thirty (30) days for bicycles and other wheeled devices and vehicles as set forth in section 27-24), may make claim for such property, prior to its sale, to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent. The chief of police or his duly authorized agent may elect to return such property to the finder making such claim or proceed under the provisions of sections 27-21 or 27-24. Strict records of each such disposal shall be kept. 
(Ord. No. 1498, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 2850, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 3222, 3-13-12)  
Secs. 27-26—27-38. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONVICTED FELONS' REPORTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Central criminal records exchange, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-387 et seq. 
 
Sec. 27-39. - Violations of article. 
A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 27-40. - Exemptions from article. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person who has received or who shall receive a full and unconditional pardon for each or any crime whereof he shall have been convicted or to any person on furlough from either a federal or state prison or similar facility, when such person is on constant escort by city, state or federal law officers or officials or prison authorities during the period of such furlough. 
(Code 1965, § 15-7; Ord. No. 1031, 3-17-80)  
Sec. 27-41. - When required. 
(a)  Any person who has been convicted of any offense punishable as a felony in this state or elsewhere, at any time subsequent to September 14, 1964, who comes into the city from any point outside the city and remains in the city for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours, shall report to the chief of police within twelve (12) hours after the expiration of the twenty-four (24) hour period. 
(b)  The chief of police or his designee shall endeavor to notify all persons subject to this section of their duty to comply with the provisions of this section. Failure to file a report after such actual notice is given shall be a violation of this section. 
(Code 1965, § 15-1)  
Sec. 27-42. - Contents. 
Persons required to report by section 27-41 shall furnish to the chief of police a statement, in writing, signed by such person and giving the following information: 
(1)  His true name and all aliases which he has used or under which he may have been known. 
(2)  A full and complete description of his person. 
(3)  The kind, character and nature of each crime of which he has been convicted. 
(4)  The place where any of such crimes were committed and the place of conviction of the same. 
(5)  The name under which he was convicted in each instance and the date thereof. 
(6)  The name, if any, and the location of each prison, reformatory, jail or other penal institution in which he was confined or to which he was sentenced. 
(7)  The location or address of his residence, stopping place, living quarters or place of abode in the city, and each one thereof, if more than one; or the address of the location of his intended residence, stopping place, living quarters or place of abode therein, and each one thereof; with a description of the character of each such place, whether a hotel, apartment house, dwelling house or otherwise, giving the street number thereof, if any, or such description of the address or location thereof as will so identify the same as to make it possible to locate; and the length of time for which he expects or intends to reside within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 15-2)  
Sec. 27-43. - Photographing and fingerprinting of person making report. 
At the time of making a report pursuant to section 27-41, the person so reporting shall be photographed and fingerprinted by the chief of police and the photograph and fingerprints of such person shall be made a part of the permanent record provided for in this article. 
(Code 1965, § 15-4)  
Sec. 27-44. - Notice of change of address. 
In the event any person required to make a report under section 27-41 shall change any place of residence, stopping place or living quarters to any new or different place within the city, other than any place last shown in such report, he shall, within twenty-four (24) hours after the making of such change, notify the chief of police, in a written and signed statement, of such change of address and shall furnish, in such written statement, his new address. 
(Code 1965, § 15-5)  
Sec. 27-45. - False or misleading information. 
It shall be unlawful for any person required by any provision of this article to furnish a report to furnish, in such report, any false or fictitious address or any address other than a true address or intended address, or to furnish, in making any such report, any false, untrue or misleading information or statement relating to any information required by any provision of this article to be furnished. 
(Code 1965, § 15-3)  
Sec. 27-46. - Disposition and use of statements, photographs, etc. 
(a)  The statements, photographs and fingerprints provided for in this article shall at all times be kept by the chief of police in a file separate and apart from other files and records maintained and kept by the department of police and shall not be open to inspection by the public, or by any person other than a regular member of the department of police; provided, that any such photographs, or duplicates thereof, may be exhibited to persons other than police officers of the city for the purpose of assisting in identifying perpetrators of any crime. 
(b)  Copies of such statements, photographs and fingerprints may be transmitted to the sheriff of any county of the state, to the head of any department of the state engaged in the enforcement of any criminal law of the state, to the head of any federal law-enforcement agency or to any sheriff or chief of police of a municipality or the head of any other law-enforcement agency of any state or territory outside the state, when request is made in writing by such sheriff or other head of a law-enforcement agency asking for the record of a certain person named therein or for the record of a person whose photograph or fingerprints reasonably correspond with photographs or fingerprints submitted with such request; provided, that such written request states that such record is deemed necessary for the use of such law-enforcement officer or agency, in or concerning the investigation of any crime or any person who is accused of committing a crime, or any crime which is reported to have been committed; provided further, that such request in writing shall state that the record will be used only for such purpose. 
(Code 1965, § 15-6) 
State Law reference— Dissemination of criminal history record information, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-389. 

Chapter 28 - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building regulations, Ch. 8; housing code, Ch. 16; license tax for sewer companies, § 18-115; mobile homes, Ch. 19; sewer utility to maintain employees on call for emergencies, § 23-52; soil removal and other land-disturbing activities, Ch. 30; solid waste, Ch. 31; installation or maintenance of defective sewers or drains under street, § 33-40; repair of street or sidewalk damaged by sewers or drains, § 33-41; installation or repair of underground utilities prior to street improvements, §§ 33-86 et seq.; water supply, Ch. 37; zoning ordinance, App. A; sanitary sewers in subdivisions, App. B, § 5.9; site plan ordinance, App. C; App. H. 
State Law reference— Sewage disposal generally, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-163 et seq.; authority of city to establish, maintain and operate sewage disposal systems, §§ 15.1-320, 15.1-876; authority to regulate sewage disposal, §§ 15.1-855, 15.1-856. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Violations of chapter generally. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and each day's continuation of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. Any such person shall furthermore be liable for all damage, loss and expense suffered or incurred by the city as a result of such violation. 
(Code 1965, § 29-10)  
Sec. 28-1.1. - "Sewer system" defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, "public sewer system" shall be defined as any appurtenance of that integrated regional system of sewage collection, transmission or treatment, whether located within or without the boundaries of the city, which has been, or is intended to be, installed, operated or maintained by the city, or in the installation. operation or maintenance of which the city has participated, is participating or intends to participate, financially. 
(Ord. No. 1035, 4-21-80; Ord. No. 1108, 10-27-80)  
Sec. 28-2. - Mandatory sewer connections. 
(a)  The owner of any dwelling or other building in which human beings live or congregate shall, when a public sewer system is made available by the city, connect such dwelling or building with such public sewer line, within one year after such line becomes available; provided, however, that the director of public health may require connection within sixty (60) days if, in his opinion, a health hazard exists. The date of availability shall be that on which notice is given by publication or by mailing or delivering notice to the affected property owner. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to empty any sewage or industrial waste into any well, septic tank, open stream or waterway, upon any other land or water or into any noncertificated sewer service at any time after connection to the public sewer system, as required by this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy, lease or rent any premises, unless the same is connected to the public sewer, if such connection is required by this section. 
(d)  The fees prescribed by this article shall be due from the date the sewer connection is required pursuant to this section, and no connection shall be made to the public sewer system until such fees have been paid. 
(Code 1965, § 29-1; Ord. No. 1035, 4-21-80; Ord. No. 1108, 10-27-80; Ord. No. 1209, 8-3-81) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to require sewer connections, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-876.  
Sec. 28-3. - Sewer tap installation fees. 
The following fees shall be paid for connections to the public sewer system: 
(a)  For a four-inch or larger tap, lateral and cleanout, except as provided in City Code Section 28-3.1: actual cost to the City of installation. 
(b)  "Actual cost" shall mean the average installation cost determined by the Department of Public Utilities annually based upon contract unit bid prices and contract administration cost. 
(Code 1965, § 29-3, Ord. No. 1035, 4-21-80; Ord. No. 1108, 10-27-80; Ord. No. 1209, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 1380, 6-27-83; Ord. No. 1712, 7-6-87; Ord. No. 2928, 3-7-06) 
Cross reference— Plumbing permit fee, § 8-32.  
Sec. 28-3.1. - Same; existing dwellings. 
(a)  Sewer tap, cleanout and installation fees for existing dwellings qualifying under Section 28-2, pertaining to mandatory connections to the public sewer system, shall be $450.00 for a four-inch tap. For six-inch or larger taps, the fee shall be the actual cost of installation by the City. 
(b)  "Actual cost" shall mean the average installation cost determined by the Department of Public Utilities annually based upon contract unit bid prices and contract administration cost. 
(Ord. No. 2928, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 28-4. - Sewer capital recovery fees, generally. 
(a)  The fees prescribed by the following subsections of this section shall be paid as the property owner's share of the cost of the public sewer system and associated conveyance facilities. Such fees shall be known as "sewer capital recovery fees" and shall be deemed system revenues, as defined in the Master Water and Sewer Revenue Bond Resolution adopted February 11, 1992. Such fees shall be applicable to a use or structure not presently connected to the sanitary sewer system when such use or structure connects and as otherwise provided in this article. If a property owner has paid sanitary sewer connection fees in effect as of June 30, 2014, but has not obtained a building permit for the building or structure to which such fees apply, the property owner may, through December 31, 2014, elect to pay sewer capital recovery fees in the amount prescribed in this article, less a credit of any sanitary sewer connection fees previously paid. Any property owner who pays such fees between July 1, 2014 and December 31, 2014 may choose to pay sewer capital recovery fees in the prescribed amount or the applicable amount of sanitary sewer connection fees in effect as of June 30, 2014. 
(b)  In cases in which a gravity sewer connection to the public sewer system is not available to the property, the sewer capital recovery fee shall be in amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the applicable fee set forth in subsection (a) of section 28-4.1. 
(b1)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b), where a use or structure connected to the public sewer system is reconstructed, expanded or modified, so as to result in an increase in water meter size, the sewer capital recovery fee shall be in an amount equal to the difference between the fee corresponding to the size of new water meter installed to serve such use or structure and the fee corresponding to the size of the water meter replaced. 
(c)  Where the property owner is required to construct sewage facilities that are to become a part of the public sewer system in order to provide service to a specific parcel or parcels, the sewer capital recovery fee shall be in an amount equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the applicable fee specified in subsection (a) of section 28-4.1. 
(d)  Whenever a property to be served discharges through a publicly-owned pump station, and (1) the system installation costs are calculated pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, or (2) the estimated peak sanitary sewer flow exceeds the property's flow allocation, there shall be an additional fee in the amount of one thousand, one hundred eighty-seven dollars ($1,187.00) per gallon per minute/peak flow. "Peak flow" shall be construed to mean the projected peak flow set forth in the Department of Public Utilities Design Standards or the actual peak flow, whichever is greater. "Flow allocation" shall mean that portion of the pump station's capacity assigned to the property. 
(e)  The sewer capital recovery fee for campgrounds or temporary uses connected to the public sanitary sewer system is hereby established. Such fee shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  For campgrounds and other uses operated on a seasonal basis, the fee shall be in an amount equal to one-half (½) of the applicable sewer capital recovery fee specified in subsection (a) of section 28-4.1 for each water meter installed to serve such campground. For such fee to be applicable, the owner shall first enter into a contract with the city providing that, if such campground is converted to year-round use, the owner shall, at the time of conversion to year-round use, pay the fee prescribed by subdivision (2) hereof, less the amount of any sewer capital recovery fee previously paid on account of such campground. 
(2)  For campgrounds operated on a year-round basis the sewer capital recovery fee shall be in an amount equal to the applicable fee under subsection (a) of section 28-4.1 for each water meter installed to serve such campground. 
(3)  For temporary uses and structures, the applicable fee shall be determined by the director of public utilities based upon the estimated contribution of wastewater to the public sanitary sewer system from the proposed use or structure. A temporary use or structure shall be one intended to be operated or occupied during a single season or period of time and not thereafter repeated on an annual or other basis. 
(g)  No building permit shall be issued and no water or sewer tap shall be installed for any property until the fees required by this section have been fully paid, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(h)  Existing contractual agreements between property owners and the city regarding fees and waiver of fees shall remain in effect. 
(i)  Where a property having no water meter is connected to the public sewer system, the sewer capital recovery fee shall be in an amount equal to the applicable fee for a water meter of a size necessary to serve such property, as determined in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Department of Public Utilities Design Standards Manual. 
(Code 1965, § 29-3; Ord. No. 953, 6-25-79; Ord. No. 987, 9-17-79; Ord. No. 989, 9-17-79; Ord. No. 991, 9-17-79; Ord. No. 1035, 4-21-80; Ord. No. 1057, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 1122, 11-24-80; Ord. No. 1209, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 1367, 4-11-83; Ord. No. 1380, 6-27-83; Ord. No. 1712, 7-6-87; Ord. No. 2490, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 3020, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3063, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 3346, 5-13-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 28-4.1. - Sewer capital recovery fees, amount. 
The sewer capital recovery fee shall be determined as follows: 
(a)  For single-family and duplex dwellings and triplexes where the dwelling units are separately-metered (per dwelling unit) and for all non-residential uses: 
Meter Size (in inches) 	Sewer Capital Recovery Fee 
5/8	$1,545.00 
1 	$3,863.00 
1.5 	$7,727.00 
2 	$12,363.00 
3 	$23,181.00 
4 	$38,634.00 
6 	$77,268.00 
8 	$123,629.00 
10 	$177,717.00 
 
(b)  For multiple-family dwellings, the fee shall be in an amount equal to seventy (70) percent of the applicable sewer capital recovery fee or reduced fee under section 28-4(c), as the case may be, per dwelling unit. 
(c)  For mixed-use and other buildings containing both residential and non-residential uses, separate meters shall be required to serve the residential and non-residential components of the property. Fees shall be payable for each meter serving the property in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 3346, 5-13-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 28-5. - Installment, etc., payment of sewer capital recovery fees. 
(a)  The director of public utilities is hereby authorized to accept, on behalf of the city, promissory notes for the payment of the sewer capital recovery fees due under this article, for single-family residences and duplexes. The terms of each such note shall be all tap and cleanout fees, given as a down payment, with the full sewer capital recovery fee to be paid within four (4) years. Installation payments must be made at least annually in four (4) installments during the four-year period, but may be made more frequently if agreed to by the owner and the director of public utilities. Interest shall be charged at a rate equal to the Prime Rate for U.S. Banks, as published in the Wall Street Journal, when the installment contract is executed, plus three (3) percentage points, not to exceed twelve (12) percent per annum. 
(b)  When a hardship exists, the director of public utilities may allow the down payment prescribed in subsection (a) to be paid by installments over a one-year period; or, if the property is being offered for sale, the director of public utilities may enter into an agreement on behalf of the city whereby all fees shall be paid from the proceeds of the sale or within ninety (90) days of the date of the agreement, whichever shall be the sooner. 
(Code 1965, 29-3; Ord. No. 1020, 1-4-80; Ord. No. 1035, 4-4-80; Ord. No. 1209, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 1712, 7-6-87; Ord. No. 2184, 10-13-92; Ord. No 2485, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2501, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 3346, 5-13-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 28-6. - Sewer capital recovery fee exemption—Certain elderly or disabled persons. 
(a)  Exemption or partial exemption from payment of the sewer capital recovery fees prescribed by section 28-4 is provided for owners of single-family dwellings and duplexes who qualify under this section. The exemption is to be administered by the city manager or his authorized designee, herein referred to as the administrator. The administrator is hereby authorized to prescribe such rules as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for exemption. The administrator may require the production of certified tax returns and appraisal reports to establish income and financial worth. 
(b)  Exemptions shall be granted under this section subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Title to the property for which the exemption is sought must be held or partially held by the applicant continuously for at least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the installation or scheduled date of installation, whichever comes first, of the public sewer system; 
(2)  The owner of the title or partial title must be sixty-five (65) years of age or older at least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the installation or scheduled installation date, whichever comes first, of the public sewer system. If such person is under sixty-five (65) years of age, he or she shall have been determined by the Social Security Administration, the Veterans Administration, or the Railroad Retirement Board to be totally disabled, as defined in the regulations of the agency making such determination. Such determination shall be filed with the administrator at such time as the applicant files an application for exemption; 
(3)  The dwelling to be connected to the public sewer system must be the sole residence of the applicant claiming exemption; 
(4)  The total combined income during the immediately preceding calendar year from all sources of the owners of the dwelling living therein and of the owner's relatives living in the dwelling does not exceed twenty-three thousand five hundred dollars ($23,500.00); provided that the first five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) of income of each relative, other than spouse or spouses of the owner or owners living in the dwelling shall not be included in such total; and provided further that the first seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) or any portion thereof of income received by a permanently and totally disabled owner shall not be included in such total; and 
(5)  The net combined financial worth of the owners of the property shall not exceed eighty thousand dollars ($80,000.00), excluding the fair market value of the property to be connected to the public sewer system. Net combined financial worth shall include the value of all assets, including equitable interests, of the owner and of the spouse of the owner. 
(c)  Persons applying for an exemption under this section must file with the administrator an affidavit setting forth, in a manner prescribed by the administrator, the location and value of the property to be connected to the public sewer, the names of the persons related to the owner and occupying the dwelling, their gross combined income and their net combined financial worth. If such applicant is under sixty-five (65) years of age, a copy of the determination of disability, as set forth in subsection (b)(2) of this section, shall also be filed with the administrator. 
(d)  Where the person claiming an exemption meets the eligibility criteria set forth in this section, the exemption shall be as shown in the following schedule: 
Total income, all sources 	Amount of exemption 
$    00.00—15,000.00 	100% 
 15,000.01—17,000.00 	80% 
 17,000.01—19,000.00 	60% 
 19,000.01—21,000.00 	40% 
 21,000.01—23,500.00 	20% 
 
(e)  If, within twelve (12) months after the fee exemption is obtained under this section, the financial position of the person having the exemption changes, such that he or she no longer meets the criteria for qualification under this section, the amount of the exemption shall become due and payable to the city. 
(f)  Any person falsely claiming an exemption provided for by this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 29-11; Ord. No. 1035, 4-21-80; Ord. No. 1057, 6-16-80; Ord. No. 1209, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 1440, 3-5-84; Ord. No. 1693, 4-27-87; Ord. No. 1898, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 1938, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 2456, 8-26-97; Ord. No. 2492, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 3346, 5-13-14)  
Sec. 28-7. - Same—Certain financially disadvantaged persons generally. 
(a)  Exemption from payment of the sewer capital recovery fees prescribed by this article is provided for certain financially disadvantaged owners of single-family or duplex dwellings who qualify under this section. The exemption is to be administered by the city manager or his authorized designee, herein referred to as the administrator. The administrator is hereby authorized to prescribe, such rules as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for exemption. The administrator may require the production of certified tax returns and appraisal reports to establish income and financial worth. 
(b)  Exemptions shall be granted under this section subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Title to the property for which the exemption is sought must be held or partially held by the applicant at least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the installation or scheduled date of installation, whichever comes first, of the sewer line. 
(2)  The dwelling to be connected to the sewer line must be the sole residence of the applicant claiming exemption. 
(3)  The total combined income of the owner and the owner's relatives living in the household during the year immediately preceding the installation shall not exceed the most recent federally established poverty thresholds. 
(4)  The net combined financial worth of the owner shall not exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), excluding fair market value of the house to be connected to the sewer line. Net combined financial worth shall include the value of all assets, including equitable interests, of the owner and of the spouse of the owner. 
(c)  Persons applying for an exemption under this section must file with the administrator an affidavit, setting forth, in a manner prescribed by the administrator, the location and value of the property to be connected to the line, the names of the persons related to the owner and occupying the dwelling, their gross combined income and their net combined financial worth. 
(d)  Where the person claiming an exemption meets the eligibility criteria set forth in this section, the exemption shall be one hundred (100) percent of the sewer capital recovery fee. 
(e)  If, within twelve (12) months after an exemption is obtained under this section, the financial position of the person having the exemption changes such that he or she no longer meets the criteria for qualification under this section, the amount of the exemption shall become due and payable to the city. 
(f)  Any person falsely claiming an exemption or violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 29-12; Ord. No. 1693, 4-27-87; Ord. No. 1898, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 2501, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 3346, 5-13-14)  
Sec. 28-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3346, adopted May 13, 2014, repealed § 28-8, which pertained to sanitary sewer connection fee exemptions—families in community development target areas. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 28-9. - Sewer cleanouts. 
All buildings and dwellings connected to the public sewer system shall have a cleanout installed in the lateral line at or near the property lines served. 
(Code 1965, § 29-2, Ord. No. 1380, 6-27-83; Ord. No. 1712, 7-6-87; Ord. No. 2928, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 28-10. - Sewage disposal facilities for commercial and industrial units. 
(a)  In commercial and industrial units, there shall be provided therein or attached directly thereto and opening therein approved toilet facilities that afford protection against the elements, are flytight and properly lighted and ventilated in a manner approved by the housing officer. 
(b)  In the event any premises having a commercial or industrial unit thereon is not within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a sanitary sewer of usable elevation or a public water supply main or pipe existing in any public street, alley or right-of-way which abuts or adjoins the lot or parcel of land upon which the unit or premises exists, the requirements of this section regarding toilet facilities shall not apply; provided, that the water supply and method of sewage disposal shall be approved by the department of public health. 
(Code 1965), §§ 19-25, 19-36)  
Sec. 28-11. - Procedure when check in payment of fees or charges provided for in chapter is returned unpaid. 
In any case where fees or charges provided for in this chapter are paid by check, draft or other instrument and the check or other instrument is returned unpaid for any reason, no tap shall be installed or, if already installed, the sewer service or water service to the premises shall be discontinued until full payment of all fees and charges due under this chapter is received. 
(Code 1965, § 29-9)  
Secs. 28-12—28-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEWER MAINTENANCE AND SEWAGE TREATMENT CHARGES 
 
Sec. 28-26. - Sanitary sewer charges established. 
The following monthly charges are hereby established with respect to all property connected directly or indirectly to the public sewer system maintained by the city: 
1)  Residential uses: 
a)  Single-family detached residences: , $19.54 effective July 1, 2009, and $22.12 effective July 1, 2011; and $24.86 effective July 1, 2012; and $27.76 effective July 1, 2013; and $30.81 effective July 1, 2014. 
b)  Structures with two (2) or more family residential units with one (1) connection to the public sewer system, except where structures meet the criteria set forth in subsection (e), and trailer parks: 
(1)  First unit or trailer: $19.54 effective July 1, 2009, and $22.12 effective July 1, 2011; and $24.86 effective July 1, 2012; and $27.76 effective July 1, 2013; and $30.81 effective July 1, 2014. 
(2)  Each additional unit or trailer: $14.65 effective July 1, 2009, and $16.60 effective July 1, 2011; and $18.66 effective July 1, 2012; and $20.83 effective July 1, 2013; and $23.12 effective July 1, 2014. 
c)  Hotels and motels: 
(1)  First room provided for occupancy: $19.54 effective July 1, 2009, and $22.12 effective July 1, 2011; and $24.86 effective July 1, 2012; and $27.76 effective July 1, 2013; and $30.81 effective July 1, 2014. 
(2)  Each additional room provided for occupancy: $7.84 effective July 1, 2009, and $8.89 effective July 1, 2011; and $9.99 effective July 1, 2012; and $11.15 effective July 1, 2013; and $12.38 effective July 1, 2014. 
d)  Campgrounds: 
(1)  First space provided: $19.54 effective July 1, 2009, and $22.12 effective July 1, 2011; and $24.86 effective July 1, 2012; and $27.76 effective July 1, 2013; and $30.81 effective July 1, 2014. 
(2)  Each additional space provided: $7.84 effective July 1, 2009, and $8.89 effective July 1, 2011; and $9.99 effective July 1, 2012; and $11.15 effective July 1, 2013; and $12.38 effective July 1, 2014. 
e)  If a structure or property has two (2) or more family residential units, each of which is directly connected to the public sewer system owned and operated by the city, the charge for individual unit(s) shall be no less than $19.54 per unit effective July 1, 2009, and $22.12 effective July 1, 2011; and $24.86 effective July 1, 2012; and $27.76 effective July 1, 2013; and $30.81 effective July 1, 2014. 
f)  Separately metered multi-unit structures served by a privately-owned, on-site sewer collection system with a single connection point to the city's sewer system shall be charged $14.65 effective July 1, 2009, and $16.60 effective July 1, 2011; and $18.66 effective July 1, 2012; and $20.83 effective July 1, 2013; and $23.12 effective July 1, 2014. 
2)  Nonresidential uses: Effective July 1, 2009, for all nonresidential uses in which there is also supplied public water service, the sanitary sewer service charge shall be determined by the size of the water tap through which water is provided, as per the following table: 
Tap Size      Monthly 
Charge 
¾ inch .....$19.61 
1 inch .....24.76 
1½ inch .....49.02 
2 inch .....74.30 
3 inch .....145.85 
4 inch .....243.64 
6 inch .....489.01 
8 inch .....1,135.86 
10 inch .....1,878.81 
12 inch .....2,848.23 
Effective July 1, 2011, for all nonresidential uses in which there is also supplied public water service, the sanitary sewer service charge shall be determined by the size of the water tap through which water is provided, as per the following table: 
Tap Size 	Monthly Charge Effective July 1, 2011 
¾ inch 	$22.21 
1 inch 	28.04 
1½ inch 	55.52 
2 inch 	84.15 
3 inch 	165.18 
4 inch 	275.94 
6 inch 	553.83 
8 inch 	1,286.00 
10 inch 	2,128.00 
12 inch 	3,226.00 
 
Effective July 1, 2012, for all nonresidential uses in which there is also supplied public water service, the sanitary sewer service charge shall be determined by the size of the water tap through which water is provided, as per the following table: 
Tap Size 	Monthly Charge Effective July 1, 2012 
¾ inch 	$24.97 
1 inch 	31.52 
1½ inch 	62.40 
2 inch 	94.58 
3 inch 	185.66 
4 inch 	310.16 
6 inch 	622.50 
8 inch 	1,446.00 
10 inch 	2,392.00 
12 inch 	3,626.00 
 
Effective July 1, 2013, for all nonresidential uses in which there is also supplied public water service, the sanitary sewer service charge shall be determined by the size of the water tap through which water is provided, as per the following table: 
Tap Size 	Monthly Charge Effective July 1, 2013 
¾ inch 	$28.06 
1 inch 	35.43 
1½ inch 	70.14 
2 inch 	106.31 
3 inch 	208.68 
4 inch 	348.61 
6 inch 	699.67 
8 inch 	1,625.00 
10 inch 	2,688.00 
12 inch 	4,075.00 
 
Effective July 1, 2014, for all nonresidential uses in which there is also supplied public water service, the sanitary sewer service charge shall be determined by the size of the water tap through which water is provided, as per the following table: 
Tap Size 	Monthly Charge Effective July 1, 2014 
¾ inch 	$31.15 
1 inch 	39.32 
1½ inch 	77.84 
2 inch 	117.98 
3 inch 	231.60 
4 inch 	386.89 
6 inch 	776.51 
8 inch 	1,804.00 
10 inch 	2,983.00 
12 inch 	4,523.00 
 
a.  For all nonresidential uses in which public water service is not available, the monthly charge shall be as follows: 
(1)  0—4 commodes: $39.21 effective July 1, 2009, and $44.40 effective July 1, 2011; and $49.90 effective July 1, 2012; and $55.72 effective July 1, 2013; and $61.83 effective July 1, 2014. 
(2)  Each additional commode over four (4): $7.84 effective July 1, 2009, and $8.89 effective July 1, 2011; and $9.99 effective July 1, 2012; and $11.15 effective July 1, 2013; and $12.38 effective July 1, 2014. 
The charges prescribed in this section shall be calculated for each service period by multiplying the number of days in the service period by the applicable daily charge for the rates on a twelve-month basis. 
(Code 1965, §§ 29-4, 29-5; Ord. No. 1035, 4-21-80; Ord. No. 1139, 12-15-80; Ord. No. 1309, 7-12-82; Ord. No. 1380, 6-27-83; Ord. No. 1999, 8-14-90; Ord. No 2487, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2634, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2873, 5-10-05; Ord. No. 3129, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 28-26.1. - Nonresidential tap sizing. 
For nonresidential uses wherein an Omni-type meter combines domestic and fire flow through a single meter, the sewer charge provided by section 28-26 shall be based on a meter size equal to the calculated domestic flow. 
(Ord. No. 3229, 5-8-12, eff. 7-1-12)  
Sec. 28-27. - Sewage treatment charges established. 
In addition to the charges imposed by section 28-26, there are hereby imposed uniform charges for sewage treatment as follows: 
(a)  Where treatment of sewage is performed by the Hampton Roads Sanitation District, the charges shall be paid to the district in conformity with the rates established by the district. 
(b)  Where treatment of sewage is performed by the city, the charges shall be: 
(1)  For each single-family residence, including trailers and mobile homes: $3.00 per month. 
(2)  For all other structures, the charge shall be equal to those imposed by Hampton Roads Sanitation District for like structures. 
(Code 1965, § 29-6)  
Sec. 28-28. - Billing. 
(a)  The director of public utilities is hereby authorized to bill each customer, for charges due the city under this article. If the customer also receives water service from the city, charges provided for by this article may be included in the bill, along with waste collection and stormwater management charges levied pursuant to Chapter 32.5; provided that all charges shall be separately stated. The combined bill shall be issued for one (1) total amount. The director of public utilities is hereby authorized and directed to create policies and procedures for the efficient billing and collection of the combined bill, including a policy for allocating payments to the separate charges stated on the combined bill. 
(b)  The department of public utilities shall mail or deliver all bills for charges prescribed by this article, but failure to receive such bills shall not prevent the discontinuance of service, if the amount due is not paid within the time limits set forth in this article. 
(Code 1965, §§ 29-5, 29-7; Ord. No. 2827, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 3516, 9-5-17)  
Sec. 28-29. - When due and payable; notice of and interest on delinquency. 
All bills for charges prescribed by this article shall be due and payable twenty-one (21) days from the date of the bill, and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid in full within such time. A notice of such delinquency shall be mailed to the owner or occupant of the premises, directing such owner or occupant to show cause why the premises should not cease discharging sewage or waste, directly or indirectly, into the public sewer system. 
(Code 1965, § 29-7; Ord. No. 2827, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 3516, 9-5-17)  
Sec. 28-30. - Discontinuing service and assessing penalty for failure to pay. 
(a)  If, within ninety (90) days past the date of the bill, all charges provided for in this article are not paid, the water supply to the premises, if furnished by the city, shall be disconnected pursuant to section 15.2-2119 of the Code of Virginia, and such charges shall become a lien against the property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes, and shall be collected as provided by section 15.2-2119 of the Code of Virginia. If water service is so disconnected, arrearages and a delinquent service fee shall be paid in accordance with section 37-54 of this Code. 
(b)  For premises not supplied water by the city, the sewer service to such premises shall be disconnected, if a bill for charges under this article is not paid within two (2) months of the due date, and a penalty shall be assessed in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00). If sewer service is so disconnected, it shall not be reinstituted until payment is made to the city for all arrearage, plus the actual cost to make the reconnection, plus twenty-five percent (25%) of such cost as an administrative charge. Such charges and penalty shall become a lien on the property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes and shall be collected as provided by section 15.2-2119 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the above, no lien for unpaid sewer charges shall be recorded unless the charges were incurred by an owner of the property. 
(Code 1965, §§ 29-7, 29-8; Ord. No. 2827, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 3516, 9-5-17)  
Sec. 28-31. - Account initiation and reestablishment charge. 
(a)  For each new account established for a property not connected to city water, there shall be a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) to cover costs connected with the establishment of the account. 
(b)  When the account is discontinued or a service is inactivated for any reason, there shall be a twenty dollar ($20.00) charge for re-establishing the account or service. 
(Ord. No. 1380, 6-27-83; Ord. No. 1712, 7-6-87; Ord. No. 2827, 6-8-04)  
Secs. 28-32—28-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 28-46. - Violations of article. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 17-40)  
Sec. 28-47. - Permit required to install or repair. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install or repair, have installed or repaired, allow to be installed or repaired or contract to install or repair any septic tank or other sewage disposal system for himself/herself or any other person before the owner of the property on which the septic tank or other system is to be installed or repaired obtains a permit from the director of public health and pays a fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(b)  Notwithstanding the above, no fee shall be required for a permit to repair an existing septic tank or other sewage disposal system which has been previously approved. 
(Code of 1965, § 17-39; Ord. No. 2386, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 28-48. - Design standards; drainage easements; etc. 
The permit required by section 28-47 shall specify the design standards for the septic tank or other system, such as tank size, length of drainfield, location of tank, drainfield and well, where applicable, and such other facilities as may be required under rules and criteria of the state health department. Where grading and drainage improvements are required under such rules and criteria, the permit shall so stipulate. The director of public health shall require such drainage easements and other assurances as he deems adequate to guarantee the perpetual maintenance of such drainage improvements. 
(Code 1965, § 17-39)  
Sec. 28-49. - Maintenance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to maintain or cause to be maintained any septic tank or other sewage disposal system, including associated drainage improvements, in the manner specified in the permit issued under this article and in a manner satisfactory to the director of public health. All duties and responsibilities of any person for whose property a permit is issued under this article shall be binding upon any and all subsequent owners of such property for as long as such septic tank or sewage disposal system remains in service. 
(Code 1965, § 17-39)  
Sec. 28-50. - Removal, etc., of inoperative septic tanks. 
All inoperative septic tanks must be removed or, in lieu thereof, be pumped out and filled with sand, gravel or other similar acceptable material, unless such septic tank is inspected by a representative of the department of public health and is found to meet the standards of health and safety established by the director of public health, as approved by the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 17-39)  
Secs. 28-51—28-57. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SANITATION DISPOSAL CONTRACTORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— License tax for contractors removing contents of privies, cesspools, etc., § 18-75. 
 
Sec. 28-58. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the term "sanitation disposal contractor" shall mean any person who engages in the business of removing the contents of privies, cesspools, septic tanks and other similar facilities in the city. References in this article to the "director of public health" shall mean the director of public health of the city or his authorized representative. 
(Code 1965, § 17-33)  
Sec. 28-59. - Bond. 
(a)  The commissioner of revenue shall not issue any license under section 18-75 of this Code to any sanitation disposal contractor, until the applicant shall have posted with him a bond, with corporate surety, in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned upon faithful compliance with the terms of this article. 
(b)  If any sanitation disposal contractor is convicted of violating any provision of this article, in addition to any other penalty imposed, the court may order the forfeiture of the bond posted pursuant to this section. The forfeiture of such bond shall operate to suspend the license of such person until a new bond is posted. The commissioner of revenue shall not accept a new bond until the cause for the forfeiture has been removed. 
(Code 1965, §§ 17-35, 17-40)  
Sec. 28-60. - Approval of equipment and manner and place of disposal. 
(a)  Every sanitation disposal contractor shall obtain the written approval of the director of public health of all equipment to be used in such contractor's business and of the manner and place of disposal. No such equipment or manner or place of disposal shall be used or employed unless it has been so approved. The director of public health shall not approve such equipment or place of disposal, unless such equipment is capable of holding and transporting its contents without leakage or spillage and the place of disposal is such that no water supply or stream will be contaminated by the presence of the contents of the disposal vehicle and the presence of such contents at such place will not create a hazard to the health of any person. The manner of disposal shall not be approved, unless it is such that flies and other insects will not have access to such contents and it will not create a hazard to the health of any person. 
(b)  No license shall be issued to any sanitation disposal contractor under section 18-75 of this Code, until the applicant has submitted to the commissioner of revenue a written statement, signed by the director of public health, that the equipment to be used and the manner and place of disposal have been approved by the director of public health, as required by this section. 
(Code 1965, § 17-34)  
Sec. 28-61. - Identification of vehicles used to transport contents of privies, septic tanks, etc. 
Every vehicle used by a sanitation disposal contractor to transport the contents of privies, cesspools, septic tanks or similar facilities shall have displayed, on the outside of both doors thereof, the name of such contractor or his firm and his office address and phone number. 
(Code 1965, § 17-36)  
Sec. 28-62. - Display of license. 
The license issued under section 18-75 of this Code to a sanitation disposal contractor shall be displayed in the principal place of business and will be displayed, upon request, to the director of public health or to any police officer of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 17-36)  
Sec. 28-63. - Records to be kept. 
(a)  Every sanitation disposal contractor shall keep, at his principal place of business, a record of each business transaction, setting forth the following: Date, time, name of person to whom service is rendered, the address where pickup is made, route traveled and time and place of deposit. 
(b)  Records kept pursuant to this section shall, at all reasonable times, be open to inspection by the director of public health and any officer of the city with police jurisdiction. 
(Code 1965, 17-37, 17-38)  
ARTICLE IV. - USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - SEWER USE 
 
Sec. 28-64. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastes into the city's public sewer system that will interfere with the operation of the system and with the wastewater system of the Hampton Roads Sanitation District (the "district"), contaminate the receiving waters of the system, or otherwise be incompatible with the system; to protect the wastewater facilities of the City of Virginia Beach and those of the District; and to ensure that the city and the users of the public sewer system comply with federal and state mandates under the Clean Water Act and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(b)  The provisions of this division are intended to comply with provisions of the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) and the Special Order by Consent issued to the Cities of Virginia Beach, Chesapeake, Hampton, Newport News, Poquoson, Portsmouth, Suffolk and Williamsburg; the Counties of Gloucester, Isle of Wight and York; the Town of Smithfield; the Hampton Roads Sanitation District and the James City Service Authority, effective September 26, 2007. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 28-65. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in this division shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Day means the twenty-four-hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. 
Director means the director of public utilities or the authorized designee of the director of public utilities. 
Infiltration. The introduction of groundwater into the public sanitary sewer system. Infiltration includes, but is not limited to, frequent seepage of groundwater through defective or cracked pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished, from inflow. 
Inflow. Water, other than wastewater, that enters a sanitary sewer system (including service connections) from sources such as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar drains, yard drains, area drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cleanouts, cross connections between storm sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. 
Public sewer system includes the pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, force mains, and all other construction, devices, and appliances appurtenant thereto, located within the City of Virginia Beach and used for the conveyance of residential, commercial or industrial sewage or wastewater or other wastes to the Hampton Roads Sanitation District. 
Regional consent order or special order by consent means the regulatory order between the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality and localities within the Hampton Roads region, including the City of Virginia Beach, effective September 26, 2007. 
Storm sewer system means the system of roads, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, pipes, lakes, ponds, channels, storm drains and other facilities located within the City of Virginia Beach that are designed or used for collecting, storing or conveying stormwater or through which stormwater is collected, stored or conveyed. 
User means any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the city's wastewater collection system within the city's boundaries, including any person who contributes such wastewater from mobile sources, such as one who discharges hauled wastewater. 
Wastewater means a combination of liquid and water-carried wastes from the sanitary conveniences of residences, commercial buildings, industries, or institutions. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 3181, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 28-66. - Prohibited discharges. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any portion of the public sewer system, directly or indirectly, any wastes which may violate any law or governmental regulation or have an adverse or harmful effect on the public sewer system, maintenance personnel, processes, or equipment, or which may otherwise endanger the public or create a nuisance. The following discharges are prohibited: 
(a)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, solvent, fuel oil or any liquid, solid, or gas that may cause flammable or explosive conditions, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140° F (60° C) using test methods specified in Title 40, Part 261.21 of the Code of Federal Regulations (40 CFR Part 261.21) or any successor regulation. 
(b)  Any toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in such quantities that, alone or in combination with other wastewater constituents, may interfere with the sewage treatment process of the Hampton Roads Sanitation District or biosolids use or disposal, cause acute worker or public health and safety problems, materially increase the cost of treatment, or constitute a hazard to any beneficial stream use, including recreation, ascribed to the receiving waters of the effluent from the sewage treatment plant. 
(c)  Any waste having a pH in violation of requirements as provided in Title 40, Part 403 of the Code of Federal Regulations (40 CFR Part 403) or any successor regulation or having any detrimental characteristics that may cause injury or damage to persons or property. 
(d)  Any solids or viscous substances that may cause obstruction to flow or be detrimental to sewerage system operations. These objectionable substances include, but are not limited to, asphalt, dead animals, offal, ashes, sand, mud, straw, industrial process shavings, metals, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, bones, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, paper cups, milk containers, or other similar paper products, either whole or ground. 
(e)  Any significant quantities of unpolluted water such as rainwater, stormwater, groundwater, street drainage, yard drainage, private swimming pool discharge, or water from yard fountains, ponds or lawn sprays. 
(f)  Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which would otherwise exceed applicable limitations for any wastewater constituent. 
(g)  Any petroleum or mineral-based oils (non-saponifiable) and/or any animal or vegetable based oils, fats, or greases which in excess concentrations would tend to cause interference, pass-through, or adverse effects on the sewerage system, as determined by HRSD. No visible free non-saponifiable oil shall be present in the discharged waste stream. 
(h)  Any wastes with excessively high chemical oxygen demand (COD), biological oxygen demand (BOD), or decomposable organic content or any significant quantities of wastewater with a COD to BOD ratio exceeding six to one (6:1). COD to BOD ratio criteria are shown on Hampton Roads Sanitation District's list entitled "Wastewater Discharge Authorization Criteria COD/BOD Ratio," as amended from time to time. 
(i)  Any significantly odorous wastes or waste tending to create odors. 
(j)  Any waste containing dissolved sulfides in amounts which would be hazardous, cause damage to the sewerage system, or create a public nuisance. 
(k)  Any substance promoting or causing the promotion of toxic gases. 
(l)  Any wastes that will increase the temperature of the treatment plant influent to greater than 104° F (40° C). 
(m)  Any wastes requiring the introduction of an excessive quantity of chlorine or any other compound for sewage treatment purposes. 
(n)  Any significant amounts of deionized water, distilled water, steam condensate, cooling water, or discharges from heat pumps. 
(o)  Any waste producing significant discoloration of wastewater or treatment plant influent. 
(p)  Any waste containing substances that may precipitate, solidify, or become viscous at temperatures between 50° F (10° C) and 100° F (38° C). 
(q)  Any significant quantities of solid waste material that is not ground sufficiently to pass through a 3/8 inch screen. 
(r)  Any significant quantity of blown-down or bleed water from cooling towers or other evaporative coolers. 
(s)  Any quantities of radioactive material wastes which are in violation of applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 
(t)  Any significant quantities of inorganic material. 
(u)  Any discharge of any pollutant released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that would result in interference, cause adverse effects or pass through at the treatment plant. 
(v)  Any significant quantity of wastewater in which the Toxic Organics (TO) concentration exceeds 2.13 milligrams per liter (mg/l), or in which any one toxic organic compound exceeds 1.0 mg/l, or in which the BTEX (Benzene, Toluene, Ethylbenzene and Xylene) concentration exceeds 1.0 mg/l). 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 3181, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 28-67. - Discharges of stormwater or surface water. 
(a)  No person shall connect any sump pump or any roof, foundation, areaway, parking lot, roadway, or other surface runoff or groundwater drains to any sewer connected to any portion of the city's wastewater collection system unless such connection is authorized in writing, for good cause, by the director. 
(b)  All discharges of stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or other similar discharges of stormwater shall be made to discharge to storm sewers or natural outlets designed for such discharges, except as authorized under this section. No person shall construct or use any connection, drain, or arrangement which will permit any such waters to enter the public sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 3181, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 28-68. - Damage to the wastewater collection system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage, obstruct, introduce materials harmful to the collection system that would cause or contribute to sanitary sewer overflows, or tamper with any part of the public sewer system, including any manholes, cleanouts, plugs, pipes, pumping station, valves, apparatus, tools or fixtures. No person other than authorized agents or employees of the city, shall uncover any public sewer lines, operate any public fire hydrant or operate any valves connected with the public water and sanitary sewer systems without first obtaining express approval from the director of public utilities, unless such use is necessary for emergencies. 
(b)  Any person causing damage to or obstruction of the public sewer system shall be liable to the city for the cost of repairing such damage or obstruction. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 28-69. - Inspections. 
(a)  The director shall have authority to make such lawful inspections during reasonable hours for the purpose of observing, measuring, sampling, testing or reviewing records of the wastewater collection system installed in any building or structure as may be necessary or appropriate, including inspections performed for the purpose of ensuring that discharge to the city's public sanitary sewer system from such building or structure is not in violation of this division. The owner or occupant of such building or structure, or his or her designee, shall be entitled to accompany the director during such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 28-70. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any intentional or willful act or omission to act in violation of any of the provisions of this division shall be punishable by fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each day that a continuing violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. The court assessing such fines may, at its discretion, order such fines to be paid into the treasury of the city for the purpose of abating, preventing or mitigating environmental pollution. 
(b)  Any person who, intentionally or otherwise, commits any of the acts prohibited by this division or who fails to perform any of the acts required by this division shall be liable to the city in an action at law for all costs of containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and disposal of any substance unlawfully discharged into the wastewater collection system, as well as the costs of any damages or regulatory fines imposed upon the city, that are proximately caused by such violations. Such costs shall be collectible by the city in accordance with the provisions of sections 28-29 and 28-30. 
(c)  The city may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this division, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or in equity, shall be no defense to any such action. 
(d)  Except as expressly provided in section 28-70.1, the remedies set forth in this section and in section 28-70.1 shall be cumulative, not exclusive; and, it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 3181, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 28-70.1. - Civil penalties; scheduled violations. 
(a)  Except for the violations specified in the Schedule of Civil Penalties set forth in subsection (b), and without otherwise limiting the remedies which may be obtained under this division, the director may issue an order assessing a civil penalty or other monetary assessment in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  No order assessing a civil penalty for a violation shall be issued until after the alleged violator has been provided an opportunity for a hearing before the director, except with the consent of the alleged violator. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, on the alleged violator or his authorized representative at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall specify the time and place for the hearing, facts and legal requirements related to the alleged violation, and the amount of any proposed civil penalty. At the hearing the alleged violator may present evidence, including witnesses, regarding the occurrence of the alleged violation and the amount of the penalty, and may examine any witnesses for the city. A verbatim record of the hearing shall be made. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the director shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law and issue the order. 
(2)  No such order shall assess civil penalties in excess of thirty-two thousand five hundred dollars ($32,500.00) per violation, not to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per order, or such other amount as may be allowed under Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15 or any successor statute, except with the consent of the violator. 
(3)  The actual amount of any civil penalty assessed shall be based upon the severity of the violation, the extent of any potential or actual environmental harm or facility damage, the compliance history of the violator, any economic benefit realized from the noncompliance, and the ability of the violator to pay the penalty. In addition to civil penalties, the order may include a monetary assessment for actual damages to sewers, treatment works and appurtenances and for costs, attorney fees and other expenses resulting from the violation. 
(4)  Any civil penalty or other monetary assessment included in any such order shall be payable as set forth in the order. Any unpaid balance at the time payment of the civil penalty or other monetary assessment is due may be collected in an action at law against the violator or included in the violator's bill for sewer services and collected in accordance with sections 28-29 and 28-30. 
(5)  Any order issued by the director, whether or not such order assesses a civil penalty, shall inform the alleged violator of his right to judicial review of any final order by appeal to the circuit court on the record of proceedings before the director. To commence an appeal, the alleged violator shall file a petition in circuit court within thirty (30) days of the date of the final order, and failure to do so shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal. With respect to matters of law, the burden shall be on the party seeking review to designate and demonstrate an error of law subject to review by the court. With respect to issues of fact, the duty of the court shall be limited to ascertaining whether there was substantial evidence in the record to reasonably support such findings. 
(b)  Any violation listed in the following schedule shall subject the violator to a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for an initial summons and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each additional summons in lieu of any other civil penalty authorized by this section; provided, however, that the total amount for a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), as follows: 
(1)  The director, or any full-time employee of the department of public utilities designated by the director, may issue a civil summons ticket for a violation. Any person summoned or issued a ticket for a violation may make an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the city treasurer prior to the date fixed for trial. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability and pay the civil penalty established for the violation. 
(2)  If a person charged with a violation does not elect to enter a waiver of trial and admit liability, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. In any such trial, the city shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence the liability of the alleged violator. 
(3)  An admission of liability or finding of liability under this section shall not be deemed an admission at a criminal proceeding, and no civil action authorized by this section shall proceed while a criminal action is pending. 
(4)  Any civil penalties imposed pursuant to this subsection shall be paid into the treasury of the city for the purpose of abating, preventing or mitigating environmental pollution. 
SCHEDULE OF CIVIL PENALTIES 
Violation 	City Code Section 
Unauthorized roof leader connected to public sewer system 	28-67(a) 
Unauthorized sump pump connected to public sewer system 	28-67(a) 
Unauthorized connection to sanitary sewer allowing inflow and/or infiltration to enter the sanitary sewer system 	28-67(b) 
Discharges to public sewer system prohibited by Section 28-66 	28-66 
Willfully causing damage to, obstruction of, or introduction of materials harmful to public sewer collection system 	28-68(a) 
 
(Ord. No. 3181, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 3239, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 28-71. - Variances. 
The director may authorize a variance from the provisions of section 28-67 or 28-68 in any case in which a property owner or other person demonstrates that strict compliance with the provision from which a variance is sought would cause undue hardship or extraordinary expense and the director is satisfied that the authorization of the variance will not adversely affect the public sewer system. In such cases, the director shall impose such reasonable conditions as will ensure, to the extent possible, that the variance does not adversely affect the public sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 28-72. - Severability. 
The provisions of this division shall be severable, it being the intention of the city council that in the event one (1) or more of the provisions of this division are adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the validity and enforceability of the remaining provisions shall be unaffected by such adjudication. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09)  
DIVISION 2. - FATS, OILS, AND GREASE (FOG) 
 
Sec. 28-73. - Purpose; findings. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to aid in preventing the introduction and accumulation of fats, oils, and grease (FOG), which cause or tend to cause or contribute to sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions, into the municipal wastewater system. This division requires that grease control devices be installed, implemented, and maintained by food service establishments in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(b)  Findings. The city council hereby finds that: 
(1)  Grease buildup in the public sewer system occurs when FOG from cooking is allowed to be introduced into the system. FOG washed down sinks and floor drains builds up over time and eventually creates backups in the public sewer system which may result in sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs). SSOs constitute significant public health hazards, expose the city to costly environmental penalties, and are prohibited under the federal Clean Water Act. In 2008, thirty-eight (38) SSOs within the city were caused by accumulations of FOG in the public sewer system. 
(2)  The accumulation of FOG in the public sewer system leads to increased costs for maintaining sewers and wastewater treatment plants and cleaning blockages out of public and private property. During 2008, the department of public utilities responded to three thousand one hundred five (3,105) sewer blockages caused by accumulations of FOG in the public sewer system. 
(3)  FOG from food service establishments is a major source of FOG in the public sewer system. The use of properly sized, installed and maintained grease control devices in food service establishments, however, minimizes the introduction of FOG into the system. 
(4)  The special order by consent issued to the City of Virginia Beach and other localities and service providers within Hampton Roads, which became effective on September 26, 2007, requires the city, among other things, to develop and submit to the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) a Maintenance, Operations and Management (MOM) Plan that documents the MOM Plan elements used to manage the city's sewer system and minimize SSOs. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 28-74. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to all food service establishments, as defined herein, within the city that are required under the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code or applicable regulations of the Hampton Roads Sanitation District to have grease control devices and to all grease haulers providing service to any such food service establishment. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 28-75. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in this division shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Brown grease means floatable fats, oils, grease and settled solids produced during food preparation that are recovered from grease control devices. 
Building code administrator means the city's building code administrator or his or her authorized designee. The building code administrator is referred to in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code as the building official. 
Director means the city's director of public utilities or his or her authorized designee. 
Enforcement response plan means a system that sets forth the process and procedures for enforcement of this section by the city. 
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) means material, either liquid or solid, composed of fats, oils or grease from animal or vegetable sources. Examples of FOG include, but are not limited to, kitchen cooking grease, vegetable oil, bacon grease and organic polar compounds derived from animal or plant sources that contain multiple carbon triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in the Title 40, Part 135 of the Code of Federal Regulations (40 CFR 136), as may be amended from time to time. 
Food service establishment (FSE) means any commercial, institutional, or food processing facility that discharges kitchen or food preparation wastewaters and that is required to have a grease control device under the Virginia Uniform Building Code or applicable regulations of the Hampton Roads Sanitation District. 
Grease control device means a device used to collect, contain, and remove food waste and grease from the wastewater while allowing the remaining wastewater to be discharged to the city's wastewater collection system by gravity. Devices include grease interceptors, grease traps, automatic grease removal devices or other devices approved by the director. 
Grease hauler means a contractor who collects the contents of a grease interceptor or trap and transports it to a recycling or disposal facility. A grease hauler may also provide other services related to grease interceptor maintenance for a food service establishment. 
Grease interceptor means a structure or device, usually located underground and outside of a food service establishment, designed to collect, contain and remove food waste and grease from the wastewater while allowing the remaining wastewater to be discharged to the city's wastewater collection system by gravity. 
Grease removal device means an active, automatic device that separates and removes fats, oils and grease from effluent discharge and that cleans itself of accumulated FOG at least once every twenty-four (24) hours utilizing electromechanical apparatus. 
Grease trap means a device typically located indoors and under the sink, designed for separating and retaining grease prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the wastewater collection system. Such devices are typically passive (gravity fed) and compact with removable baffles. 
Public sewer system includes the pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, force mains, and all other construction, devices, and appliances appurtenant thereto, located within the City of Virginia Beach and used for the conveyance of residential, commercial or industrial sewage or wastewater or other wastes to the Hampton Roads Sanitation District. 
Renderable FOG container means a closed, leak-proof container for the collection and storage of yellow grease. 
Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code includes the model codes incorporated by reference therein, including, specifically, the International Plumbing Code. 
Yellow grease means fats, oils, and grease used in food preparation that have not been in contact or contaminated with other sources such as water, wastewater or solid waste. An example of yellow grease is fryer oil, which can be recycled into products such as animal feed, cosmetics and alternative fuel. Yellow grease is also referred to as renderable FOG. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 28-76. - Registration requirements for food service establishments. 
All food service establishments shall be required to register their grease control devices. Registrations shall be on forms provided by the director to ensure that such devices are properly sized and maintained and to facilitate inspection in accordance with the requirements established by the director. 
(a)  Existing food service establishments shall register all grease control devices within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this division; provided new establishments shall register such devices when requesting their water and sewer service, applying for a business license, or prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy, whichever is later. 
(b)  At least one employee of a food service establishment shall have completed a training program concerning the operation and maintenance of grease control devices, provided by the city, no later than ninety (90) days after the effective date of this division. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 3181, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 28-77. - Discharge limits. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged from any food service establishment any wastewater with fats, oils, grease or other substances harmful or hazardous to the public sewer system, the regional sanitary sewer system, or sewage treatment plant or processes, as determined by Section 301 (d) of the Hampton Roads Sanitation District's Industrial Wastewater Discharge Regulations or any successor regulation. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 28-78. - Grease control devices. 
(a)  Requirements. All food service establishments shall have a grease control device or devices meeting all applicable requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as determined by the building code administrator. Any grease control device sized in accordance with the "Hampton Roads Regional Technical Standards, Sizing of Grease Control Devices" shall be deemed to meet the requirements of the section. 
(1)  New establishments. Except as provided in subdivision (a)(2), food service establishments shall be required to install, operate, and maintain a grease control device in compliance with the requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Grease control devices shall be installed and registered prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Existing establishments. Food services establishments in operation as of the effective date of this division may continue to operate and maintain their existing grease control devices, provided such grease control devices are in proper operating condition and are not found to be contributing FOG in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or to necessitate increased maintenance of the sanitary sewer system. An existing food service establishment shall install a new grease control device that complies with the requirements of the Uniform Statewide Building Code if its grease control device is determined by the director not to be in proper operating condition or if is found to be contributing FOG in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or to necessitate increased maintenance of the sanitary sewer system. 
(3)  Renovations or expansions. Food service establishments that are renovated or expanded shall, if required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, install new grease control devices meeting the requirements of such Code. 
(4)  Retrofitting. Existing establishments lacking approved grease control devices by reason of having been grandfathered from such requirement under the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall, if required by the Hampton Roads Sanitation District, install grease control devices in accordance with the regulations of the district. Such grease control devices shall be registered within thirty (30) days of their installation. 
(b)  Installation. Grease control devices shall be installed by a plumber licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia. Every grease control device shall be installed and connected so that it may be readily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of the intercepted food waste and grease at any time. 
(c)  Maintenance. Grease control devices shall be maintained as follows: 
(1)  Grease control devices shall be properly maintained at all times. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating material, wastewater and settled solids. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the grease interceptor or private sewer line or into any portion of the city's or HRSD's wastewater collection system is prohibited. 
(2)  Grease interceptors shall be pumped out completely when the total accumulation of surface fats, oils and grease, including floating solids and settled solids, reaches twenty-five (25) percent of the overall liquid volume. At no time shall a grease control device be cleaned less frequently than once every three (3) months unless allowed by the director for good cause shown. Approval will be granted on a case-by-case basis upon submittal of a request by the food service establishment documenting reasons for the proposed frequency variance. The director shall not approve any request unless the applicant demonstrates that the frequency variance will not result in the introduction of any greater quantities of FOG into the public sewer system than would otherwise be introduced. 
(3)  Grease traps and grease removal devices shall be opened, inspected and completely cleaned of food solids and fats, oils and grease a minimum of once per week, unless allowed by the director for good cause shown. Approval will be granted on a case-by-case basis upon submittal of a request by the food service establishment documenting reasons for the proposed frequency variance. The director shall not approve any request unless the applicant demonstrates that the frequency variance will not result in the introduction of any greater quantities of FOG into the public sewer system than would otherwise be introduced, and in no event shall the content of food solids and fats, oils, and grease exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the overall liquid depth of the device. 
(4)  The director of public utilities may establish a more frequent cleaning schedule if the food service establishment is found to be contributing FOG in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or to necessitate increased maintenance of the wastewater collection system. 
(5)  Unless authorized by the director, the use of additives including, but not limited to, products that contain solvents, emulsifiers, surfactants, caustics, acids, enzymes or bacteria are prohibited for use as grease management control; provided, however, that additives may be used to clean the FSE drain lines so long as the usage of such additives will not cause FOG to be discharged from the grease control device to the sanitary sewer system. The use of additives shall not be substituted for the maintenance procedures required by this section. The director shall not approve the use of any additives unless he is satisfied that such use will have no adverse effects upon the public sewer system. 
(6)  Any grease control device rated for a flow of fifty (50) gallons per minute (gpm) (one hundred (100) lb.) or higher shall be maintained by a grease hauler meeting the requirements of section 28-79. 
(d)  Waste disposal. Waste material from grease control devices shall be disposed of as follows: 
(1)  Waste removed from a grease trap shall be disposed of in the solid waste disposal system or by a grease hauler certified by the Hampton Roads Planning District Commission. 
(2)  Waste removed from a grease interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such wastes. No materials removed from interceptors shall be returned to any grease interceptor, private sewer line or into any portion of the city's or HRSD's wastewater collection system. 
(3)  Yellow grease shall be disposed of in a renderable FOG container in which contents will not be discharged to the environment. Yellow grease shall not be poured or discharged into the city's or HRSD's wastewater collection system. 
(e)  Inspection. The director shall have the authority to make such lawful inspections as are authorized by law during reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting, observing, taking measurement, sampling, testing or reviewing the records of the wastewater collection system and grease control devices installed in a food service establishment to ensure that such food service establishment is compliance with this division. Operational changes, maintenance and repairs required by the director shall be implemented as noted in the written notice received by the food service establishment. The owner or occupant of such food service establishment, or his or her designee, shall be entitled to accompany the director during such inspection. 
(f)  Recordkeeping. Food service establishments shall maintain records meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  Food service establishments shall retain and make available for inspection and copying records of all cleaning and maintenance for the previous three (3) years for all grease control devices. Cleaning and maintenance records shall include, at a minimum, the dates of cleaning/maintenance, the names and business addresses of the company or person performing each cleaning/maintenance and the volume of waste removed in each cleaning. Such records shall be kept on site and shall be made available to the director upon request. 
(2)  Food service establishments shall retain and make available for inspection and copying records of yellow grease disposal for the previous three (3) years. Yellow grease disposal logs shall include, at a minimum, the dates of disposal, name and business address of the company or person performing the disposal and the volume of yellow grease removed in each cleaning. Such records shall be kept on site and shall be made available to the director upon request. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 3181, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 28-79. - Requirements for grease haulers. 
(a)  Any person collecting, pumping or hauling waste from grease control devices within the city shall be certified under the Regional Grease Hauler Program of the Hampton Roads Planning District Commission and shall be approved through a Hampton Roads Sanitation District Indirect Wastewater Discharge Permit or a permit from the facility in which waste will be disposed. 
(b)  Grease haulers shall notify the director within twenty-four (24) hours of any incident required to be reported to the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
(c)  Grease haulers shall retain and make available for inspection and copying by the director, for a period of at least three (3) years, all records related to grease interceptor pumping and waste disposal from businesses located in the city's wastewater service area. The director may require additional record keeping and reporting, as necessary, to ensure compliance with the terms of this division. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 3181, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 28-80. - Modification and repair. 
(a)  The director may require existing food service establishments to modify or repair any noncompliant grease control device and appurtenances within thirty (30) calendar days of written notification by the director. The director may grant extensions for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 28-81. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any intentional or willful act or omission to act in violation of any of the provisions of this division shall be punishable by fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each day that a continuing violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. The court assessing such fines may, at its discretion, order such fines to be paid into the treasury of the city for the purpose of abating, preventing or mitigating environmental pollution. 
(b)  Any person who, intentionally or otherwise, commits any of the acts prohibited by this division or who fails to perform any of the acts required by this division shall be liable to the city in an action at law for all costs of containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and disposal of any substance unlawfully discharged into the wastewater collection system, as well as the costs of any damages or regulatory fines imposed upon the city, that are proximately caused by such violations. Such costs shall be collectible by the city in accordance with the provisions of sections 28-29 and 28-30. 
(c)  In addition to any other remedy for the violation of this division, the city may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this division, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or in equity, shall be no defense to any such action. 
(d)  Except as expressly provided in section 28-81.1, the remedies set forth in this section are cumulative, not exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 3181, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 28-81.1. - Civil penalties; scheduled violations. 
(a)  Except for the violations specified in the Schedule of Civil Penalties set forth in subsection (b), and without otherwise limiting the remedies which may be obtained under this division, the director may issue an order assessing a civil penalty or other monetary assessment in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  No order assessing a civil penalty for a violation shall be issued until after the alleged violator has been provided an opportunity for a hearing before the director, except with the consent of the alleged violator. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, on the alleged violator or his authorized representative at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall specify the time and place for the hearing, facts and legal requirements related to the alleged violation, and the amount of any proposed civil penalty. At the hearing the alleged violator may present evidence, including witnesses, regarding the occurrence of the alleged violation and the amount of the penalty, and may examine any witnesses for the city. A verbatim record of the hearing shall be made. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the director shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law and issue the order. 
(2)  No order issued by the director shall assess civil penalties in excess of thirty-two thousand five hundred dollars ($32,500.00) per violation, not to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per order, or such other amount as may be allowed under Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15 or any successor statute, except with the consent of the violator. 
(3)  The actual amount of any civil penalty assessed shall be based upon the severity of the violation, the extent of any potential or actual environmental harm or facility damage, the compliance history of the violator, any economic benefit realized from the noncompliance, and the ability of the violator to pay the penalty. In addition to civil penalties, the order may include a monetary assessment for actual damages to sewers, treatment works and appurtenances and for costs, attorney fees and other expenses resulting from the violation. 
(4)  Any civil penalty or other monetary assessment included in any such order shall be payable as set forth in the order. Any unpaid balance at the time payment of the civil penalty or other monetary assessment is due may be collected in an action at law against the violator or included in the violator's bill for sewer services and collected in accordance with sections 28-29 and 28-30. 
(5)  Any order issued by the director, whether or not such order assesses a civil penalty, shall inform the alleged violator of his right to judicial review of any final order by appeal to the circuit court on the record of proceedings before the director. To commence an appeal, the alleged violator shall file a petition in circuit court within thirty (30) days of the date of the final order, and failure to do so shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal. With respect to matters of law, the burden shall be on the party seeking review to designate and demonstrate an error of law subject to review by the court. With respect to issues of fact, the duty of the court shall be limited to ascertaining whether there was substantial evidence in the record to reasonably support such findings. 
(b)  Any violation listed in the following schedule shall subject the violator to a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for an initial summons and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each additional summons in lieu of any other civil penalty authorized by this section; provided, however, that the total amount for a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), as follows: 
(1)  The director, or any full-time employee of the department of public utilities designated by the director, may issue a civil summons ticket for a violation. Any person summoned or issued a ticket for a violation may make an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the city treasurer prior to the date fixed for trial. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability and pay the civil penalty established for the violation. 
(2)  If a person charged with a violation does not elect to enter a waiver of trial and admit liability, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. In any such trial, the city shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence the liability of the alleged violator. 
(3)  An admission of liability or finding of liability under this section shall not be deemed an admission at a criminal proceeding, and no civil action authorized by this section shall proceed while a criminal action is pending. 
(4)  Any civil penalties imposed pursuant to this subsection shall be paid into the treasury of the city for the purpose of abating, preventing or mitigating environmental pollution. 
SCHEDULE OF CIVIL PENALTIES 
Violation 	City Code Section 
Failure to maintain cleaning and maintenance records 	28-78(f)(1) 
Failure to maintain yellow grease disposal records 	28-78(f)(2) 
Failure to maintain certified employee with completed grease control device training 	28-76(b) 
Failure to register grease control device(s) 	28-76 
Failure to use certified grease hauler for grease control device over rated over 50 gallons per minute 	28-78(c)(6) 
Failure to properly maintain grease control device 	28-78(c) 
Failure to allow inspection of grease control device 	28-78(e) 
Unauthorized use of additives including, but not limited to, products that contain solvents, emulsifiers, surfactants, caustics, acids, enzymes or bacteria 	28-78(c)(5) 
Failure to have grease a control device or devices meeting all applicable requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code 	28-78(a) 
Failure to make required modification or repair to grease control device 	28-80 
 
(Ord. No. 3181, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 3239, 6-12-12)  
Sec. 28-82. - Severability. 
The provisions of this division shall be severable, it being the intention of the city council that in the event one (1) or more of the provisions of this division are adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the validity and enforceability of the remaining provisions shall be unaffected by such adjudication. 
(Ord. No. 3067, 2-24-09)  
Chapter 28.5 - SMOKING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Food and food establishments, Ch. 13; hotels and similar establishments, Ch. 15; cigarette tax, § 35-206 et seq. 
 
Sec. 28.5-1. - Legislative purpose and intent. 
Based on a substantial body of scientific evidence and on the 1986 Report of the Surgeon General entitled "The Health Consequences of involuntary Smoking," the City of Virginia Beach hereby acknowledges that passively inhaled tobacco smoke poses a potential health hazard to persons exposed thereto. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by regulating the smoking of tobacco in designated public places in a manner that recognizes the competing interests of smokers and nonsmokers, and the burdens hereby imposed on persons in control of the places so regulated. The regulations contained herein are intended to be viewed as minimum standards and shall not be construed as limiting, in any manner, the authority of persons in control of public places to implement more stringent standards applicable to the particular establishment or organization. 
(Ord. No. 1832, 2-27-89; Ord. No. 1858, 5-1-89)  
Sec. 28.5-2. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall, for purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(a)  Bar or lounge area shall mean an area or a room utilized primarily for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises and in which the sale of food is merely incidental to the sale of alcoholic beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar or lounge area, the term "bar" or "lounge area" shall not be construed to encompass an entire restaurant or any dining area. 
(b)  Child-care facility shall mean any facility which is a "child-care center" or a "family day-care home" as defined by section 63.1-195 of the Code of Virginia, and any amendments thereto. 
(c)  Health-care facility shall mean any facility or institution providing individual care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other medical, physiological or psychological conditions. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aged or chronically ill, laboratories, and waiting areas of any other health care provider. 
(d)  Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(e)  Public meeting and/or hearing shall mean any meeting, assembly and/or hearing held in a public building or building leased for a public purposes which is open to the public for the conduct of the affairs of, and the transaction of business by, any legislative, administrative or advisory body or agency of the city, including boards, commissions, authorities, councils, committees, and any subordinate groups thereof, receiving or expending, and supported in whole or in part by, public funds. 
(f)  Public place shall mean an enclosed area available for use by, or accessible to, the general public during the normal course of business, conducted by either private or public entities. 
(g)  Restaurant shall mean any building, structure, or area used as, maintained as, advertised as, or held out to the public to be an establishment where food is made available to be consumed on the premises. 
(h)  Retail or service establishment shall mean any establishment which offers goods or services for sale to the general public. 
(i)  Smoke or smoking shall mean the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment, or the lighting, inhaling or exhaling of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind. 
(j)  Theater shall mean any indoor facility or auditorium, open to the public, which is primarily used for, or designed for, the purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage production, musical recital, dance, lecture or other similar performance. 
(Ord. No. 1832, 2-27-89)  
Sec. 28.5-3. - Smoking prohibited in certain public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any of the following public places: 
(1)  Elevators, regardless of capacity, except in an elevator located in a single-family dwelling. 
(2)  Retail and service establishments or financial institutions serving the general public, including, but not limited to, department stores, grocery stores, convenience stores, drugstores, clothing stores, shoe stores, hardware stores, banks, savings and loan institutions, hair salons and barbershops. 
(3)  Indoor service lines, cashier areas, and counter service areas. 
(4)  Public restrooms. 
(5)  Health care facilities, regardless of capacity. 
(6)  Rooms in which a public meeting or hearing is being held. 
(7)  Places of entertainment, including, but not limited to, theatres, concert halls, gymnasiums, auditoriums, or other enclosed arenas. 
(8)  Art galleries, libraries, museums, or similar cultural facilities. 
(9)  Educational facilities, whether public or private, in common areas such as classrooms, offices, hallways, auditoriums, and public meeting rooms. 
(10)  Child-care facilities. 
(11)  Indoor facilities used for recreational purposes. 
(12)  Any part of a restaurant, bingo hall or bowling alley designated a "no-smoking" area pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(13)  Buildings owned or leased by the city or the school board used for public purposes with the exception of lawfully designated smoking areas. 
(14)  Meeting houses, community centers, group homes, or recreational facilities open to the public at large. 
(15)  Vehicles used regularly for public transportation including, but not limited to, transit buses and school buses. 
(b)  The owner or person in charge of any building, structure, space, place or area in which smoking is prohibited may designate separate rooms or areas in which smoking is permitted, provided that: 
(1)  The designated smoking area shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of that portion of the building, structure, space, place or area open to the general public. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the twenty-five (25) percent limitation, the designated smoking area may not encompass any area outlined in subsections (a) (1), (3), (4), (6), (12) and (15). 
(3)  Designated smoking areas shall be separate to the extent reasonably practicable from those rooms or areas entered by the public in the normal course of use of the particular business or institution. 
(4)  In designated smoking areas, ventilation systems and existing physical barriers shall be used when reasonably practicable to minimize the permeation of smoke into no-smoking areas. 
(Ord. No. 1832, 2-27-89; Ord. No. 1858, 5-1-89)  
Sec. 28.5-4. - Designated no-smoking areas in restaurants, bingo halls and bowling alleys. 
(a)  Any restaurant, bingo hall or bowling alley having a seating capacity of fifty (50) or more persons shall have a designated no-smoking area sufficient to meet customer demand. The designated no-smoking area shall be located in a separate room if one is available or, if no separate room is available, in a compact and contiguous area as far removed from areas where smoking is permitted (and closest to the best source of ventilation) as reasonably possible under applicable building, fire and city code regulations. 
(b)  Any restaurant, bingo hall or bowling alley required to have a designated no-smoking area shall post signs in accordance with the provisions of section 28.5-6 at each entrance to the establishment indicating that a no-smoking area is available. 
(Ord. No. 1832, 2-27-89; Ord. No. 1858, 5-1-89)  
Sec. 28.5-5. - Where smoking not regulated. 
This chapter is not intended to regulate smoking in the following places and/or under the following conditions: 
(a)  Bars and lounge areas. 
(b)  Retail tobacco stores. 
(c)  Restaurants, conference/meeting rooms, and public and private assembly rooms while these places are being used for private functions. 
(d)  Private hospital rooms. 
(e)  Areas of enclosed shopping centers or malls that are external to the retail stores and are used by customers as a route of travel from one store to another, and that consist primarily of walkways and seating arrangements. 
(f)  Lobby areas of hotels, motels, and other establishments open to the public for overnight accommodation. 
(Ord. No. 1832, 2-27-89; Ord. No. 1858, 5-1-89)  
Sec. 28.5-6. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  Any person who owns, manages or otherwise controls any building or area in which smoking is regulated by this chapter shall post in an appropriate place in a clear, conspicuous, and sufficient manner "Smoking Permitted" signs or "No Smoking" signs (or a sign displaying the international "no smoking" symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a circle with a bar across it). Print on such signs shall be at least one inch in height and the international symbol, if used, shall have a circle of at least four (4) inches in diameter. 
(b)  Every restaurant, bingo hall and bowling alley regulated by this chapter shall post at or near its entrance a sign stating that a no-smoking section is available. 
(c)  "No Smoking" signs may, but are not required to, contain language that smoking is prohibited by city ordinance and that violation of the no-smoking prohibition is a Class 4 misdemeanor punishable by a fine up to one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 1832, 2-27-89; Ord. No. 1858, 5-1-89; Ord. No. 1943, 2-5-90)  
Sec. 28.5-7. - Structural modifications. 
Persons regulated by the provisions of this chapter are encouraged to make such structural modifications to their respective buildings or structures as may be necessary to prevent or reduce the permeation of smoke from smoking areas into no-smoking areas; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring any such person to make such modifications. 
(Ord. No. 1832, 2-27-89)  
Sec. 28.5-8. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the prohibitions or restrictions of this chapter to fail to comply with its provisions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area prohibited or restricted by the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1832, 2-27-89)  
Sec. 28.5-9. - Compliance oversight and enforcement. 
(a)  The department of public health and/or any other department designated by the city manager shall perform an evaluation for compliance with all requirements of this chapter in the course of an otherwise mandated inspection. 
(b)  Any law enforcement officer may issue a summons for violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1832, 2-27-89; Ord. No. 2234, 6-22-93)  
Sec. 28.5-10. - Other applicable laws and policies. 
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise prohibited or restricted by other applicable statutes and ordinances, or the policies of individual establishments or organizations. 
(Ord. No. 1832, 2-27-89; Ord. No. 1858, 5-1-89)  
Chapter 30 - SOIL REMOVAL, OTHER LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Removing sand from shores, beaches, etc., § 6-13; disturbing or removing grass or other vegetation placed to catch sand for rebuilding dunes, § 6-14; permit for dredging, filling, etc., in waters, marshlands and lowlands, § 6-151; building regulations, Ch. 8; sewers, Ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 33; swimming pools, Ch. 34; zoning ordinance, App. A; subdivision ordinance, App. B; site plan ordinance, App. C; stormwater management, App. D; Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance, App. F. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Excavations for farm ponds or fish ponds for bona fide agricultural operations. 
(a)  This section shall only apply to farm ponds for bona fide agricultural operations, and not to borrow pits as defined in the city zoning ordinance (appendix A) or stormwater management facilities as defined in the stormwater management ordinance (appendix D). 
(b)  Prior to the excavation for a farm pond or fish pond, the property owner shall submit to the director of the department of agriculture a construction plan showing the location, dimension and depth of the proposed excavation and the intended use and location of the excavated material. 
(c)  The edge of any excavation for farm ponds or fish ponds for bona fide agricultural operations shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from any exterior property line and at least one hundred (100) feet from all existing or proposed public streets and highways. 
(d)  The director of planning may grant an exception to the setback requirements imposed by this section when he finds that due to existing conditions and circumstances, the location of a farm pond or fish ponds within the required setback area will not adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. In reviewing requests for exceptions, the director of planning shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  Existing and planned uses of adjacent properties. 
(2)  Constructability without adversely impacting adjacent properties. 
(3)  Accessibility for maintenance without adversely impacting adjacent properties. 
(4)  Density of population in the immediate area. 
(5)  Traffic volume and safety issues on adjacent roadways. 
(6)  Design and structural integrity of adjacent roadways. 
(7)  Protection of trees and other environmental considerations. 
(e)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 31.10, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 2004, 10-2-90; Ord. No. 2308, 2-7-95; Ord. No. 2393, 6-11-96)  
Secs. 30-2—30-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BORROW PITS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-16. - Definition. 
For the purpose of this article, the term "borrow pit" means any operation involving the breaking or disturbing of the surface soil or rock, where the primary purpose of the operation is to facilitate or accomplish the extraction or removal of sand, soil, gravel, fill or other similar material. Specifically exempt from this definition are the following: 
(1)  Any excavation for roads, drainage, stormwater management facilities, as defined in the city stormwater management ordinance (Appendix D), or similar features necessarily incidental to, and in accordance with, the approved construction plans for a residential subdivision or other similar development activity; provided, however, if the depth or surface area of the excavation exceeds that of the approved construction plans and the excavated material is hauled offsite, an excavation permit and conditional use permit for a borrow pit must be obtained. 
(2)  Any excavation for the sole purpose of conducting a bona fide agricultural operation, including, but not limited to, excavations to improve drainage, provide watering facilities for livestock, create a holding lagoon for animal waste or farm ponds or fish ponds; provided that none of the excavated material may be hauled off site or sold. 
(3)  Any excavation or excavations on any single lot or parcel of land which total less than one-quarter (1/4) acre in area and less than twelve (12) feet in excavated depth as measured from the original ground level, to the lowest point of the excavation. 
(4)  Any trench, ditch or hole for utility lines, drainage pipes or other similar public works facilities or projects where the excavation is in accordance with the approved construction plans. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 31.1, 8-25-90; Ord. No. 2331, 6-6-95; Ord. No. 2369, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2394, 6-22-96)  
Sec. 30-17. - Violations of article. 
Any violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by confinement in jail for a period not to exceed one (1) year, either or both. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 31.1, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 2144, 6-23-92)  
Sec. 30-18. - Permitted only in appropriate zoning districts. 
Borrow pits shall be allowed only as provided in the city zoning ordinance [appendix A]. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 31.3, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 2144, 6-23-92)  
Sec. 30-18.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 30-18.1, requiring registration of existing excavations from which borrow material is sold, derived from Ord. No. 1085, § 31.7, adopted Aug. 25, 1980, was repealed by Ord. No. 2144, adopted June 23, 1992.  
Sec. 30-19. - Site inspections and inspection fees. 
The department of planning shall periodically inspect the sites of excavations for which permits are issued under this article to ensure compliance with this article and other provisions, as required by the city council, and a reasonable fee for such inspections shall be paid. The director of planning or his designee may determine the amount of the fee based upon the anticipated costs associated with the anticipated periodic inspections for compliance. Such fee shall be submitted to the director of planning and made payable to the treasurer of the city of Virginia Beach. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 31.5, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 2331, 6-6-95; Ord. No. 2394, 6-11-94)  
Sec. 30-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2394, adopted June 11, 1996, repealed § 30-20, which pertained to the fee for removal of material, and which derived from: 
Ord. No. 	Sec. 	Date 	Ord. No. 	Sec. 	Date 
1085 	31.8 	 8-25-80 	1967 	— 	 6-11-90 
2144 	— 	 -23-92 	2331 	— 	 6- 6-95 
  
Secs. 30-21, 30-22. - Reserved.  
Sec. 30-23. - Fencing. 
Where deemed necessary by the director of planning, the holder of a permit issued under this article shall be required to erect a chain link type fence around the perimeter of the area to be excavated or being excavated. Such fence shall be erected to a height of six (6) feet and shall completely encircle such excavation. All gates and other entrances shall be kept locked at all times when not in use. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 31.9. 8-25-80; Ord. No. 2331, 6-6-95)  
Secs. 30-24—30-26. - Reserved.  
Sec. 30-27. - Slope of banks. 
All slopes around the edge of excavated areas shall be left with a slope no greater than three (3) feet horizontal to one foot vertical, except that the director of planning may authorize a slope of one foot horizontal to one foot vertical from a depth of fourteen (14) feet below the elevation of the designed water surface of borrow pits that will be excavated to a depth greater than twenty (20) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 31.9, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 2331, 6-6-95)  
Sec. 30-28. - Abandonment of pit. 
No pit shall be abandoned unless the owner has requested a final inspection from the department of planning, has submitted a final "as built" plat drawn by a certified engineer or land surveyor and has received a final release, in writing, from the director of planning, at which time any surety on a bond filed pursuant to section 30-37 of this article or section 227 of the city zoning ordinance shall be released. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 31.9, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 2331, 6-6-95)  
Sec. 30-29. - Bottom of excavated area to be left in level state; topsoil restoration and planting. 
(a)  The bottom of all excavated areas, inundated or otherwise, shall be left in a level state. 
(b)  Topsoil restoration and planting shall be in conformance with the City of Virginia Beach erosion and sediment control requirements and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 31.9, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 2144, 6-23-92)  
Sec. 30-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2331, adopted June 6, 1995, amended the Code by deleting provisions formerly codified as § 30-30, which provided for the incorporation of certain state statutes, the Mineral Mining Regulations, Revegetation Guidelines and Drainage Handbook promulgated by the Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals and Energy by reference, which provisions derived from Ord. No. 2144, adopted June 23, 1992.  
Secs. 30-31—30-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 30-36. - Required; conditional use permit prerequisite to issuance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a borrow pit without first obtaining an excavation permit to do so from the department of planning. 
(b)  The department of planning shall not issue an excavation permit for any proposed excavation for which a conditional use permit has not been granted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1085, §§ 31.2, 31.3, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 2144, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2331, 6-6-95)  
Sec. 30-37. - Application generally. 
After approval by the city council of a conditional use permit for a borrow pit, the owner of record shall cause to be filed with the department of planning an application and site plan for an excavation permit. The application fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of the property affected. 
(2)  The names and addresses of owners of all property abutting the property for which the excavation permit is sought. 
(3)  If the applicant or owner is a corporation, the names and addresses of its corporate officers and registered agent. 
(4)  An aerial photograph of the area to be excavated, with the boundaries of such area clearly delineated. 
(5)  A copy of the current recorded survey or plat, if available, prepared by an engineer or land surveyor, certified by the commonwealth, and drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet, submitted in five (5) copies. 
(6)  The boundaries of the area to be excavated by courses and distances. 
(7)  The current field topography, including the location of all watercourses. 
(8)  The means of vehicular access to the proposed excavation. 
(9)  A cross-section of any banks or walls to be established through the process of excavating. 
(10)  The number of cubic yards to be excavated. 
(11)  The areas proposed for the storage of overburden and other spoil during the process of excavating. 
(12)  The proposed date on which excavating will commence, the proposed date on which the excavation will be completed and the proposed date that all required restoration measures are to be completed. 
(13)  The location of all haul roads leading to public streets and highways within the area, as well as the on-site haul road, the point at which the haul road intersects the public right-of-way, the nearest street intersections in all directions leaving the excavation site, and all existing and proposed entrances on both sides of the public street within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed entrance. 
(14)  A detailed description of the on-site haul road and the entrance to the public right-of-way, including width, radii, composition of surface material and length of improved surface. 
(15)  A statement listing the public streets and highways to be used as haul routes to access an arterial or major street or highway. 
(16)  A traffic maintenance control plan, including, but not limited to, sign type, size, color, lettering size and location. 
(17)  A description or plan of all proposed improvements to mitigate the traffic impacts associated with the hauling operation including, but not limited to, turn lanes, signalization, striping and other traffic control measures. 
(18)  The location of all test wells and depth of borings, where required, which shall be within the setback requirements of this article. The location of test wells adjacent to residential areas shall be subject to approval of the department of planning. 
(19)  An erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
(20)  A statement of the methods to be used to maintain or repair any public street or highway to be used for hauling purposes. The department of planning shall determine the acceptability of the methods proposed by the applicant and, if deemed necessary, shall require the posting of a bond to insure against road damage due to the hauling. 
(21)  A copy of the mining permit issued by the Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals and Energy. 
(Ord. No. 1085, §§ 31.4, 31.9, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 2144, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2331, 6-6-95; Ord. No. 2394, 6-22-96)  
Sec. 30-38. - Restoration plan to accompany application. 
Each application for a permit under this division shall be accompanied by a plan for the restoration of excavated areas. Such plan shall include the following elements: 
(1)  General plan for restoration. A general land use plan for the parcel of property wherein the excavation will be conducted shall be prepared. This plan shall be in the form of an overlay for the aerial photograph required by section 30-37. It shall show the areas to be left in an inundated state, the proposed pattern of land use around inundated areas and all areas where supplementary planting is to be carried out. 
(2)  Restoration contour plat. A restoration contour plat shall be prepared on the same basis as the identification plat required by section 30-37. It shall show the proposed topography of the parcel of land that will be excavated for a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet from the edge of all excavated areas or to all external property lines that are within two hundred (200) feet of such area. Such contour plat shall have a contour interval of two (2) feet or less. 
(3)  Description of restoration methods for renewal of topsoil and replanting. A description of the methods and materials proposed for restoration of all areas that are not inundated shall be submitted. It shall specify the amount and type of planting, the depth to which topsoil is to be spread and the amount of fertilizer to be applied. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 31.9, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 2144, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2331, 6-6-95)  
Sec. 30-39. - Reserved.  
Sec. 30-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Provisions formerly codified as § 30-40, pertaining to the applicant's bond, and derived from Ord. No. 1085, § 31.5, adopted Aug. 25, 1980; and Ord. No. 2144, adopted June 23, 1992, were deleted from the Code by Ord. No. 2331, adopted June 6, 1995.  
Sec. 30-41. - Issuance. 
After the filing of the permit application pursuant to section 30-37 of this article, approval of the plan, and the filing and acceptance of a bond, if required, the director of planning shall issue the excavation permit and cause surveillance of the work as it is performed. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 31.5, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 2144, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2133, 6-6-95)  
Sec. 30-42. - Transfer. 
No permit issued under this division shall be transferred to another person without approval by the department of planning. Such approval shall be granted in the same manner as for original applications for permits. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 31.6, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 2331, 6-6-95)  
Sec. 30-43. - Voidance when conditional use permit becomes void. 
In the event that the conditional use permit becomes void being activated, as provided in section 221 of the city zoning ordinance, the excavation permit issued under this division shall also become void. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 31.6, 8-25-80) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, App. A.  
Sec. 30-44. - Expiration; extension. 
An excavation permit henceforth issued under this division shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance. Excavation permits issued prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance shall expire one (1) year from the date of adoption of this ordinance. The holder of the permit may thereafter apply annually to the department of planning for a renewal of the permit upon payment of a fifty dollar ($50.00) renewal fee and by providing the following information: 
(1)  A copy of the current mining permit issued by the Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals and Energy. 
(2)  Verification of all information required under section 30-37 of this article. 
(3)  A written verification of the number of cubic yards of material removed from the excavation site during the previous year. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 31.6, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 2144, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2331, 6-6-95; Ord. No. 2394, 6-22-96)  
Secs. 30-45—30-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL AND TREE PROTECTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1907, adopted Aug. 21, 1989, amended Article III in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 30-56—30-62, 30-71—30-74, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1965, §§ 31-12—31-19; Ord. No. 957, adopted July 2, 1979; Ord. No. 1111, adopted Oct. 27, 1980; Ord. No. 1217, adopted Aug. 24, 1981; and Ord. No. 1270, adopted Apr. 26, 1982. Although Ord. No. 2342, adopted June 22, 1992, contained the entire text of this article, only those sections actually amended will carry reference to the ordinance in the history note. 
State Law reference— Erosion and sediment control law, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq.; local control programs, § 10.1-562. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-56. - Findings of council. 
The city council has determined that the trees and the lands and waters comprising the watersheds of the city are great natural resources; that as a result of erosion of lands by both winds and water and sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the city, such waters are being polluted and despoiled to such a degree that fish, aquatic life, recreation and other uses of lands and waters are being adversely affected; that the rapid shift in land use from agricultural to nonagricultural uses has accelerated the processes of soil erosion and sedimentation and tree removal; and that it is necessary to establish and implement, through the department of planning, a city-wide coordinated erosion and sediment control program to conserve and to protect the land, water, air, trees and other natural resources of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1907, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2144, 6-23-92)  
Sec. 30-57. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context requires a different meaning: 
Agreement in lieu of a plan means a contract between the VESCP authority and the owner which specifies conservation measures which must be implemented in the construction of a single-family residence; this contract may be executed by the VESCP authority in lieu of a formal site plan. 
Applicant means any person submitting an erosion and sediment control plan for approval or requesting the issuance of a permit, when required, authorizing land-disturbing activities to commence. 
Board means the State Water Control Board. 
Certified inspector means an employee or agent of the City of Virginia Beach who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of project inspection or (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for project inspection and successfully completes such program within one (1) year after enrollment. 
Certified plan reviewer means an employee or agent of the City of Virginia Beach who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of plan review, (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for plan review and successfully completes such program within one (1) year after enrollment, or (iii) is licensed as a professional engineer, architect, landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of chapter 4 of title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, or professional soil scientist as defined in § 54.1-2200 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
Certified program administrator means an employee or agent of the City of Virginia Beach who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of program administration or (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for program administration and successfully completes such program within one (1) year after enrollment. 
District or soil and water conservation district means the City of Virginia Beach, a political subdivision of this commonwealth. 
Erosion and sediment control plan or plan means a document containing material for the conservation of soil and water resources of a unit or group of units of land. It may include appropriate maps, an appropriate soil and water plan inventory and management information with needed interpretations, and a record of decisions contributing to conservation treatment. The plan shall contain all major conservation decisions to ensure that the entire unit or units of land will be so treated to achieve the conservation objectives. 
Erosion impact area means an area of land not associated with current land-disturbing activity but subject to persistent soil erosion resulting in the delivery of sediment onto neighboring properties or into state waters. This definition shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or less used for residential purposes or to shorelines where the erosion results from wave action or other coastal processes. 
Land-disturbing activity means any man-made change to the land surface which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands in the city, including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, except that the term shall not include: 
(1)  Minor land-disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs and maintenance work; 
(2)  Individual service connections; 
(3)  Installation, maintenance or repair of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard-surfaced road, street or sidewalk, provided the land-disturbing activity is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard-surfaced; 
(4)  Septic tank lines or drainage fields, unless included in an overall plan for land-disturbing activity relating to the construction of the building to be served by the septic tank system; 
(5)  Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted pursuant to Title 45.1 of the Code of Virginia; 
(6)  Tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural or forest crops, livestock feedlot operations, or as additionally set forth by the Board in regulations, including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested (artificially or naturally) in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, chapter 11 (section 10.1-1100 et seq.), or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in Code of Virginia, subsection B of section 10.1-1163 
(7)  Repair or rebuilding of the tracks, right-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of a railroad company; 
(8)  Agricultural engineering operation including, but not limited to, the construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the Dam Safety Act, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage and land irrigation; 
(9)  Disturbed land areas of less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in size; 
(10)  Installation of fence and sign posts or telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; 
(11)  Shoreline erosion control projects on tidal waters when all of the land-disturbing activities are within the regulatory authority of and approved by the wetlands board of the City of Virginia Beach, the Marine Resources Commission or the United States Army Corps of Engineers; however, any associated land that is disturbed outside of this exempted area shall remain subject to this article and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
(12)  Emergency work to protect life, limb or property and emergency repairs; however, if the land-disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control and tree protection plan if the activity were not an emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of the VESCP authority. 
Natural channel design concepts means the utilization of engineering analysis and fluvial geomorphic processes to create, rehabilitate, restore, or stabilize an open conveyance system for the purpose of creating or recreating a stream that conveys its bankfull storm event within its banks and allows larger flows to access its bankfull bench and its floodplain. 
Owner means the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a property. 
Peak flow rate means the maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a particular location. 
Permit-issuing authority means the director of planning or his designees. Permittee means the person to whom the local permit authorizing land-disturbing activities is issued or the person who certifies that the approved erosion and sediment control plan will be followed. 
Periodic inspections are required during or immediately following initial installation of erosion and sediment controls, at least once in every two week period, within 48 hours following any runoff producing storm event, and at the completion of the project prior to the release of any performance bonds. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, county, city, town or other political subdivision of the commonwealth, governmental body, including a federal or state entity as applicable, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Planning Department or Director of Planning shall also include any designees made by the Director of Planning. 
Responsible land disturber means an individual holding a current responsible land disturber certificate or equivalent as determined by the state department of conservation and recreation. 
Runoff volume means the volume of water that runs off the land development project from a prescribed storm. 
State waters means all waters on the surface and under the ground wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdiction. 
Subdivision means the same as the term is designated within section 1.2 of Appendix B of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Program or VESCP means a program approved by the Board that has been established by a VESCP authority for the effective control of soil erosion, sediment deposition, and nonagricultural runoff associated with a land-disturbing activity to prevent the unreasonable degradation of properties, stream channels, waters, and other natural resources and shall include such items where applicable as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement where authorized in this article, and evaluations consistent with the requirements of this article and its associated regulations. 
Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Program Authority or VESCP authority means the City of Virginia Beach, also referred to as the city. 
Water quality volume means the volume equal to the first one-half inch of runoff multiplied by the impervious surface of the land development project. 
(Ord. No. 1907, 8-2-89; Ord. No. 2047, 4-2-91; Ord. No. 2144, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2242, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 2300, 12-6-94; Ord. No. 2400, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 2440, 3-11-97; Ord. No. 2659, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 2778, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 3258, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 3345, 4-22-14)  
Sec. 30-58. - VESCP; regulations, standards and specifications for erosion and sediment control and tree protection. 
(a)  The city council hereby adopts the regulations promulgated by the Board pursuant to section 62.1-44.15:52 of the Code of Virginia for the effective control of soil erosion, sediment deposition and nonagricultural runoff which must be met in any VESCP to prevent the unreasonable degradation of properties, stream channels, waters and other natural resources. Said regulations, standards and specifications for erosion and sediment control are included in but [are] not limited to Chapter 3 of the "Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook," Third Edition, 1992 and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations and all future amendments thereto and editions thereof. 
(b)  The program and regulations provided for in this article shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the director of planning. 
(Ord. No. 1907, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2242, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 3138, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 3258, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 3345, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 30-59. - Approved plan required for issuance of grading, building or other permits; security for performance; site stabilization. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any grading, building or other permit for activities involving land-disturbing activities, the applicant shall submit an application with an approved erosion and sediment control plan and certification that the plan will be followed. In addition, as a prerequisite to engaging in the land-disturbing activity as shown on the approved plan, permit or agreement in lieu of a plan, the person responsible for carrying out the plan or agreements in lieu of a plan shall provide the name of a responsible land disturber, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity. Failure to provide the name of a responsible land disturber prior to engaging in land disturbing activities may result in revocation of the plan approval, and the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article. 
However, the planning department may waive the requirement for an agreement in lieu of a plan for construction of a single-family residence to provide the name of a responsible land disturber. If a violation occurs during the land-disturbing activity, then the person responsible for carrying out the agreement in lieu of a plan shall correct the violation and provide the name of a responsible land disturber. Failure to provide the name of a responsible land disturber shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of any grading, building, or other permit for activities involving land-disturbing activities the director of planning shall require from the applicant therefor a reasonable performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement acceptable to the city attorney, to ensure that measures could be taken by the city at the applicant's expense should the applicant fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate conservation action which may be required of him by the approved plan as a result of his land-disturbing activity. If the city takes such conservation action upon such failure by the permittee, the city may collect from the permittee for the difference should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of the security held. Within sixty (60) days of the achievement of adequate stabilization of the land-disturbing activity, such bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated. These requirements are in addition to all other provisions of law relating to the issuance of such permits and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirements for such permits. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy, or the final release of any permit authorizing a land-disturbing activity, all disturbed or denuded areas shall be stabilized in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law and Regulations by such methods as, but not limited to, temporary seeding, permanent seeding, sodding or soil stabilization blankets and matting. The building code official may authorize a temporary certificate of occupancy without the required soil stabilization if the failure to stabilize is due to circumstances beyond the control of the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 1907, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2047, 4-2-91; Ord. No. 2144, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2242, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 2659, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 2778, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 3138, 6-8-10)  
Sec. 30-60. - Monitoring reports and inspections of land-disturbing activities. 
(a)  With respect to approved plans for erosion and sediment control and tree protection in connection with land-disturbing activities which involve the issuance of a grading, building or other permit, the director of planning or his designees shall (1) provide for periodic inspections of the land-disturbing activity, and require that a responsible land disturber will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity and (2) may require monitoring and reports from the person responsible for carrying out the plan, to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in providing for tree protection and controlling erosion and sediment. The owner, permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be given notice of the inspection. If the director of planning or his designee determines that there is a failure to comply with the plan, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or in the plan certification or by delivery at the site of the land-disturbing activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with such plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the permit may be revoked and the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties provided for by section 30-75. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a violation of this article from the representative of the department of planning the city manager or his designee may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in section 30-60(a) above, issue an order requiring that all or part of the land-disturbing activities permitted on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken or, if land-disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan as provided in section 30-71 of this article, requiring that all of the land-disturbing activities be stopped until an approved plan or any required permits are obtained. Where the alleged noncompliance is causing or is in imminent danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth, or where such land-disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan or any required permits, such an order may be issued whether or not the alleged violator has been issued a notice to comply as specified in section 30-60(a) above. Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the alleged violator has failed to comply with a notice to comply. The order for noncompliance with a plan shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for seven (7) days from the date of service pending application by the director of planning or his designee or alleged violator for appropriate relief to the circuit court of the jurisdiction wherein the violation was alleged to have occurred. The order for disturbance without an approved plan or permits shall be served upon the owner by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the land records, shall be posted on the site where the disturbance is occurring, and shall remain in effect until such time as permits and plan approvals are secured, except in such situations where an agricultural exemption applies. If the alleged violator has not implemented the specified corrective measures within seven (7) days from the date of service of the order, the city manager or his designee may issue a subsequent order to the owner requiring that all construction and other work on the site, other than corrective measures, be stopped until such corrective measures are implemented. The subsequent order shall be served upon the owner by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or the land records of the locality in which the site is located. The owner may appeal the issuance of any order to the circuit court of the jurisdiction wherein the violation was alleged to have occurred. Any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey an order issued by the city manager or his designee may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the circuit court of the jurisdiction wherein the violation was alleged to have occurred to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. Upon completion and approval of corrective action, or obtaining an approved plan or any required permits, the order shall immediately be lifted. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city manager or his designee from taking any other action specified in section 30-75. 
(Ord. No. 1907, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2242, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 2400, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 2659, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 3258, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 30-60.1. - Stop work orders by board; civil penalties. 
(a)  An aggrieved owner of property sustaining pecuniary damage resulting from a violation of an approved plan or required permit, or from the conduct of land-disturbing activities commenced without an approved plan or required permit, may give written notice of the alleged violation to the city and to the director of the board. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the notice from the aggrieved owner and notification to the city, the director of the board shall conduct an investigation of the aggrieved owner's complaint. 
(c)  If the city has not responded to the alleged violation in a manner which causes the violation to cease and abates the damage to the aggrieved owner's property within thirty (30) days following receipt of the notice from the aggrieved owner, the aggrieved owner may request that the director of the board require the violator to stop the violation and abate the damage to his property. 
(d)  If (i) the director of the board's investigation of the complaint indicates that the city has not responded to the alleged violation as required by the VESCP, (ii) the city has not responded to the alleged violation within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice given pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, and (iii) the director of the board is requested by the aggrieved owner to require the violator to cease the violation, then the director of the board shall give written notice to the city that the director of the board will request the board to issue an order pursuant to subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  If the city has not instituted action to stop the violation and abate the damage to the aggrieved owner's property within ten (10) days following receipt of the notice from the director of the board, the board is authorized to issue an order requiring the owner, permittee, person responsible for carrying out an approved plan, or person conducting the land-disturbing activities without an approved plan or required permit to cease all land-disturbing activities until the violation of the plan or permit has ceased, or an approved plan and required permits are obtained, as appropriate, and specified corrective measures have been completed. 
(f)  Such orders are to be issued only after a hearing with reasonable notice to the affected person of the time, place and purpose thereof; and they shall become effective upon service on the person by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to the address specified in the land records of the city, or by personal delivery by an agent of the director of the board. However, if the board finds that any such violation is grossly affecting or presents an imminent and substantial danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth, it may issue, without advance notice or hearing, an emergency order directing such person to cease all land-disturbing activities on the site immediately and shall provide an opportunity for a hearing, after reasonable notice as to the time and place thereof, to such person, to affirm, modify, amend or cancel such emergency order. 
(g)  If a person who has been issued an order or emergency order is not complying with the terms thereof, the board may institute a proceeding in the appropriate circuit court for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy compelling the person to comply with such order. 
(h)  Any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey any injunction, mandamus or other remedy obtained pursuant to subsection (g) of this section shall be subject, in the discretion of the court, to a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation. Any civil penalties assessed by a court under this section shall be paid into the state treasury. 
(Ord. No. 2242, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 3258, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 30-61. - Program administration, plan review and inspection fee. 
(a)  At the time an erosion and sediment control plan is submitted a plan review fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be required. Additional fees include a permit fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) and inspection fees in the amount of one and five-tenths (1.5) percent of the total cost of construction as provided in the engineer's cost estimate for the stormwater management facility, with a fifty dollar ($50.00) minimum. Such fees shall be submitted to the director of planning or his designee and made payable to the treasurer of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(b)  At the time easement or dedication plats are submitted, a review fee in the amount of eighty-four dollars ($84.00) shall be required. 
(c)  The VESCP authority shall report to the Department of Environmental Quality, in a method and on a time schedule established by the Department of Environmental Quality, a listing of each land-disturbing activity in the locality for which a plan has been approved under this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1907, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2047, 4-2-91; Ord. No. 2144, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2242, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 2440, 3-11-97; Ord. No. 2807, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 3258, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 3345, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 30-62. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The VESCP authority or any duly authorized agent of the VESCP may, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, or any combination thereof acceptable to the city attorney, a VESCP authority or any duly authorized agent of the VESCP may also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land-disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified. 
(Ord. No. 3258, 8-28-12)  
Secs. 30-63—30-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL AND TREE PROTECTION PLAN FOR LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITIES 
 
Sec. 30-71. - Regulated land-disturbing activities; submission and approval of control plan. 
(a)  The standards contained within the "Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations" and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended, are to be used by the applicant when making a submittal under the provisions of this ordinance and in the preparation of an erosion and sediment control plan. The VESCP authority, in considering the adequacy of a submitted plan, shall be guided by the same standards, regulations and guidelines. When the standards vary between the publications, the State regulations shall take precedence. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 62.1-44.15:56 of the Virginia Code (state agency and federal entity projects), no person may engage in any land-disturbing activity until such person has submitted to the planning department an erosion and sediment control and tree protection plan for the land-disturbing activity and the plan has been reviewed and approved by the planning department. Such plan must be in compliance with the regulations, references, guidelines, standards and specifications promulgated by the Board for the effective control of soil erosion and sediment deposition to prevent the unreasonable degradation of properties, stream channels, waters and other natural resources. Said regulations, references, guidelines, standards and specifications for erosion and sediment control are included in, but not limited to, the "Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations" and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended. 
(c)  Where land-disturbing activities involve lands under the jurisdiction of more than one VESCP an erosion and sediment control plan may, at the option of the applicant, be submitted to the board for review and approval rather than to each jurisdiction concerned. Where the land-disturbing activity results from the construction of a single-family residence, an agreement in lieu of a plan may be substituted for an erosion and sediment control plan if executed by the director of planning or his designee. 
(d)  In accordance with Virginia Code Section 62.1-44.15:52: 
(1)  Stream restoration and relocation projects that incorporate natural channel design concepts are not man-made channels and shall be exempt from any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels; and 
(2)  Any land-disturbing activity that provides for stormwater management intended to address any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels shall satisfy the flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels if the practices are designed to 
(i)  detain the water quality volume and release it over 48 hours; 
(ii)  detain and release over a 24-hour period the expected rainfall resulting from the one year, 24-hour storm; and 
(iii)  reduce the allowable peak flow rate resulting from the 1.5, 2 and 10-year, 24-hour storms to a level that is less than or equal to the peak flow rate from the site assuming it was in a good forested condition, achieved through multiplication of the forested peak flow rate by a reduction factor that is equal to the runoff volume from the site when it was in a good forested condition divided by the runoff volume from the site in its proposed condition, and shall be exempt from any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels. 
(Ord. No. 1907, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2144, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2242, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 3258, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 3345, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 30-72. - Responsibility of property owner when work to be done by contractor. 
For the purposes of sections 30-71 and 30-73 of this article, when land-disturbing activity will be required of a contractor performing construction work pursuant to a construction contract, the preparation, submission and obtaining approval of an erosion and sediment control and tree protection plan shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1907, 8-21-89)  
Sec. 30-73. - Approval or disapproval. 
(a)  The planning department shall review erosion and sediment control plans submitted to it and grant written approval within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of the plan if it determines that the plan meets the requirements of the board's regulations and if the person responsible for carrying out the plan certifies that he will properly perform the conservation measures included in the plan and will conform to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  When a plan is determined to be inadequate, written notice of disapproval stating the specific reasons for disapproval shall be communicated to the applicant within forty-five (45) days. The notice shall specify such modifications, terms and conditions that will permit approval of the plan. If no action is taken by the VESCP authority within the time specified above, the plan shall be deemed approved and the person authorized to proceed with the proposed activity. 
(Ord. No. 1907, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2144, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2242, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 3258, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 30-74. - Changing approved plan. 
An approved plan may be changed by the planning department in the following cases: 
(1)  Where inspection has revealed that the plan is inadequate to satisfy applicable regulations; or 
(2)  Where the person responsible for carrying out the approved plan finds that because of changed circumstances or for other reasons the approved plan cannot be effectively carried out, and proposed amendments to the plan, consistent with the requirements of this article, are agreed to by the planning department and the person responsible for carrying out the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1907, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2144, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2400, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 3258, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 30-75. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Violators of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The appropriate permit-issuing authority, the city, or the board, may apply to the circuit court in any jurisdiction where the land lies to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation under this article without the necessity of showing that an adequate remedy at law does not exist. 
(c)  In addition to any criminal penalties provided under this article, any person who violates any provision of this article may be liable to the city or the board, as appropriate, in a civil action for damages. 
(d)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained in this section, any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey any injunction, mandamus or other remedy obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject, in the discretion of the court, to a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation. A civil action for such violation or failure may be brought by the locality wherein the land lies. Any civil penalties assessed by a court shall be paid into the treasury of the locality wherein the land lies; except that where the violator is the locality itself, or its agent, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(e)  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any regulation or order of the board, or any condition of a permit or any provision of this article, the board, the director of the board, the director of planning or his designee may provide, in an order issued by the board or such person, for the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sums, not to exceed the limit specified in subsection (d) of this section. Such civil charges shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under subsection (d). 
(f)  Upon the request of the city or the director of planning or his designee, the city attorney or the commonwealth's attorney shall take legal action to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(g)  Compliance with the provisions of this article shall be prima facie evidence in any legal or equitable proceeding for damages caused by erosion or sedimentation that all requirements of law have been met and the complaining party must show negligence in order to recover any damages. 
(Ord. No. 1907, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 2242, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 2440, 3-11-97)  
Sec. 30-76. - Appeals from decisions under article. 
Final decisions under this article shall be subject to review by the court of record of the City of Virginia Beach, provided an appeal is filed within thirty (30) days from the date of any written decision adversely affecting the rights, duties or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land-disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. 1907, 8-21-89)  
Sec. 30-76.1. - Variances. 
The VESCP authority may waive or modify any of the standards contained herein that are deemed to be too restrictive for site conditions. Such variance may be granted under the following conditions: 
(1)  At the time of plan submission, an applicant may request a variance to become part of the approved erosion and sediment control plan. The applicant shall explain the reasons for requesting such variances in writing. Approved variances shall be documented in the plan. 
(2)  During construction, the person responsible for implementing the approved plan may request a variance in writing from the VESCP authority. The VESCP authority shall respond in writing either approving or disapproving the request. If the request is not approved within ten (10) days of receipt of the request, the request shall be considered to be disapproved. Following disapproval, the applicant may resubmit the request with additional documentation. 
(3)  The VESCP authority shall consider variance requests judiciously, keeping in mind both the need of the applicant to maximize cost effectiveness and the need to protect off-site properties and resources from damage. 
(Ord. No. 3258, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 30-77. - Erosion and sediment control plan for erosion impact area. 
In order to prevent further erosion a VESCP may require approval of a erosion and sediment control plan for any land identified in the VESCP as an erosion impact area. 
(Ord. No. 1907, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 3258, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 30-78. - Incorporation of Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance and the Southern Rivers Watershed Management Ordinance. 
The provisions of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance and the Southern Rivers Watershed Management Ordinance and any future amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as requirements of this article in the areas of the city to which they apply. Such provisions shall be deemed to be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the provisions of this article except in cases of conflict, in which event the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2010, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2242, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 3374, 9-16-14) 
Cross reference— Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance, App. F; Southern Watersheds Management Ordinance, App. G.  
Chapter 31 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste division of department of public works, § 2-270; burning of brush, debris, etc., § 12-3; accumulations of trash, garbage, etc., § 23-50; junk dealers, ch. 25; automobile graveyards, junkyards and dumps, § 25-23 et seq.; sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 28; storm sewer system discharge ordinance, app. H. 
State Law reference— Solid and hazardous waste management, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-177 et seq.; authority of city to require property owners to remove garbage and refuse and city's right to operate garbage and refuse collection and disposal service, §§ 15.1-11, 15.1-857. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 31-1. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
Building and construction materials means any material such as lumber, wire, pilings, sheetrock, shingles, brick, plaster, gutters, pipes, concrete, asphalt, stones, topsoil, dirt, dredge spoil or other substances accumulated as a result of the construction, repair, alteration or demolition of infrastructure, including, but not limited to, buildings, highways, utilities, streets, sidewalks, or similar structures, dredging or land-clearing activities. 
Bulk container, dumpster means a metal container of not less than four (4) cubic yards nor larger than eight (8) cubic yards, made of watertight construction with doors opening on two (2) sides and/or top, and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by specially equipped trucks. Containers shall be covered. Hereinafter, upon the effective date of this section, all new bulk containers shall meet these specifications. 
Business trash means any waste accumulation of dust, paper and cardboard, excelsior, rags or other accumulations, other than hazardous waste, garbage or household trash, which are usually attendant to the operation of stores, offices and similar businesses. 
City means the City of Virginia Beach. 
Commercial establishment means any retail, restaurant, manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, religious, governmental or other nonresidential establishment at which garbage or trash may be generated. For purposes of this chapter the term "commercial establishment" shall not apply to churches, synagogues, mosques, or any other such house of worship. 
Detachable container means a unit, varying in capacity between five (5) cubic yards and forty (40) cubic yards, which is used for collecting, storing and transporting building and construction materials, business trash, industrial waste, hazardous waste, refuse or yard trash. The unit may or may not use an auxiliary stationary packing mechanism for compaction of materials into the container and may be of the open or enclosed variety. The distinguishing feature of the detachable container is that it is picked up by a specially equipped truck and becomes an integral part of the truck for transporting the waste materials to the disposal site. 
Garbage means the by-product of animal or vegetable foodstuffs resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which, during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for insects or animals. 
Hazardous waste means any substance, material, solid waste or combination of solid waste which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase [in] mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or in capacitating illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
For purposes of this chapter, the term "hazardous waste" shall include, but not be limited to, materials such as poison, acids, caustics, chemicals, infectious materials, offal, fecal matter, biological materials, petroleum, petroleum products, flammable materials, compressed gases, radioactive materials and explosives. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semi-solids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Litter means garbage, refuse, waste materials, including waste tires, or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled as specified in this chapter. 
Loading and unloading area means any stream, river or lakeside or land dock, space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities or persons. 
Mobile containers means containers for refuse for use by commercial establishments, and having a capacity of up to one hundred twenty (120) gallons and equipped with wheels for mobility. 
Multiple residential unit means any duplex, apartment, group of apartments or condominium used as a dwelling place for more than one (1) family. 
Out of view of the public means stored behind the plane of the front wall of the residence or building being serviced, except when otherwise designated by the city manager or his designee. 
Person means any individual, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, governmental body, municipal corporation or any other legal entity. 
Portable packing unit means a metal container, not exceeding forty-five hundred (4,500) pounds gross weight, with four (4) to six (6) cubic yard capacity, that contains a packing mechanism and an internal or external power unit. 
Recyclables means recyclable items, including, but not limited to, newspaper, cardboard, chipboard, junk mail, and catalog grade papers; clear, green and brown glass bottles and jars; plastic containers #1—#7; aluminum beverage cans, aluminum foil and pie pans and steel/tin food cans. 
Refuse means solid waste accumulations consisting of garbage, household trash, vegetative waste, yard trash and business trash as herein defined. 
Residential refuse receptacle means a metal or plastic container for refuse, of substantial construction, with a tight-fitting lid, and provided with wheels or handles sufficient for safe and convenient handling for collection at curbside. Except for those areas serviced by automated collection equipment, such receptacles shall have a capacity of not more than thirty-two (32) gallons and a total weight of not more than fifty (50) pounds or an empty weight of not more than ten (10) pounds and shall be kept in serviceable condition at all times. Any areas serviced by automated collection equipment shall use 90- to 120-gallon automated refuse receptacles as approved by the city manager or his designee. Any receptacle which does not meet standards set by the city manager or his designee shall be removed. Exceptions to these requirements may be made by the city manager or his designee. 
Resort area includes all real property within the RT-1, RT-2, RT-3 and RT-4 Resort Tourist Districts. 
Resort collection zone includes all commercial establishments within the area defined by and including the establishments fronting on the west side of Pacific Avenue to the boardwalk and by Rudee Inlet to 42nd Street. This zone is established to ensure that the Resort Area, with its dense concentration of businesses, its high visibility, and its impact on city resources, is adequately maintained for the numerous visitors and residents who visit the Resort Area. The city manager or his designee may include in the resort collection zone such commercial establishments that operate as a "resort business" and which are located along the periphery of the resort collection zone. 
Single residential unit means any dwelling place occupied by one (1) family. 
Small dead animals means dead cats, dogs, small household pets and other animals of similar size. 
Tree removal activity means the removal of trees wholly or partially felled or damaged by storm, disease or other natural causes, as well as the cutting down and removal of standing trees; 
Tree removal contractor means any person, firm, corporation or other entity regularly performing tree removal activity for monetary or other consideration. 
Vegetative waste means waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bark, roots, stumps, bushes or shrubbery generated by yard and lawn care or land-clearing activities. 
Yard waste, yard trash means waste accumulations of lawn, grass or shrubbery cuttings or clippings and dry leaf rakings, free of dirt, rocks, large branches and bulky or noncombustible material. 
Yard waste receptacles means plastic bags closed by a tight-sealing method of suitable type, such as drawstring, wire tie or knot, made of a clear material, which have a maximum capacity of forty (40) gallons and a maximum weight, when full, of twenty-five (25) pounds. 
Yard waste container means a container thirteen (13) feet long, seven (7) feet wide and five (5) feet high for residential yard waste. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-1, 1-14-80; Ord. No. 1580, 1-21-86; Ord. No. 1592, 4-7-86; Ord. No. 1957, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 2034, 2-12-91; Ord. No. 2307, 1-24-94; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96; Ord. No. 2450, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 2500, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 2853, 12-7-04)  
Sec. 31-2. - Administration and enforcement of chapter. 
The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, including provisions for refuse collection throughout the city, by both private contractors and the city, shall be the duty of the department of public works and the department of housing and neighborhood preservation. 
(Ord. No. 1016, §§ 17-2, 17-3, 17-11(F), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 2284, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96)  
Sec. 31-2.1. - Notice of violation, summons—Authority to issue. 
All provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by inspectors assigned to the departments of public works and housing and neighborhood preservation; provided, however, that sections 31-7, 31-8, 31-10 and 31-11 shall also be enforced by police officers, assistant fire marshals and by inspectors of the departments of planning and public utilities. In their enforcement of this chapter, such assistant fire marshals and inspectors shall exercise all authority of police officers including, without limitation, the authority to issue notices of violation and to issue summonses directing the appearance before a court of competent jurisdiction of any person alleged to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1197, 7-6-81; Ord. No. 2307, 1-24-95; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96)  
Sec. 31-2.2. - Notice of violation, summons—Method of issuance. 
(a)  Upon finding or observing a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the inspector, assistant fire marshal or police officer shall issue a notice of violation to the owner, operator, occupant or other person causing or permitting such violation. Such notice shall set forth the date and nature of the violation, including a citation of the city code section violated, and shall specify the time within which the violation shall be corrected. Service of the notice shall be by personal delivery to the person causing or permitting the violation or, if the person cannot be found, by posting of the notice in a conspicuous location upon the land or premises. 
If the person so served fails to comply with the notice of violation, a summons shall be issued against and served on such person directing him to appear before the general district court, on the date and at the time specified in the summons, to answer for the violation alleged, the date and nature of which shall be set forth in the summons; provided, however, that the procedure in cases of violations of sections 31-26, 31-28 and 31-33 shall be in accordance with the provisions of section 31-3.1 of this chapter. 
(b)  In any case where an inspector, assistant fire marshal or police officer observes a violation in progress, a summons may be issued against and served on the person committing the violation directing him to appear before the general district court without the necessity of issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 1197, 7-6-81; Ord. No. 2307, 1-24-95; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96; Ord. No. 2853, 12-7-04)  
Sec. 31-3. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. In any case where building and construction materials, hazardous waste, or refuse is deposited, transported, transferred or stored in or upon any public or private property in the city without acquiring all permits under applicable city, state, and federal laws, the mere cessation of such activities shall not be deemed sufficient to correct the violation. Said violation shall not be deemed corrected until such time that all required permits and approvals have been obtained or until such time as the building and construction materials, hazardous waste or refuse have been removed from the subject property and disposed of in a lawful manner. 
In addition to and not in lieu of the penalties prescribed in this section, the city may apply to the circuit court for an injunction against the continuing violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and may seek any other remedy authorized by law; provided, that the assessment of a civil penalty for any violation shall preclude the institution of a criminal prosecution for the same violation. 
(Ord. No. 1196, 7-6-81; Ord. No. 2307, 1-24-95; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96; Ord. No. 2853, 12-7-04)  
Sec. 31-3.1. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates the provisions of section 31-26 or section 31-28 of this chapter shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first violation and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each subsequent violation, and any person who violates section 31-33 shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount prescribed therein. Each day during which the same violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 31-33(e), no civil penalty shall be assessed without first issuing a notice of violation in the manner specified in section 31-2.2 to the owner, operator, occupant or other person causing or permitting such violation. 
(c)  Any person issued a civil summons for a violation may make an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the city treasurer prior to the date fixed for trial in court. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability, and pay the civil penalty established for the offense charged. Such person shall be informed of his right to stand trial and that a signature to an admission of liability will have the same force and effect as a judgment of court. If a person charged with a scheduled violation does not elect to enter a waiver of trial and admit liability, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided by law. In any trial for a violation, it shall be the burden of the city to show the liability of the violator by a preponderance of the evidence. An admission of liability or finding of liability shall not be a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2853, 12-7-04)  
Sec. 31-4. - Construction or use of commercial-type incinerators for burning solid waste. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or use any commercial-type incinerator for the burning of rubbish or other readily combustible solid waste material in any zoning district of the city except those areas zoned for industrial or agricultural uses. 
(Code 1965, § 17-23; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96)  
Sec. 31-5. - Refuse receptacles for parking lots. 
The owner or manager of any parking lot or establishment with a parking lot shall provide refuse receptacles distributed within the parking area. The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to determine the number of receptacles necessary to provide proper containerization. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or manager of the parking lot to maintain such receptacles and place them for collection in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-8, 1-14-80; Ord. No. 2220, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 2246, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96)  
Sec. 31-6. - Containers utilized by commercial establishments. 
The owner, manager or occupant of any commercial establishment shall be responsible for the collection or handling of solid waste originating from their commercial property. Said owner, manager or occupant of the commercial establishment shall provide refuse receptacles for the commercial establishment, and shall maintain such receptacles and place them for collection in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Owners, managers or occupants of commercial establishments in the resort collection zone shall provide either a bulk or mobile container for said commercial establishments and shall maintain such container and place it for collection in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The city manager or his designee may authorize the use of a refuse receptacle other than a bulk or mobile container in the resort collection zone only in such cases where the nature of the business or the size, or physical constraints of the commercial property renders the use or placement of a bulk or mobile container impossible or impracticable. All containers shall at all times be clean, neat and in a good state of repair. Cleaning up materials spilled from containers when emptying shall be the responsibility of the private contractor or the property owner, manager or occupant. No refuse shall be placed adjacent to any bulk or mobile container or refuse receptacle. The owner, manager or occupant of any establishment for which a bulk or mobile container screening requirement applies must maintain such screening in a clean and neat condition and in good state of repair. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-7(C), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 2220, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 2246, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96)  
Sec. 31-7. - Hazardous waste not to be placed in collection receptacles; special care and preparation required before placing certain refuse items in containers. 
No hazardous waste, contagious disease refuse or any other refuse that may cause a public health hazard shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection by the city or collection by any private agency. The following are several types of special refuse items which shall be given special care and preparation before disposing of the same in any refuse container: 
(1)  Hypodermic instruments and other sharp articles. No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic syringe, hypodermic needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering the same inoperable and incapable of reuse. Such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device shall not be disposed of without safeguarding by wrapping or securing the same in a suitable manner so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection personnel. 
(2)  Ashes. Ashes that are to be collected by the city or private collectors must have been wetted and cooled to the touch prior to collection. Ashes shall be placed in suitable containers of such size and weight as stipulated in section 31-26 and shall not be placed with the normal refuse unless separately wrapped, so that they will not cause injury to the collection personnel. 
(3)  Pressurized cans. All pressurized cans containing pesticides or any other dangerous materials shall be released of all pressure before being deposited in a receptacle for collection by the city or any private collection agency. 
(4)  Glass. All broken glass or any type of glass that may cause injury to refuse collection personnel shall be separately wrapped to prevent injury and placed with the normal refuse. 
(5)  Pesticides. All pesticide containers and other poisonous containers shall be emptied and the contents thereof shall be disposed of in a lawful manner before being placed for collection. 
(6)  Animal waste. Animal waste from domesticated animals such as dogs, cats or birds shall be wrapped separately from other refuse in a manner to prevent spillage prior to placing the same in a refuse container. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-7(E), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96)  
Sec. 31-8. - Disposal of refuse and debris from construction, demolition, etc., operations. 
(a)  The city shall not be responsible for the collection or hauling of building and construction materials originating from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction, repair, alteration or demolition of infrastructure, dredging or land-clearing activities. Such material shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor and disposed of in a lawful manner. No inspection certificate or certificate of occupancy shall be issued until such material has been removed by the owner or contractor. In addition, all contractors must provide refuse receptacles for construction debris and litter to be deposited in at the end of each working day. 
(b)  Building and construction materials, refuse or other debris deposited upon any public or private property as a result of the construction, repair, alteration or demolition of infrastructure, dredging or land-clearing activities shall be immediately removed by the contractor and disposed of in a lawful manner. Construction sites shall be kept clean and orderly at all times. 
(c)  The prime contractor or developer of a construction, demolition, dredging or land-clearing activities site shall be held responsible for maintaining the site as required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1016, §§ 17-7(F), 17-12(D), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 2307, 1-24-95; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96) 
Cross reference— Building regulations, ch. 8.  
Sec. 31-9. - Collection, removal and disposal of industrial waste. 
Industrial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of in an approved manner by the operator of the factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing same. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-7(D), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96)  
Sec. 31-10. - Unlawful storage and deposits generally; littering. 
(a)  No person shall store or place any accumulation of building and construction materials, hazardous waste or refuse in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any private property, except as stated in other sections of this chapter, or unless such storage or accumulation is authorized by a federal, state or local statute, regulation or permit, or is specifically related to an ongoing and active building or construction project. For purposes of this subsection, "ongoing and active" shall mean that all applicable federal, state and/or local permits have been issued and are in effect or, in the case of any project not requiring a permit, that the owner of the property in question is actively pursuing completion of the project. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Scatter building and construction materials, hazardous waste or refuse about or litter any public or private street, area or place. 
(2)  Cast, throw, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any building and construction materials, hazardous waste or refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or into any occupied or unoccupied premises within the city. 
(3)  Throw or deposit any hazardous waste, refuse or debris in any stream or body of water. 
(c)  The driver of any vehicle shall be responsible for assuring that no litter, hazardous waste, refuse, or building and construction materials are thrown from the vehicle or occurs through the lack of proper covering. 
(d)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not more than twelve (12) months and a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), either or both. 
(Ord. No. 1016, §§ 17-13(A), 17-14, 17-15, 1-14-80; Ord. No. 2307, 1-24-95; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96; Ord. No. 2610, 8-22-2000) 
Cross reference— Scattering advertising matter, § 3-4; litter control on beaches, § 6-7; depositing hazardous or injurious material on street, § 33-12. 
State Law reference— Dumping on highways, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-346.  
Sec. 31-11. - Placing hazardous waste, refuse or refuse receptacles on, in or over storm drains. 
No person shall place any hazardous waste, refuse or refuse receptacle or container on, in or over any storm drain. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-13(B), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96)  
Sec. 31-12. - Property to be kept free of litter. 
All owners or occupants shall maintain the real property owned or occupied by them in a clean and litter-free condition. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting the lawful storage of refuse or litter in authorized receptacles or containers for collection pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1016, §§ 17-12(E), 17-13(A), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96)  
Sec. 31-13. - Interference with or damaging receptacles. 
No person, other than employees of the city charged with such duty, shall interfere with the contents of any refuse receptacle set out for removal by the city or any private collection agency, unless authorized by the city manager or his designee. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or destroy any refuse receptacle placed at the curbline for collection. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-9, 1-14-80; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96) 
Cross reference— Damaging property generally, § 23-38 et seq.  
Sec. 31-14. - Location and screening of refuse receptacles, mobile and bulk containers in resort collection zone. 
Approved refuse receptacles in the resort collection zone shall be located in areas out of public view. All privately owned mobile and bulk containers in the resort collection zone shall be screened from the public view on all sides. Any enclosure utilized for screening such containers shall be subject to approval by the city manager or his designee and shall be located on private property unless an encroachment has been approved as set forth in section 33-113. 
(Ord. No. 1580, 1-21-86)  
Sec. 31-15. - Provision of automated refuse receptacles. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of owners of residential structures located in areas of the city serviced by the automated collection system to provide automated refuse receptacles. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days of the date of occupancy of a new structure located in any such area, the owner or occupant thereof shall provide an automated refuse receptacle. 
(c)  The city shall make automated refuse receptacles available for sale to homeowners who are residents of the city. The fee for each receptacle shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00), which shall be paid to the city before the receptacle is provided. 
(Ord. No. 1957, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 2032, 2-12-91; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96; Ord. No. 2822, 5-11-04)  
Secs. 31-16—31-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION BY CITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Responsibility of solid waste division of department of public works with respect to collection and disposal of garbage and waste, § 2-270. 
 
Sec. 31-26. - Receptacles generally. 
All refuse to be collected by the city shall be stored in proper receptacles between times of collection. Except in those areas serviced by automated collection equipment, such receptacles shall be metallic or plastic, with a capacity of not more than thirty-two (32) gallons or a total weight of not more than fifty (50) pounds. Any automated refuse receptacle serviced by the city shall not be filled to exceed two hundred (200) pounds total weight, and all refuse therein must fit inside the receptacle. Refuse may be placed in plastic or polyethylene bags which meet the standards set by the city manager or his designee. Each receptacle shall have a tight-fitting cover, and each bag shall be tightly secured. The cover of any receptacle shall be kept on at all times except when the receptacle is being filled, emptied or cleaned. Animal waste, ashes and special refuse items shall be disposed of in the manner set forth in section 31-7 of this chapter. Any areas serviced by automated collection equipment shall use automated refuse receptacles and containers for recyclables as approved by the city manager or his designee. All garbage or receptacle material shall be placed within the automated refuse receptacles. No hazardous waste, refuse, medical waste, or any other refuse or nonrecyclables shall be placed in any container for recyclables used for collection by the city or a city contractor. No other types of receptacles are permitted for use in the automated collection areas. Exceptions to these requirements may be made by the city manager or his designee. Only yard waste containers or yard waste receptacles as defined in section 31-1 of this chapter shall be used for yard waste. A maximum of twenty-five (25) yard waste receptacles shall be collected per residence on any given collection day. 
(Ord. No. 1016, §§ 17-4, 17-5, 1-14-80; Ord. No. 1580, 1-21-86; Ord. No. 1592, 4-7-86; Ord. No. 2034, 2-12-91; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96; Ord. No. 2450, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 2853, 12-7-04)  
Sec. 31-27. - Frequency of collection. 
(a)  Garbage and household trash accumulated at residences shall be collected by the city one (1) time each week, except when otherwise designated by the city manager or his designee. Oversized household trash, and bulky items such as refrigerators, water heaters and washing machines shall be collected by the city one (1) time each week at the curbside; provided that, the service of collecting these articles shall only be provided when a special order is placed by telephoning the waste management division in advance. 
(b)  Recyclables shall be collected every other week on the same day as waste collection, except when otherwise designated by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-7(A), (B), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 1198, 7-6-81; Ord. No. 1580, 1-21-86; Ord. No. 1592, 4-7-86; Ord. No. 1957, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 2220, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 2246, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 2450, 6-10-97)  
Sec. 31-28. - Points of collection. 
(a)  Privately owned residential refuse receptacles, including automated refuse receptacles and containers for recyclables, oversized household trash and bulky items such as refrigerators, water heaters, washing machines, other household appliances, furniture, mattresses and similar items, the contents of which are to be collected by the city or a city contractor, shall be placed on the curb line of a city right-of-way no earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the day before collection and by 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. All receptacles must be removed out of view of the public after collection on the day of collection, except as otherwise designated by the city manager or his designee. Containers for recyclables provided to townhouses shall be removed out of view of the public after collection on the day of collection. Except as otherwise set forth in this subsection, automated refuse receptacles and containers for recyclables that are not removed from public view on the day of collection may be removed by the city and taken into temporary custody with posted written notice to the property owner as to the location of the containers and the procedure for reclaiming such containers. Some residents serviced by automated collection equipment shall be required to place the automated refuse receptacles on the opposite side of the street from their house. 
(b)  Mobile containers in the resort collection zone may be placed on the curb line of a city right-of-way by 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection. 
The collection of refuse from any mobile or bulk container by a private contractor in the resort collection zone during the resort season shall be restricted to between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. daily. Any mobile container in the resort collection zone placed on the curb line of a city right-of-way during the resort season must be removed from said right-of-way no later than 10:00 a.m. If mobile containers are not removed by that time, the city may remove them and take temporary custody of such containers with posted written notice to the property owner as to the location of the containers and the procedure for reclaiming such containers. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee may authorize the placement of mobile containers outside of the resort collection zone on the curb line of a city right-of-way for collection by a private contractor where access to and the servicing of such containers from the commercial property is impossible or impracticable because of the size or physical constraints of the property. In such cases the mobile container may be placed on the curb line of a city right-of-way by 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection. Such mobile containers shall be removed out of view of the public immediately after collection. 
(d)  The city will not make refuse collections on private property. 
(e)  Except as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, refuse receptacles, mobile containers and bulk containers used by commercial establishments and serviced by private refuse collectors shall not be placed on any street or city right-of-way for collection. Unless otherwise authorized by the city manager or his designee, all collections shall be made directly from the premises of the customer and any emptied receptacles or containers shall be returned directly to such premises. 
(Ord. No. 1016, §§ 17-3, 17-6, 1-14-80; Ord. No. 1580, 1-21-86; Ord. No. 1592, 4-7-86; Ord. No. 2034, 2-12-91; Ord. No. 2450, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 2853, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 2868, 4-26-05)  
Sec. 31-29. - Limitation on the number of mobile containers. 
Commercial establishments shall not place more than six (6) mobile containers of refuse each collection day, unless otherwise authorized by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2246, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96)  
Sec. 31-30. - Holiday collection schedule. 
Refuse collection service shall be provided by the city on official holidays as designated by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-7(A), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 1198, 7-6-81; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96)  
Sec. 31-31. - Refuse from multiple-unit dwellings not to be collected. 
The city shall not provide refuse collection to apartments, residential condominiums, duplexes, or other multiple-unit residential buildings unless each unit or duplex is individually located on a separate lot abutting the right-of-way of a publicly maintained street; provided, however, that such refuse collection shall be done in accordance with the other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-3, 1-14-80; Ord. No. 1592, 4-7-86; Ord. No. 2220, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96)  
Sec. 31-32. - Collection of dead animals. 
Dead animals, except marine life, may be collected and disposed of by the city bureau of animal control in conjunction with section 5-14 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-7(G), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96)  
Sec. 31-33. - Storage or preparation of yard trash, limbs, shrubbery, etc., for collection. 
(a)  Yard waste storage. Yard waste may be stored for collection by the city in approved yard waste receptacles or yard waste containers as described in this chapter. Any yard waste that cannot be put in an approved refuse receptacle shall be handled as described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Restrictions on yard waste material. All limbs, branches, shrubbery and hedge trimmings generated from normal pruning to be collected by the city shall be cut into lengths not to exceed four (4) feet and shall be stacked neatly by the curbline for collection. Stacks shall not exceed four by four by four (4 × 4 × 4) feet, shall contain no material greater than six (6) inches in diameter, and shall contain no debris generated as a result of tree removal activity. No more than one (1) pile per week per residence shall be collected. If such material is not prepared for collection as herein required, its disposal shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(c)  Violations. Except as provided in section 31-35 or as allowed by the city manager in cases of declared emergency, any property owner, tenant or occupant who places, or causes to be placed, any debris generated by tree removal activity on any public street, alley or right-of-way, including the area between the paved portion thereof and abutting property line, and who fails to remove such debris within the time prescribed in the notice issued pursuant to section 31-3.1 of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day that the violation continues after the date specified in the notice. 
(d)  Summons; procedure. In the event of a violation of any of the provisions of this section, the owner, tenant or occupant of the subject property shall be notified of such violation in the manner provided in section 31-2.2 and directed to remedy the violation within a reasonable time specified in the notice, but not less than forty-eight (48) hours. If the person so notified fails or refuses to comply with the notice of violation within the time specified, or such extension of time as may be authorized by the city manager or his designee, the code enforcement administrator of the department of housing and neighborhood preservation or his designee may issue a civil summons for a violation. In such event, further proceedings shall be in accordance with section 31-3.1(c). 
(e)  Special provisions for tree removal contractors. The provisions of subsections (b), (c) and (d) hereof shall apply to tree removal contractors, except that any violation of the provisions of this section by a tree removal contractor shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for an initial violation and each day thereafter that a violation continues, and a civil summons may be issued against such a contractor without the prior issuance of a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-7(H), (I), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 1022, 2-11-80; Ord. No. 1198, 7-6-81; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96; Ord. No. 2853, 12-7-04)  
Sec. 31-34. - Forking of debris flooded or washed upon private property. 
On seasonal occasions, when various types of debris from public waterways, highways or drainage systems is either flooded or washed upon residential private property utilizing city waste management services, and such debris has been carted to the curb line for collection by the city, the city manager or his designee may authorize the forking of such accumulations of debris not in approved refuse receptacles or stacked as normally required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1022, 2-11-80; Ord. No. 2220, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 2246, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96)  
Sec. 31-35. - Use of yard waste containers. 
The city shall make available to those homeowners who are residents of the city a yard waste container, which shall be picked up and delivered by city employees. Prior to the container being delivered, there shall be paid to the city a fee of forty dollars ($40.00), for the use of a yard waste container delivered for a 24-hour period Monday through Thursday and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for deliveries made on Fridays and picked up on Monday. The city employees shall deliver and place the yard waste container on the property of the homeowner of an occupied dwelling who has requested the yard waste container. Prior to delivery of the yard waste container, the homeowner shall sign a statement which shall state: 
(1)  That he is not a contractor and that his need arises from his homeownership; 
(2)  That the yard waste container shall only be used for tree limbs, leaves, shrubbery, grass trimmings and yard debris; 
(3)  That he will not place hazardous waste, stumps, building and construction materials or other bulky items within the yard waste container; 
(4)  That he will not fill the load above the top of the container; 
(5)  That he will release the city from liability for any damages resulting from city equipment or personnel being on private property to deliver or remove the yard waste container; 
(6)  That he will be responsible for any injuries and/or damages that result to individuals using the container or directly to the container while being used by the homeowner; and 
(7)  That he will reimburse the city for any costs associated with the handling and disposal of any material or items placed in the yard waste container in violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1603, 6-9-86; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96; Ord. No. 2745, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 2815, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 3016, 5-13-08)  
Sec. 31-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2370, adopted Feb. 6, 1996, deleted § 31-36, which contained charges to commercial establishments in the resort collection zone for city disposal of solid waste, and which derived from Ord. No. 2246, adopted Sept. 28, 1993.  
Sec. 31-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 31-36 and 31-37 were repealed by Ord. No. 2220, adopted May 11, 1993. Section 31-36 gave the charges to commercial establishments for city disposal of solid waste and was derived from Ord. No. 1957, adopted May 7, 1990, and Ord. No. 1988, adopted June 25, 1990. Section 31-37 limited the provision of city disposal and collection services to commercial establishments outside the resort collection zone and was derived from Ord. No. 1957. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2246, adopted Sept. 28, 1993, added a new § 31-36.  
Sec. 31-38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2370, adopted Feb. 6, 1996, deleted § 31-38, which pertained to solid waste collection service from commercial establishments in the Resort Area during the season, and derived from Ord. No. 2220, adopted May 11, 1993.  
Sec. 31-39. - Waste collection fee; billing and collection. 
(a)  That rate(s) to be charged for access to the service of solid waste collection, management, and disposal of solid waste materials, and other refuse shall be as follows: 
(1)  A waste collection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month shall be charged to each occupied dwelling unit eligible for, and each participating church receiving, city trash collection services in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  That the billing and collection of the waste collection fee shall be pursuant to the same procedures as the collection of water and sewer utility service and stormwater management charges as described in section 37-53. 
(Ord. No. 3587, § 1, 5-14-19)  
Secs. 31-40—31-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE COLLECTORS 
 
Sec. 31-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2370, adopted Feb. 6, 1996, deleted § 31-46, which pertained to permits required for private collectors, and which derived from Ord. No. 1016, § 17-10(A), adopted Jan. 14, 1980.  
Sec. 31-47. - Maintenance, etc., of vehicles and other equipment. 
All vehicles, containers and other equipment used by private refuse collectors shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and free from odors at all times and shall be equipped with water-tight bodies with a suitable system for cleaning, disinfecting and deodorizing garbage and refuse containers. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-10(B), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 2370, 2-6-96)  
Sec. 31-48. - Inspection of containers and vehicles. 
All containers and vehicles owned or operated by private refuse collectors shall be subject to inspection by police officers, assistant fire marshals, and inspectors assigned to the department of housing and neighborhood preservation to ensure safety compliance and to ensure that proper lids or covers are provided to prevent litter problems. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-10(A), 1-14-80)  
Sec. 31-49. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 31-49, requiring private collectors to collect from customers' premises, and derived from Ord. No. 1016, § 17-10(C), adopted Jan. 14, 1980, was deleted by Ord. No. 2370, adopted Feb. 6, 1996.  
Secs. 31-50—31-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CITY REFUSE DISPOSAL AREAS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Private dumps, § 25-23 et seq. 
 
Sec. 31-61. - Use charges. 
(a)  Effective as of July 1, 2001, there shall be a fee of fifty-four dollars ($54.00) per ton, or a fifteen dollar ($15.00) minimum charge for less than one ton, or any part thereof, for all sanitary solid waste, refuse, debris or garbage generated solely within the city and deposited at the city refuse disposal areas; provided, however, that residents of the city depositing sanitary solid waste, refuse, debris, or garbage generated solely from their households may deposit the same free of charge. 
(b)  There shall be a fee of seventy-five cents ($0.75) per passenger and light truck tire and five dollars ($5.00) per truck tire for cutting and disposing of tires at the city refuse disposal areas. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-11(A), (C), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 1038, 5-12-80; Ord. No. 1277, 5-14-82; Ord. No. 1504, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 1505, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 1602, 5-12-86; Ord. No. 1701, 5-11-87; Ord. No. 1777, 5-9-88; Ord. No. 1863, 5-8-89; Ord. No. 1959, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 2059, 5-7-91; Ord. No. 2089, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 2131, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 2214, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 2329, 5-23-95; Ord. No. 2417, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 2581, 5-9-00; Ord. No. 2656, 8-14-01)  
Sec. 31-62. - Use by private collectors—Generally. 
Persons engaged in the business of collecting sanitary solid waste, refuse, debris or garbage may deposit solid waste, refuse, debris or garbage collected within the city at the city refuse disposal areas subject to the provisions of section 31-61 and the following provisions: 
(1)  The proper city business license has been purchased and is current. 
(2)  The vehicles transporting the sanitary solid waste, refuse, debris or garbage have a current city license decal displayed thereon. 
(3)  Section 31-63 has been and is fully complied with. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-11(B), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 1038, 5-12-80)  
Sec. 31-63. - Same—Disposal permit. 
(a)  No person engaged in the business of collecting solid waste, refuse, debris or garbage shall deposit such material at any city refuse disposal area, unless he has a current refuse disposal permit issued by the director of public works or his designated agent. Such permit shall be issued only upon the certification and affidavit by the applicant that all sanitary solid waste, debris, refuse or garbage deposited at a city refuse disposal area will be generated and collected within the city. 
(b)  The fee for a permit required by this section shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per vehicle per year or any part thereof. Each such permit shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(c)  When a permit is issued under this section, a decal shall be issued for each vehicle listed on the permit. Such decal shall be displayed on the vehicle at all times when it is being used at any city refuse disposal area. 
(d)  The director of public works or his designated agent is hereby authorized to revoke or suspend any permit issued under this section, to prevent the holder thereof from utilizing the city refuse disposal areas, for good cause. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-11(B), (G), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 1038, 5-12-80)  
Sec. 31-64. - Hours of operation. 
The director of public works, with the approval of the city manager, is hereby authorized to establish reasonable hours for the operation of the city refuse disposal areas. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-11(E), 1-14-80)  
Sec. 31-65. - Determination of acceptability of deposits. 
The director of public works or his designated agent shall have the authority to determine what sanitary solid waste, refuse or garbage shall be acceptable for deposit at the city refuse disposal areas. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-11(D), 1-14-80)  
Sec. 31-66. - Delivery vehicles to conform to section 21-129. 
Every vehicle used to deliver material to a city refuse disposal area shall conform to the requirements of section 21-129 of this Code, so that the contents of such vehicle do not escape therefrom. A person operating a vehicle which does not conform to such section shall be allowed access to such area only after he is issued a notice of, or summons for, a violation of section 21-129 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-15, 1-14-80; Ord. No. 1962, 5-21-90) 
Editor's note— See Code of Virginia, section 46.2-1156 for state law regulating construction, maintenance and loading to prevent escape of contents.  
Sec. 31-67. - Scale and fee collection procedures. 
The director of public works, in conjunction with the director of finance, is hereby authorized to establish such scale and fee collection procedures as they may determine to be necessary to ensure the efficient collection of fees imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-11(D), 1-14-80)  
Sec. 31-68. - Liability of officers, etc., of corporation, partnership or association for violation of article. 
Any officer or agent of a corporation or member of a partnership or association, who shall personally participate in or be an accessory to any violation of this article by such corporation, partnership or association, shall be subject to the penalties provided for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-11(G), 1-14-80)  
ARTICLE V. - SOLID WASTE RECYCLING REPORTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Recyclable materials, app. A, § 231. 
 
Sec. 31-69. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Person shall mean any nonresidential generator of solid waste and any individual, firm, company, corporation or association that collects, transports, processes, manages or recycles solid waste. 
(2)  Recycle shall mean to sell, donate, or otherwise transfer solid waste material to any other person located outside the city so that such waste material may be processed and used again as a raw material for a product which may or may not be similar to the original product; and/or to process a given waste material at a location within the City of Virginia Beach so that such material may be used again as a raw material for a product which may or may not be similar to the original product. 
(Ord. No. 2016, 11-20-90)  
Sec. 31-70. - Annual report required. 
(a)  Each person located within the city who recycles solid waste shall submit an annual report to the department of public works/solid waste division. 
(b)  The annual report shall cover the twelve-month period beginning January 1 and ending December 31, and shall be submitted not later than twenty (20) days from the end of such period. 
(Ord. No. 2016, 11-20-90)  
Sec. 31-71. - Information required. 
The annual report required by this article shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person on whose behalf the report is being filed; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of an individual who may be contacted on behalf of such person; and 
(3)  The total quantity of solid waste recycled by such person during the twelve-month period. 
(Ord. No. 2016, 11-20-90)  
Sec. 31-72. - Method of measurement. 
All quantities of solid waste required to be reported hereunder shall be measured by weight. When a person is unable to accurately determine quantity by weight, such quantities shall be reported based upon carefully estimated data. Each report shall identify all information which is based upon estimated data. 
(Ord. No. 2016, 11-20-90)  
Sec. 31-73. - Proprietary information. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to require any person to report information of a proprietary nature. Where any person fails to report any information otherwise required hereunder based upon a determination that such information is of a proprietary nature, the person shall specify in the annual report the nature of the information withheld and the basis for the determination that such information is of a proprietary nature. 
(Ord. No. 2016, 11-20-90)  
Sec. 31-74. - Consolidated report. 
Any person who recycles solid waste at or from locations both within and without the city and is not reasonably able to identify the quantity of solid waste recycled at or from each location may submit a consolidated report. Any such consolidated report shall state that it reflects quantities of solid waste recycled at or from all locations of the person within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016, 11-20-90)  
Sec. 31-75. - Report forms. 
The city may prepare forms to be used by any person required to submit a report under this article. Any such form shall be available at the office of the waste management division of the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2016, 11-20-90)  
Chapter 32 - SPECIAL SALES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 32-1—32-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GOING-OUT-OF- BUSINESS SALES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 32-16. - Violations of article. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, and each day's business in violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1965, § 23-24.6; Ord. No. 1003, 11-5-79)  
Sec. 32-17. - Advertisement or sale of uninventoried goods. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person connected with a sale authorized by a permit issued under this article to advertise or to sell, during the period covered by such permit, any goods which are not specified in the inventor filed pursuant to section 32-27. 
(b)  In addition to any other penalties prescribed by law, the commissioner of the revenue shall revoke any special sale permit upon proof that goods not appearing on the original inventory of special sale goods filed pursuant to section 32-27 have been commingled with or added to the special sale goods. 
(Code 1965, § 23-24.2; Ord. No. 1815, 10-31-88; Ord. No. 2166, 8-4-92; Ord. No. 3142, 6-22-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-224.  
Sec. 32-18. - Inspections. 
The commissioner of the revenue shall inspect the advertisement and conduct of a sale authorized by a permit issued under this article to insure that it is advertised and conducted in conformity with such permit. 
(Code 1965, § 23-24.3; Ord. No. 3142, 6-22-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-224.  
Secs. 32-19—32-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 32-26. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or conduct a sale for the purpose of discontinuing a retail business, or to modify the word "sale" in any advertisement with the words "going out of business" or any other words which tend to insinuate that the retail business is to be discontinued and the merchandise liquidate, unless such person has a valid permit to conduct such sale issued by the commissioner of the revenue of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 23-24.1; Ord. No. 1003, 11-5-79; Ord. No. 3142, 6-22-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-223.  
Sec. 32-27. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a permit required by this division shall be filed, on forms provided for the purpose, with the commissioner of the revenue. Such application shall be accompanied by an inventory, including the kind and quantity of all goods which are to be offered for sale during the sale for which the permit is sought. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false statement in any application filed pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1965, §§ 23-24.2, 23-24.6; Ord. No. 1392, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 3142, 6-22-10) 
State Law reference— Inventory of goods required, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-224.  
Sec. 32-28. - Fee. 
The fee for a permit required by this division shall be sixty-five dollars ($65.00). 
(Code 1965, § 23-24.4; Ord. No. 1392, 9-6-83) 
State Law reference— Authority to charge above fee, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-224.  
Sec. 32-29. - Issuance. 
The commissioner of the revenue shall issue permits required by this division to retail merchants upon the filing of a proper application and payment of the prescribed fee. 
(Code 1965, § 23-24.3; Ord. No. 3142, 6-22-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-224.  
Sec. 32-30. - Term. 
Each permit issued under this division shall be valid for a period of no longer than sixty (60) days and any extension of that time shall constitute a new sale and shall require an additional permit and inventory. A maximum of one (1) permit beyond the initial sixty-day permit may be granted solely for the purpose of liquidating only those goods contained in the initial inventory list and which remain unsold. 
(Code 1965, § 23-24.5; Ord. No. 1392, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 1815, 10-31-88; Ord. No. 2166, 8-4-92) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-224.  
Chapter 32.5 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2195, adopted Dec. 1, 1992, added ch. 32.5. Under authority of § 1-7 of this Code, in order to maintain alphabetical sequence of chapter titles, the editor has redesignated the chapter as ch. 32.5. 
 
Sec. 32.5-1. - Findings and determinations. 
(a)  The City of Virginia Beach has a unique topography which has required development and maintenance of a system of manmade and natural components of a stormwater management infrastructure to both limit and manage the volume of stormwater to control flood events and to prevent degradation of the city's waterways through stormwater quality management. 
(b)  Stormwater runoff is associated with all improved properties in the city, whether residential or nonresidential, and the individual property impacts of runoff are correlated to the amount of impervious surface on the property and land-disturbing activities on property. 
(c)  The elements of the stormwater management infrastructure provide benefit and service to properties within the city through direct protection of property and through control of flooding of critical components of the infrastructure and through protection of the city's natural environment. 
(d)  The costs of monitoring, operating, maintaining, and constructing the stormwater system required in the city, both to meet new regulations and to address identified flood event needs, should therefore be allocated, to the extent practicable, to all property owners based on their impact on the stormwater management system. 
(Ord. No. 2195, 12-1-92; Ord. No. 2243, 6-22-93)  
Sec. 32.5-2. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in this section shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Equivalent residential unit or ERU means the equivalent impervious area of a single-family residential developed property per dwelling unit located within the city based on the statistical average horizontal impervious area of a single-family residence in the city. An equivalent residential unit (ERU) equals two thousand two hundred sixty-nine (2,269) square feet of impervious surface area. 
(b)  ERU rate means the utility fee charged on an equivalent residential unit, which shall be forty-nine and three-tenth cents ($0.493) per day, effective July 1, 2019, fifty-two and eight-tenth cents ($0.528) per day, effective July 1, 2021, fifty-six and three-tenth cents ($0.563) per day, effective July 1, 2022, fifty-nine and eight-tenth cents ($0.598) per day, effective July 1, 2023, sixty-three and three-tenth cents ($0.633) per day, effective July 1, 2024 and sixty-six and eight-tenth cents ($0.668), effective July 1, 2025. 
(c)  Developed property means real property which has been altered from its "natural" state by the addition of any improvements such as buildings, structures, and other impervious surfaces. For new construction, property shall be considered developed pursuant to this section upon: (a) certification of the final plumbing permit inspection; or (b) certification of the final building permit inspection for those facilities not requiring a plumbing permit. 
(d)  Impervious surface area means a surface which is compacted or covered with material that is highly resistant to infiltration by water, including, but not limited to, most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar structures. 
(e)  Developed residential property means a developed lot or parcel containing at least one (1) but no more than four (4) residences or dwelling units, and accessory uses related to but subordinate to the purpose of providing permanent dwelling facilities. Such property shall include houses, duplexes, triplexes, quadruplexes, townhouses and mobile homes. 
(f)  Developed multifamily residential property means developed property containing more than four (4) residences or dwelling units, and accessory uses related to but subordinate to the purpose of providing permanent dwelling facilities. Such property shall include apartments and condominiums. 
(g)  Developed nonresidential property means developed property which does not serve a primary purpose of providing permanent dwelling units. Such property shall include, but not be limited to, commercial properties, industrial properties, parking lots, recreational and cultural facilities, hotels, offices and churches. 
(h)  Revenues means all rates, fees, assessments, rentals or other charges or other income received by the utility, in connection with the management and operation of the system, including amounts received from the investment or deposit of moneys in any fund or account and any amounts contributed by the city, fees-in-lieu-of provided by developers or individual residents, and the proceeds from sale of utility bonds. 
(i)  Stormwater management system or system means the stormwater management infrastructure and equipment of the city and all improvements thereto for stormwater control in the city. Infrastructure and equipment shall include structural and natural stormwater control systems of all types, including, without limitation, retention basins, sewers, conduits, pipelines, pumping and ventilation stations, and other plants, structures, and real and personal property used for support of the system. The system does not include privately owned farm ditches and other private drainage systems. 
(j)  Stormwater management utility or utility means the enterprise fund created by this section to operate, maintain and improve the city's stormwater management system. 
(k)  Undeveloped property means any parcel which has not been altered from its natural state to disturb or alter the topography or soils on the property in a manner which substantially reduces the rate of infiltration of stormwater into the earth. 
(l)  Utility fees means the monthly service charges based upon the ERU rate applied to property owners or occupants, including condominium unit owners or tenants (when the tenant or occupant is the party to whom water and sewer service is billed), of developed residential property, developed multifamily residential property and developed nonresidential property, all as more fully described in section 32.5-4. 
(m)  Agricultural property means land used for the tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural or forest crops or land used for raising livestock. 
(Ord. No. 2195, 12-1-92; Ord. No. 2243, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 2445, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 2636, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2827, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 2874, 5-10-05; Ord. No. 3012, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3179, 5-10-11; Ord. No. 3347, 5-13-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3501, 5-9-17, eff. 7-1-17; Ord. No. 3560, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18; Ord. No. 3588, 5-14-19, eff. 7-1-19; Ord. No. 3616, 5-12-20, eff. 7-1-20)  
Sec. 32.5-3. - Establishment of stormwater management utility. 
(a)  The stormwater management utility is established to provide for the general welfare, health, and safety of the city and its residents. 
(b)  The utility shall deposit in a separate ledger account all revenues collected pursuant to this chapter. The funds deposited shall be used exclusively to provide services and facilities related to the stormwater management system. The deposited revenues shall be used for the following: 
(1)  Acquisition of real or personal property, and interest therein necessary to construct, operate and maintain stormwater control facilities; 
(2)  The cost of administration of such programs, to include the establishment of reasonable operating and capital reserves to meet unanticipated or emergency requirements of the utility; 
(3)  Engineering and design, debt retirement, construction costs for new facilities and enlargement or improvement of existing facilities; 
(4)  Facility maintenance; 
(5)  Monitoring of stormwater control devices; and 
(6)  Pollution control and abatement, consistent with state and federal regulations for water pollution control and abatement. 
(Ord. No. 2195, 12-1-92)  
Sec. 32.5-4. - Imposition of utility fees. 
Adequate revenues shall be generated to provide for a balanced operating and capital improvement budget for maintenance of the stormwater management system by setting sufficient levels of utility fees. Income from utility fees shall not exceed actual costs incurred in providing the services and facilities described in section 32.5-3. Utility fees shall be charged to owners of all developed property in the city; provided, however, where a tenant or occupant is the person to whom water or sewer service, or both, are billed, the utility fee may be charged to such tenant or occupant. 
(a)  For purposes of determining the utility fee, all properties in the city are classified into one of the following classes: 
(1)  Developed residential property; 
(2)  Developed multifamily residential property; 
(3)  Developed nonresidential property; 
(4)  Undeveloped property; or 
(5)  Agricultural property. 
(b)  The monthly utility fee for developed residential property shall equal the ERU rate. Provided, however, where more than one (1) residence or dwelling unit is located on a single lot or parcel the owner of the lot or parcel shall be charged a utility fee which is equal to the ERU rate multiplied by the number of residences or dwelling units located on the lot or parcel. 
(c)  The monthly utility fee for developed multifamily residential property shall be the ERU rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total impervious surface area of a developed multifamily residential property by one (1) ERU (2,269). The numbered factor will be rounded to the nearest tenth (0.1) of a unit. 
(d)  The monthly utility fee for developed nonresidential property shall be the ERU rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total impervious surface area of a developed nonresidential property by one (1) ERU (2,269). The numbered factor will be rounded to the nearest tenth (0.1) of a unit. The minimum utility fee for any developed nonresidential property shall equal the ERU rate. 
(e)  The utility fee for vacant developed property, both residential and nonresidential, shall be the same as that for occupied property of the same class. 
(f)  Undeveloped property shall be exempt from the utility fee. 
(g)  Agricultural property shall be exempt from the utility fee. Provided however, each developed residential unit situated on a parcel devoted to agricultural use shall be charged a fee equal to the ERU rate. 
(Ord. No. 2195, 12-1-92; Ord. No. 2243, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 2827, 6-8-04)  
Sec. 32.5-5. - Billing and payment, interest, liens. 
(a)  The utility fee is to be paid by the owner of each lot or parcel subject to the utility fee; provided, however, where a tenant or occupant is the person to whom water or sewer service, or both, are billed, the utility fee may be charged to such tenant or occupant. In any case in which a tenant or occupant fails to pay utility fees, the delinquent utility fees shall be collected from the owner of the property. All properties, except undeveloped property, shall be rendered bills or statements for stormwater services. Such bills or statements may be combined with water and sewer bills levied pursuant to Chapters 28 and 37, provided that all charges shall be separately stated. The combined bill shall be issued for one (1) total amount. The director of public utilities is hereby authorized and directed to create policies and procedures for the efficient billing and collection of the combined bill, including a policy for allocating payments to the separate charges stated on the combined bill. 
(b)  The bills or statements shall include a date by which payment shall be due. All bills for charges prescribed by this article shall be due and payable thirty (30) days from the date of the bill and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid in full within such time. 
(c)  Billing for the utility fee shall be rendered in arrears to all chargeable persons and shall represent charges for each day of the preceding billing period of stormwater service, and any unpaid balances and interest on an account. 
(d)  Any bill which has not been paid by the due date shall be deemed delinquent, and the account shall be collected by any means available to the city. Notice to the owner shall be provided in every case when stormwater charges incurred by a tenant or occupant become more than ninety (90) days delinquent. All payments and interest due may be recovered by action at law or suit in equity. Unpaid fees and interest accrued shall constitute a lien against the property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes. Records of all unpaid fees and interest, indexed by the name of the record owner of the real estate, shall be maintained in the city treasurer's office. 
(e)  In the event charges are not paid when due, interest thereon shall commence on the due date and accrue at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum until such time as the overdue payment and interest is paid. 
(f)  When developed properties are brought into the utility, fees will accrue commencing with the release of the final plumbing inspection for the property. In the absence of a plumbing inspection, utility fees will accrue commencing with release of the final building inspection for the property. A bill will be issued in the next billing cycle and will be prorated for the number of days in which service was provided. 
(g)  In the event of alterations or additions to developed multifamily property or developed nonresidential property which alter the amount of impervious surface area, the utility fees will be adjusted upon release of the final plumbing inspection. In the absence of a plumbing inspection, utility fees will be adjusted upon release of the final building inspection. A bill will be issued in the next billing cycle and will be prorated for the number of days in which service was provided. 
(Ord. No. 2195, 12-1-92; Ord. No. 2243, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 2445, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 2827, 6-8-04)  
Sec. 32.5-6. - Adjustment of fees, exemptions. 
(a)  Full waiver of the utility fee shall be provided to properties owned by federal, state, and local government agencies when those agencies own and provide for maintenance of storm drainage and stormwater control facilities. 
(b)  Any owner, tenant or occupant who has paid his utility fees and who believes his utility fees to be incorrect may submit an adjustment request to the director of public works or his designee. Adjustment requests shall be made in writing setting forth, in detail, the grounds upon which relief is sought. Response to such adjustment requests, whether providing an adjustment or denying an adjustment, shall be made to the requesting person by the director of public works or his designee within sixty (60) days of receipt of the request for adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 2195, 12-1-92; Ord. No. 2243, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 2827, 6-8-04)  
Sec. 32.5-7. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed severable; and if any of the provisions hereof are adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining portions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect and their validity unimpaired. 
(Ord. No. 2195, 12-1-92; Ord. No. 2243, 6-22-93)  
Chapter 33 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Payments to persons displayed by city road projects, § 2-235 et seq.; responsibilities of department of public works with respect to streets, § 2-268 et seq.; duties of director of planning with respect to street names, § 2-384; signs and other advertising devices in public right-of-way, § 3-3; projecting signs, § 3-41 et seq.; abandoning domestic animal on street right-of-way, § 5-12; depositing dead animals or leaving disabled animal on street or sidewalk, § 5-15; taking of food or drink on street adjacent to beach, § 6-6; riding bicycles and mopeds on streets, § 7-50 et seq.; riding bicycles and mopeds on sidewalks, § 7-57; parking bicycles and mopeds on sidewalks or roadways, § 7-61; building regulations, Ch. 8; farmer's market, Ch. 11; fires on street, § 12-6; street vendors of food products, § 13-36 et seq.; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 21; obscene films not to be visible to juveniles from public way, § 22-29; disorderly conduct in streets, § 23-14; begging on streets, § 23-15; obstructing free passage of others, § 23-16; riots and unlawful assemblies, §§ 23-17—23-20; damaging property in or on streets, lanes or public squares, § 23-39; altering surface of road or other public property, § 23-40; soil removal and other land-disturbing activities, Ch. 30; littering streets, § 31-10; vehicles for hire, Ch. 36; zoning ordinance, App. A; design standards for streets and alleys in subdivisions, App. B, § 4.1; required street improvements in subdivisions, App. B, § 5.2 et seq.; site plan ordinance, App. C. 
State Law reference— General authority of city relative to streets and sidewalks, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-14, 15.1-363—15.1-426, 15.1-888 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 33-1. - Certain ordinances relating to streets and alleys not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance opening, locating, closing, altering or naming any street or alley and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 33-2. - Violations of article generally. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 33-3. - Obstructions generally. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to place on any sidewalk, street or alley in the city any fence, gate, porch, step, post, barrel, bench, bar, table, box, merchandise, goods, wares or other fixtures or articles whatsoever, whether they be for sale, exhibition or any other purpose. 
(Code 1965, § 32-12)  
Sec. 33-4. - Temporary fence or barricade for protection of newly seeded or sodded grass plots in sidewalk area. 
(a)  A permit for the erection of a temporary fence or barricade, for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, in the sidewalk area in front of any premises, for the protection of newly sodded or seeded grass plots, may, upon application to the director of public works, be issued to the owner of such premises. Such fence or barricade shall conform to the specifications therefor on file in the office of the director of public works, but in no event shall such fence or barricade be less than twenty-four (24) inches or more than thirty (30) inches in height above the level of the grade of the sidewalk. Such fence or barricade shall be constructed of well-dressed lumber not less than one inch nor more than two (2) inches square, shall consist of only one rail and the necessary posts supporting the same and shall not extend beyond the building line further than within six (6) inches of the walkway or paved sidewalk in front of the premises. 
(b)  The granting of a permit under this section and the acceptance and use thereof by the owner of the premises shall not be deemed or taken to be a release from liability of the owner or person installing or maintaining such fence or barricade for damages to persons or property occasioned by its installation or maintenance, but such owner or person, by accepting the permit and constructing and maintaining the fence or barricade, assumes all liability for damage that may be occasioned thereby and agrees to save the city harmless from all loss, costs, damage and expenses that may accrue to it or to any person by reason of the construction and maintenance of the fence or barricade. 
(Code 1965, § 32-13)  
Sec. 33-5. - Removal of poles, etc., interfering with erection or construction of public improvements. 
The owner of any pipes, poles, wires or other fixtures or appliances located or erected under or upon any of the streets of the city shall remove the same, within a reasonable time, to such place as may be approved by the director of public works, when notified that such pipes, poles, wires or other fixtures and appliances are in the way of, interfere with or retard the erection and construction of any public improvement in the city. Should the owner of such pipes, poles, wires or other fixtures or appliances fail or refuse to remove the same within a reasonable time after having been so notified, the city shall proceed to have the same removed and shall collect the cost of such removal from the owner thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 32-11)  
Sec. 33-6. - Sales conducted on or adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
For purposes of this section only, "sale or exchange" shall be defined as the advertising, displaying, offering or exchanging for value of the below-mentioned items. 
The sale or exchange of any item, including but not limited to any and all goods, wares, flowers, prepared or unprepared food or any other product by any person from any temporary structure, including but not limited to any table or stand, or from any motor vehicle, trailer, cart, dray, wagon, pushcart or any hand or pedal-propelled vehicle shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Sales conducted in the public right-of-way. 
(1)  No such sale or exchange shall be made in any street or public right-of-way along any street for which the posted speed limit is greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour, nor shall such sale or exchange be made in any street or public right-of-way within twenty-five (25) feet of any intersection. 
(2)  No person conducting such sale or exchange in any street or public right-of-way may remain within any one-block area for more than fifteen (15) minutes before moving to another block. Additionally, such sale or exchange may not be repeated in the same block within any eight-hour period. A block shall be understood to mean a section of a street between its intersection with two (2) adjoining streets, or a section of street five hundred (500) feet in length, whichever is shorter. 
(3)  The provisions of subsection (a) hereof shall not apply to such sales or exchanges conducted on the premises of the Virginia Beach Farmer's Market or of any other commercial enterprise operated under franchise agreement or permit authorized by the city manager. 
(b)  Sales conducted on private property adjacent to the public right-of-way. Persons conducting a sale or exchange of the type described in this section on private property, and persons allowing their private property to be used for such sales or exchanges, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  No sale or exchange shall take place or be conducted, and no structure used for such sale or exchange shall be located, within fifty (50) feet of the closest edge of the nearest sidewalk pavement, or street pavement if there is no sidewalk, of any public right-of-way. 
(2)  The person conducting the sale or exchange shall have obtained written permission to conduct such activity from the owner of the property involved, and shall have also obtained from such owner exclusive control over any area of the property, within the allowed area, sufficient to ensure that there is adequate space for the safe circulation of traffic; such area shall not be less than eight hundred (800) square feet. The person conducting the sale or exchange shall not allow any other activity to be conducted within this minimal eight hundred (800) square foot area. 
(3)  Such sales or exchanges shall not be conducted on or from vacant lots. 
(4)  Before any person may conduct such sale or exchange, such person must have provided to and have had approved by the department of planning a plat or site plan identifying the location of the property on which the activity is to be conducted and showing the location of the structure from which the sale or exchange activity will occur, the area under the control of such person, and provisions for well-defined vehicular entrances and exists. Such plat or site plan shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for processing. After review and approval of such plat or site plan by the department of planning, application shall be made to the city manager or his designee for a permit to engage in the activities covered by this section, in accordance with this section and the approved plat or site plan. Such application shall state the name, address and telephone number of the person or persons conducting the activity, the days and hours of operation, and shall include evidence of the property owner's permission to so use the property, as required above, as well as a copy of the approved plat or site plan. A copy of the permit issued by the city manager or his designee as well as a copy of the approved plat or site plan and the written permission of the property owner shall be kept at the site of the activity. Such permit must be obtained before a business license for such activity may be issued, and shall be renewed annually prior to the renewal of any business license. 
(5)  The requirements of subsection (b) hereof shall not apply to outdoor sales and exchanges which occur as an incidental part of the retail sales activity of a merchant regularly conducting business from a permanent building where such sales are conducted on the premises of the building and in close proximity to said building; nor shall they apply to the otherwise lawful sale of market produce and processed agricultural food products such as jams and jellies; nor to garage sales in residential areas. 
(6)  Nothing herein shall exempt any person conducting a sale or exchange of the type described herein from the requirements of the comprehensive zoning ordinance or any other applicable provision of the law. 
(7)  A person who obtains a permit pursuant to subsection (4), above, shall be allowed one sign which shall be permanently attached to a motor vehicle and which shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in size. 
(c)  Compliance. Every person who obtains a permit under the requirements of this section shall keep the permit, approved plat or site plan and written permission of the property owner in a convenient place and, whenever requested to do so, shall exhibit the same to any police officer, agent of the commissioner of revenue or inspector for the department of planning. Violation of any of the requirements of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. The city manager or his designee shall revoke the permit issued to any person pursuant to subsection (b)(4) upon his conviction of violating any of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1205, 7-13-81; Ord. No. 1482, 8-27-84; Ord. No. 1576, 1-21-86; Ord. No. 2136, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 2149, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2244, 8-10-93) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1205, adopted July 13, 1981, repealed § 33-6 as it pertained to street vendors and re-enacted the section as set out above. Formerly, § 33-6 derived from Code 1965, §§ 32-7, 32-9; Ord. No. 1153, adopted March 23, 1981, and Ord. No. 1154, also adopted March 23, 1981. 
Cross reference— Street vendors of food products, § 13-36 et seq.  
Sec. 33-7. - Sidewalk photographers. 
(a)  Unless authorized by the city by franchise, permit, license or otherwise, it shall be unlawful for any person, on any street or sidewalk in the city, to take any picture, photograph or snapshot, by any process whatsoever, of any person and offer to furnish to such person, or to any person selected by him, a copy of the picture, photograph or snapshot so taken, for a consideration in any form. The passing out of written, printed, typewritten or mimeographed matter, or the giving of information orally, concerning the means by which a copy of the picture, photograph or snapshot taken may be obtained, shall constitute an offer to furnish a copy of the picture, photograph or snapshot taken for a consideration. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the taking of a picture solely for the purpose of reproducing it in a book, newspaper, magazine or periodical. 
(Code 1965, § 32-8; Ord. No. 1854, 5-1-89)  
Sec. 33-8. - Packing and unpacking on sidewalks. 
No person receiving or shipping goods, wares and merchandise in boxes, crates or other packing shall pack, unpack or store the same upon any sidewalk or street, unless such package, crate or box is too large to enter the door of the building through which the contents of such package, crate or box are to be carried, in which case such package, crate or box may be unpacked or packed upon the sidewalk, without unreasonable delay, and all packing material, trash and boxes shall be immediately removed by the owner thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 32-10)  
Sec. 33-9. - Congregations obstructing streets or sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any persons to congregate in such a manner so as to block, hinder, impede or obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the streets or sidewalks in the city. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, 23-36.2) 
Cross reference— General prohibition against interfering with traffic, § 21-34; general prohibition against obstructing free passage of others, § 23-16.  
Sec. 33-9.1. - Permits for parades and processions. 
No procession or parade, excepting the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of the state, the forces of the police and fire departments of the city and funeral processions, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street or highway in the City, except in accordance with a permit issued by the city manager and such other regulations as are set forth in Chapter 21 which may apply. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 33-10. - Sitting, reclining or lying down on streets or sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sit, recline or lie down on any street, sidewalk, alley, curb or entrance to any store or other place of business. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-36.3)  
Sec. 33-11. - Trains obstructing street crossings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, or any receiver or trustee operating a railroad, to obstruct, for a longer period than five (5) minutes, the free passage on any street or road, by standing cars or trains across the same, except a passenger train while receiving or discharging passengers, but a passway shall be kept open to allow normal flow of traffic; provided that, when a train has been uncoupled, so as to make a passway, the time necessarily required, not exceeding three (3) minutes, to pump up the air after the train has been recoupled shall not be included in considering the time such cars or trains were standing across such street or road. 
(b)  Any railroad company, receiver or trustee violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); provided that, the fine may be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each minute beyond the permitted time, but the total fine shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  This section shall not apply when a train is stopped due to breakdown, mechanical failure or emergency. 
(Code 1965, § 22-29) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-412.1.  
Sec. 33-12. - Depositing hazardous or injurious material on street and removal of same. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or highway, any bottle, glass, nail, tack, can or any other substance likely to injure any person or animal or damage any vehicle upon such street or highway, nor shall any person throw or deposit, or cause to be deposited, upon any street or highway, any soil, sand, mud, gravel or other substance, so as to create a hazard to the traveling public. 
(b)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street or highway, any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street or highway from such vehicle. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 22-32) 
Cross reference— General prohibition against littering streets, § 31-10. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-324.  
Sec. 33-13. - Duty of property owners and occupants to keep abutting streets and sidewalks free of litter. 
All owners or occupants of real property shall maintain the sidewalks and curbs and the right-of-way up to the edge of the pavement of any public street abutting such property and one-half of abutting alleys in a clean and litter-free condition. All owners or occupants of real property adjacent to a sound wall or similar noise attenuation structure shall maintain the area between the property line and the sound wall or similar noise attenuation structure in a clean and litter-free condition. 
(Ord. No. 1016, §§ 17-12(E), 17-13(A), 1-14-80; Ord. No. 3385, 12-9-14) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks abutting junkyards and automobile graveyards to be kept clear of junked vehicles and waste matter, § 25-27.  
Sec. 33-14. - Duty of property owners and occupants to remove snow and ice from sidewalks. 
The owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land in the city shall remove snow and ice from the sidewalks in front of such lot or parcel within six (6) hours after such time as such removal can first be reasonably effected. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 17-12(E), 1-14-80) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-867.  
Sec. 33-15. - Driving on street barricaded while work in progress. 
No person shall ride or drive over any street barricaded or guarded because paving, grading, macadamizing or other public improvement is in progress. 
(Code 1965, § 32-15)  
Sec. 33-16. - Removing street barriers placed for protection of work in progress. 
No person shall remove barriers or other guards placed across the streets of the city while paving, grading, macadamizing or other public improvement is in progress. 
(Code 1965, § 32-14)  
Sec. 33-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3082, adopted May 12, 2009, repealed § 33-17, which pertained to portions of streets as quiet zones and derived from § 32-6 of the 1965 Code.  
Sec. 33-18. - Vending machines on public property. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter or any other chapter of the Code, the placement of vending machines on any sidewalk or other public property located within designated RT-1, RT-2, RT-3 and RT-4 Resort Tourist Districts shall be prohibited. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, a vending machine shall be defined as any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the provision or delivery, by sale or otherwise, of consumable and/or nonconsumable products. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to newspaper vending machines, coin-operated telephones, or machines dispensing public transportation tickets or tokens. 
(d)  The placement and appearance of machines dispensing public transportation tickets or tokens shall be approved by the city manager or his designee prior to placement of the machines. 
(e)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1844, 4-3-89; Ord. No. 1860, 5-1-89; Ord. No. 2744, 5-6-03) 
Cross reference— Vending machines on private property, § 23-60.  
Sec. 33-18.1. - Newsracks on public property. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall be construed as follows: 
City manager shall mean the city manager or such other employee of the city as may be designated by the city manager to perform the duties prescribed in this section. 
Distributor shall mean the person, firm, corporation or other entity responsible for placing or maintaining a newsrack in a public right-of-way. 
Newsrack or newspaper vending machine shall mean any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display or sale of newspapers or other publications. 
(b)  The City of Virginia Beach hereby finds and declares: 
(1)  That the uncontrolled placement of newsracks and newspaper vending machines at signaled pedestrian crosswalks and next to utility poles containing pedestrian crossing buttons interferes with the rights of disabled, blind or visually impaired persons under the 1990 Americans With Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C.A. § 1201 et seq.) and the Virginia Rights of Persons With Disabilities Act (Va. Code Ann. §§ 51.5-40 through 51.5-46) to the full and free use of the public streets and highways; and 
(2)  That the benefits of regulating the placement of newsracks and newspaper vending machines at signaled pedestrian crosswalks and next to utility poles containing pedestrian crossing buttons outweigh the potential impact which may result from such regulation. 
(c)  Any newsrack or newspaper vending machine which, in whole or in part, is located upon or over any public sidewalk, street or other portion of a public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  No newsrack or newspaper vending machine shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any utility pole containing a pedestrian crossing button or crosswalk bar, or to any other fixture located within five (5) feet of any signaled pedestrian crosswalk. 
(2)  No newsrack or newspaper vending machine or grouping of newsracks or newspaper vending machines shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
(i)  Within five (5) feet of the curb-cut ramp of any signaled pedestrian crosswalk; or 
(ii)  Within three (3) feet of any utility pole containing a pedestrian crossing button. 
(d)  Any newsrack or newspaper vending machine which, in whole or in part, is located upon or over any public right-of-way shall display, in a conspicuous location, the name of the distributor and an address where the distributor can be contacted. 
(e)  Any newsrack or newspaper vending machine which has been installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this section shall be removed by the city manager and stored in temporary custody subject to the notice requirements of subsection (f) of this section. Additionally, the distributor of any newsrack or newspaper vending machine removed and stored pursuant to this subsection may be charged a reasonable fee for such removal and storage. 
(f)  Upon a determination by the city manager that a newsrack or newspaper vending machine has been installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this section, a notice to correct the violation shall be issued to the distributor. Such notice shall be deemed to constitute sufficient notice of a violation if it is properly addressed and mailed to the distributor by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address set forth on the newsrack or newspaper vending machine. The notice shall specifically describe the violation and set forth the action(s) necessary to correct the violation. The notice shall also specify that failure to correct the violation within seven (7) days following the date of mailing of the notice will result in the removal of the newsrack or newspaper vending machine by the city manager and its storage in temporary custody. The notice shall advise the distributor as to the location of the newsrack or newspaper vending machine and the procedure for claiming same. 
(g)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (f), if any newsrack or newspaper vending machine (i) has been installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this section and (ii) does not display the name and address of the distributor, notice of violation shall be sufficient by posting such notice on the newsrack or newspaper vending machine. Failure to correct the violation within seven (7) days following the date of posting will result in removal and storage of the newsrack or newspaper vending machine as set forth in subsection (e) of this section. 
(h)  Any distributor, person, or other entity who claims to be aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice or action taken under the provisions of this section may appeal to the city manager. An appeal shall be perfected within three (3) days after receipt of a notice of violation or other action by filing with the office of the city manager a letter of appeal stating the basis for such appeal. The city manager shall schedule a hearing of such appeal on a date not later than ten (10) days after the filing of the appeal; provided, however, that such hearing may, at the discretion of the city manager, be rescheduled for good cause shown. The city manager shall take no action during the pendency of an appeal. Failure to correct a violation of this section within seven (7) days following (i) the expiration of the time for noting an appeal or (ii) the denial of an appeal, shall result in the removal and storage of the newsrack or newspaper vending machine. 
(i)  Any newsrack or newspaper vending machine removed pursuant to this section must be claimed by the distributor within thirty (30) days of such removal. If the distributor fails to claim the newsrack or newspaper vending machine or refuses to pay storage costs, the city manager may dispose of same. Any proceeds or monies, if any, from the disposal of a newsrack or newspaper vending machine shall be forwarded to the city treasurer for deposit into the general fund of the city. 
(j)  If any provision of this section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2559, 8-24-99)  
Sec. 33-19. - Hauling of sand, gravel, topsoil, fill, or other excavated material off an excavation site. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to haul more than three hundred thirty-seven (337) in situ cubic yards of sand, gravel, topsoil, fill, or other excavated material from an excavation site by vehicle upon any street in the City of Virginia Beach without a hauling permit from the department of planning in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Application for a permit required by this section shall be filed with the department of planning on forms supplied by the city. The application fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The application shall be signed by the property owner, hauler and operator and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The names and addresses of all haulers; 
(2)  If the hauler is a corporation, the name and address of its corporate offices and registered agent; 
(3)  The name and address of the excavator and/or operator; 
(4)  The names and addresses of owners of all property from which the fill material is to be hauled; 
(5)  The proposed date on which the hauling operation will commence and the proposed date on which the operation will be completed; 
(6)  The total number of cubic yards of material to be hauled; 
(7)  The number, type, carrying capacity, and weight of vehicles to be used in the hauling operation on a daily basis; 
(8)  The location of all haul roads leading to public streets and highways within the hauling area; 
(9)  A statement listing the public streets to be used as haul routes to access an arterial or major street or highway; 
(10)  A statement of the methods to be used to maintain or repair any public street or highway to be used for hauling purposes; 
(11)  A site plan or survey of the excavation site, with a location map, showing the locations of the area to be excavated, the on-site haul road, the point at which the haul road intersects the public right-of-way, the nearest street intersections in all directions leaving the excavation site and all existing and proposed entrances on both sides of the public street within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed entrance; 
(12)  A detailed description of the on-site haul road and the entrance to the public right-of-way, including width, radii, composition of surface material and length of improved surface; 
(13)  Erosion and sediment control measures to be employed at the haul road entrance and all access points; 
(14)  The method by which dirt and dust will be controlled on the public streets and in the air; 
(15)  A traffic maintenance/control plan, including, but not limited to, sign type, size, color, lettering size and locations; 
(16)  Location and description of public structures and improvements immediately adjacent to and under the haul road entrance; and 
(17)  A description or plan of all proposed improvements to mitigate the traffic impacts associated with the hauling activity including, but not limited to, turn lanes, signalization, striping and other traffic control measures. 
In the event any changes in the above-required information are needed, the applicant shall submit such changes to the planning department for review and approval prior to the commencement thereof. 
(c)  The director of the department of planning or his designee shall determine the acceptability of the hauling methods and routes proposed by the applicant, and shall grant the hauling permit unless: 
(1)  Under accepted engineering standards, it is determined that the public streets and highways to be used in the proposed hauling route cannot sustain the weight or frequency of the hauling vehicles without substantial damage thereto; or 
(2)  The proposed hauling operation would render the streets and highways affected by the hauling unsafe for public travel; or 
(3)  The noise or dust generated by the hauling operation is of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of persons of reasonable sensitivity, or to disturb or annoy the quiet, comfort or repose of reasonable persons who reside in close proximity to the hauling operation. 
Any person aggrieved of the decision of the planning director or his designee may appeal such decision to the city manager or his designee within thirty (30) days of the date of such decision. Any person aggrieved of the decision of the city manager or his designee may appeal such decision to the circuit court within thirty (30) days of the date of such decision. 
(d)  In the event the planning director or his designee issues a hauling permit under this section, he may attach such conditions and safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect the public safety and to ensure against the creation of a public nuisance or substantial damage to the streets due to the hauling and may require the posting of a bond with surety, cash, escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement acceptable to the city attorney, to assure compliance. 
(e)  No permit issued under this section shall be transferred to another person without approval by the planning department. Such approval shall be granted in the same manner as for original applications for permits. 
(f)  A hauling permit issued under this section shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance. The holder of the permit may thereafter apply annually to the department of planning for a renewal of the permit upon the payment of a fifty dollar ($50.00) renewal fee and verification of all information required under subsection (b). 
(g)  A violation of any of the provisions of this section or failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a hauling permit shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. In addition to the penalties imposed hereunder, the city may institute legal action to enjoin a continuing violation of any of the provisions of this section or of any of the terms and conditions of a hauling permit issued pursuant to this section. 
(h)  In addition to, and not in lieu of, the remedies set forth in subsection (g) hereof, the director of planning or his designee may revoke a hauling permit issued pursuant to this section as a result of the violation of any of the terms or conditions of the permit. 
(i)  This section shall not apply to excavation operations conducted pursuant to an excavation permit and a conditional use permit for a borrow pit or to stormwater management facilities constructed pursuant to approved subdivision construction plans or site plans. 
(Ord. No. 2395, 6-11-96)  
Secs. 33-20—33-28. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WORK ON, OVER, UNDER OR AFFECTING STREETS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Planning commission approval required to alter surface of road or other public property, § 23-40. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 33-29. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Permittee. The word "permittee" shall mean any person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this article. 
Street. The word "street" includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, parks, public rights-of-way and all other public places or easements. 
Structure. The word "structure" means any building, pole and appurtenance thereto, fixture, post, wire, guy and tower and cable, vault, culvert, drainage system as defined in the stormwater management ordinance (appendix D), manhole and other underground installations. 
(Code 1965, § 32-1; Ord. No. 2377, 3-26-96)  
Sec. 33-30. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 33-31. - Certain provisions of article subject to provisions of articles II and III of chapter 3. 
The provisions of this article which relate or apply to signs shall be construed as subject to the provisions of articles II and III of chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 32-18)  
Sec. 33-32. - Warning signs, lights or barricades. 
Whenever any person performs any work which might tend to affect the use of any street, whether or not a permit therefor is required by this article, appropriate warning signs, lights, barricades or other measures shall be erected, placed or taken in such manner as to give effective notice of such work and to protect the public. 
(Code 1965, § 32-43; Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80)  
Sec. 33-32.1. - Traffic maintenance/control plan. 
Whenever any work within any street will affect traffic or public travel, a traffic maintenance/control plan shall be submitted to and approved by the traffic engineer. This plan shall contain all necessary items, traffic control devices and signing, as well as construction sequence, to adequately maintain traffic through and/or around the work area. 
(Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80)  
Sec. 33-33. - Inspections. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee shall conduct such inspections as may be necessary that work being done and completed pursuant to a permit issued under this article conforms to such permit. When the permittee reports that such work is completed, the city manager or his designee shall inspect the work and advise the permittee of the approval or disapproval of such work. 
(b)  If the city manager or his designee determines that a permittee is not going forward with the work in a continuing manner and it appears that more than the normal number of inspections will therefore be necessary, the city manager or his designee shall give the permittee notice, in writing, of this fact. Should additional inspections thereafter result, the city manager or his designee may charge the expense thereof against the guarantee fee provided for in division 3 of this article or, where a bond has been given in lieu of guarantee fee pursuant to section 33-73, appropriate proceedings may be carried out to recover the cost of such inspections. 
(Code 1965, §§ 32-31, 32-32; Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91)  
Sec. 33-34. - Notice and correction of defects. 
(a)  If work done or being done pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this article has not been done or is not being done in accordance with the permit, or a street is not left in satisfactory condition, notice shall be given the permittee in question and such permittee shall correct same, when deemed necessary, as follows: 
(1)  When there is a direct violation of highway specifications. 
(2)  When work does not comply with conditions of the permit, in which case, the permittee shall be given ten (10) days, upon receipt of a certified letter, to correct the same. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a notice given pursuant to this section, should the permittee in question refuse or fail to correct the condition referred to in such notice within a reasonable time, the city manager or his designee shall cancel the permit in question and cause the necessary work to be done, deducting the cost thereof from the guarantee fee required by division 3 of this article; provided that, where a bond has been given in lieu of a guarantee fee pursuant to section 33-73, appropriate proceedings shall be carried out to recover such cost. Where a bond or guarantee fee is not required by this article, the cost of correcting any defective work shall be recovered through legal means. When the city has to intervene and correct or make safe any situation that threatens public liability, a twenty-five (25) percent administrative fee will be added to the cost of repairing same by means stated in this article. 
(Code 1965, §§ 32-33, 32-34; Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91)  
Sec. 33-35. - Location of mail and newspaper boxes in street. 
Mail and newspaper boxes may be placed in the streets without obtaining, under the provisions of this article, a permit therefor; provided, all such boxes shall be so located as not to interfere with or endanger public travel or maintenance on such streets. Every such box shall be placed within the limits of the property frontage of the address for which it is to be used. Any such box so located or so sized as to interfere with or endanger public travel or create a visibility obstruction for public travel or maintenance on such streets shall be moved to an approved location upon reasonable notice from the city manager or his designee. Failure to remove such box after such notice has been given shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 1965, § 32-39; Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91)  
Sec. 33-36. - Illumination of business place from across street. 
Illumination or floodlighting of a business place from light structures across a street from the business place shall be unlawful and no permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article for this purpose. 
(Code 1965, § 32-40)  
Sec. 33-37. - Design standards for curbing, combination curb and gutter, etc. 
All curbing, combination curb and gutter, endwalls and flared end sections constructed in the city shall be in accordance with design standards on file in the office of the city engineer and made reference to in the site plan regulation dated November 28, 1973. Such design standards are hereby approved by city council. 
(Code 1965, § 32-4; Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80)  
Sec. 33-38. - Construction of valley curbs or gutters. 
Valley curbs or gutters shall not be constructed in the city unless authorized by the city engineer prior to May 1, 1964. 
(Code 1965, § 32-5)  
Sec. 33-39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2073, adopted June 25, 1991, deleted former § 33-39, relative to cutting down or lowering curbs, which derived from Code 1965, § 32-3.  
Sec. 33-40. - Installation or maintenance of defective sewers, drains or utilities under street. 
No person shall install or maintain, or cause to be installed or maintained, any defective private sewer, drain or underground utility, where the same passes under a public street, highway, easement or right-of-way. The city manager or his designee may cause such defective sewer, drain or underground utility to be closed and the cost thereof shall be recoverable, by suit or action, from such person. 
(Code 1965, § 32-17; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91) 
Cross reference— Sewers, Ch. 28.  
Sec. 33-41. - Repair of street or sidewalk damaged by sewers, drains or utilities. 
Whenever the surface of any street or sidewalk area, whether paved or not, is damaged by reason of any private sewer, drain or underground utility, it shall be the duty of the person owning the same to have such surface properly repaired and, upon neglect thereof for five (5) days, the city manager or his designee shall cause the repairs to be made, at the expense of the owner in question. Such expense shall be collected by the director of public works. 
(Code 1965, § 32-16; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91)  
Sec. 33-42. - Payment of cost of relocating or removing utility facilities when street vacated or abandoned. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated or abandoned by the city at the request of any private individual, association, corporation or public authority, the cost of the relocation or removal of public utility facilities located in such street, alley or other public way shall be paid by the private individual, association, corporation or public authority requesting such vacation or abandonment. 
(Code 1965, § 32-17.1)  
Sec. 33-43. - Restoration of street surface when permit not required for disturbance thereof. 
Whenever any person disrupts or disturbs the paved or improved surface of any street used primarily for public travel and a permit therefor is not required by this article, such person shall notify the city manager or his designee when the paved or improved surface shall be restored. The city may restore the paved or improved section and shall render to such person a statement of its costs. Such person shall reimburse the city for its costs in such restoration. 
(Code 1965, § 32-42; Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91)  
Secs. 33-44—33-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 33-51. - General requirement. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to perform any work in connection with the erection, construction, removal, relocation or maintenance of any structure, drainage system, surface, overhead or underground installation or to cut, trim or spray trees or to place signs, if such work, cutting, trimming, spraying or placing is on, under or over a street or affects a street, until such person has obtained a permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1965, § 32-18; Ord. No. 2377, 3-26-96)  
Sec. 33-52. - Only one permit required for work of continuing nature. 
For work of a continuing nature along one or more routes, only one application shall be made and only one permit shall be required under this division. 
(Code 1965, § 32-30; Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80)  
Sec. 33-53. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a permit required by this division shall be filed on forms supplied by the city. Such application shall show all required information and be signed by the applicant or his authorized agent. Such application shall include a description of the work to be done, a sketch or site plan showing such work, if required by the city manager or his designee, a statement as to whether subcontractors will perform any work pursuant to the permit and, if so, the name, business address, and telephone number of each subcontractor, and the name and telephone number of an employee, agent or representative of the applicant who is responsible for supervising the subcontractors. 
(b)  Sketches or site plans filed with an application under this section shall show the following: 
(1)  The nature of the work to be done. 
(2)  Property lines, where appropriate, and street right-of-way lines with location of the work with reference to a fixed point on the street. 
(3)  Where surface or underground work is involved, a cross-section indicating conditions and proposed changes. 
(4)  Where grading operations are involved, the pavement, shoulder, ditch and slope. 
(5)  Any tree which is to be removed. 
(6)  A traffic maintenance/control plan. 
(7)  An engineer's cost estimate of the total construction costs of any improvements located within public rights-of-way and easements. 
(c)  In addition to the information required in subsection (b) above, a sketch or site plan filed with application under this section for a permit involving underground installations shall also show the following: 
(1)  The exact location and dimensions of conduits, pipes, vaults, manholes, crossings and other installations. 
(2)  Type (concrete, iron, etc.). 
(3)  Depth of covering material. 
(4)  Outlets, showing type and size. 
(5)  Design and location of identification indicators. 
(Code 1965, §§ 32-19—32-21; Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 2377, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 2999, 9-4-07)  
Sec. 33-54. - Issuance and terms generally. 
Upon the filing of an application for a permit under this division, the city manager or his designee shall ascertain that all work to be done pursuant to the permit applied for complies in all respects with prevailing planning, practices, appropriate construction standards and with the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city and the resolutions, policies and regulations of the city before the permit shall be issued. The city manager or his designee shall issue the permit when such compliance is apparent or can be assured by the terms of the permit and when all applicable requirements for obtaining the permit has been met. The city manager or his designee may prescribe a limit for the duration of such permit and may extend the same. 
(Code 1965, §§ 32-23, 32-29; Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91)  
Sec. 33-55. - Liability insurance or bond prerequisite to issuance for disturbing improved surface of street. 
(a)  No person shall lower the curb on any street, or lay any private driveway or ramp crossing any sidewalk, or otherwise cut, undermine, disrupt or disturb in any means the paved or improved surface (including shoulders, sidewalks, curbs and gutters) of any street without first obtaining a permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Before any permit shall be issued to any person pursuant to the provisions of this division, such person shall provide proof of general liability insurance or a bond to indemnify, keep and hold the city free and harmless from liability on account of injury or damage to persons or property growing out of the activity to be authorized by such permit, in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) Such insurance shall be combined single limit per occurrence. 
(c)  All paving and repaving, where necessary, shall be done at the expense of the person receiving such permit, and it shall be the duty of the owner of the property served by any driveway or ramp to keep the sidewalk, driveway or ramp in good repair at all times at such owner's expense. 
(Code 1965, § 32-28; Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91)  
Sec. 33-56. - Reserved.  
Sec. 33-57. - Issuance for logging roads, tram roads and other temporary entrances. 
The city manager or his designee may issue a permit under this division authorizing a logging road, tram road or other temporary private entrance, if in addition to all other applicable requirements of this division, there is posted a bond, satisfactory to the city manager or his designee, conditioned that off-site drainage shall not be disrupted and that the permittee shall maintain erosion and sediment control, drainage, including off-site drainage, during his operations and that his failure to do so will result in the cancellation of his permit. No such bond shall be released until the entrance and all drainage, including off-site drainage, has been inspected and found to be in at least the same condition as existed at the time of the issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1965, § 32-37; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 2377, 3-26-96)  
Sec. 33-58. - Reserved.  
Sec. 33-59. - Issuance for cutting, trimming or spraying trees or shrubs. 
The city manager or his designee my issue a permit under this division for the cutting, trimming or spraying of trees or shrubs on a street only when such work is fully justified in the public interest. Such work shall be done only in a manner prescribed in the permit so issued as directed by the city arborist or the superintendent of landscape services. Any bush, shrub, tree, vegetation, fence, wall, berm, landscape screening or the like, which obscures, hinders or creates visibility obstruction for vehicles entering a street from another street or from a driveway shall be trimmed, relocated, adjusted or removed, whichever action is deemed appropriate or necessary for traffic safety by the traffic engineer's office. For failure to remove, trim, relocate or adjust such item within fourteen (14) days after written notice from the traffic engineer, the city will cause such work to be accomplished at the expense of the owner in question. 
(Code 1965, § 32-41; Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91)  
Sec. 33-60. - Issuance of emergency permit. 
The city manager or his designee may issue an emergency permit to allow work which requires immediate attention to proceed before the application for a permit under this division is completely processed. 
(Code 1965, § 32-45; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91)  
Sec. 33-61. - Issuance and term of blanket permit. 
Persons whose regular course of business requires work on, under or over streets or affecting streets or the use of streets may be granted a blanket permit for such work. All such blanket permits shall be accompanied by a traffic maintenance/control plan approved by the traffic engineer. Such blanket permits shall be for not more than one year's duration. 
(Code 1965, § 32-30; Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80)  
Sec. 33-62. - Issuance to, and responsibility of, contractor for work on government project. 
Where work on any government project is to be performed by a contractor, the permit required under the provisions of this division shall be issued in the name of the contractor. The contractor in such a case shall be responsible for inspection and guarantee fees under the provisions of this article and shall give evidence of liability insurance or bond as required in section 33-55. 
(Code 1965, § 32-36)  
Sec. 33-63. - Contents. 
(a)  Permits issued under this division shall specify the manner and the conditions under which the permitted work shall be done. Unless otherwise specified in the permit, every permit issued shall be deemed to include the following provisions: 
(1)  Public travel shall be protected by adequate lights, barricades and appropriate warning signals and signs at all times. For maintenance of traffic, the permit shall be accompanied by a traffic maintenance/control plan indicating proposed measures for adequate traffic maintenance and such plan shall be approved by the traffic engineer. 
(2)  Public travel shall be blocked only in the manner specified in the permit and as depicted on the traffic maintenance/control plan approved by the traffic engineer. 
(3)  Pavement shall be used for piling or storing of excavated material or for deposit of material and the placing of equipment only as specified in the permit. 
(4)  The maximum amount of ditch, trench or other excavation to be opened at one time shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet, including the backfilled portion of any trench which is not in condition for public travel, unless the city manager or his designee finds reason for exception. 
(5)  All backfilling of excavations shall be done to a ninety-five (95) percent density compaction. Compaction by using water shall not be permitted. 
(6)  On pavement cuts, the pavement shall be restored to its former dimensions, cross-section and profile, with material conforming to city specifications. 
(7)  No tree roots shall be cut to the extent of rendering the tree unsafe and, if possible, tunneling through or under roots instead of cutting anchor roots shall be followed. 
(8)  Shoulders, ditches and drainage mediums shall be left in the same condition as found or as specified in the permit. 
(9)  The permittee agrees to repair any sinks in the backfill or pavement occurring within one year after the work done under the permit is completed. 
(10)  If entrances to adjacent property are affected, the permittee shall, if practical, provide temporary facilities for safe ingress and egress to such property. 
(11)  The permittee agrees to restore the street to a satisfactory condition consistent with adjoining sections of the street. 
(12)  The permittee agrees, by the acceptance of the permit in question, to indemnify, keep and hold the city free and harmless from liability on account of injury or damage to persons or property growing out of activity authorized by the permit, whether suit is brought against the city either independently or jointly with the permittee. 
(13)  The permittee agrees, by the acceptance of the permit in question, upon notice in writing, to remove or relocate any structure or installation placed in, on, under or over any street, if such structure or installation interferes with the use of the street. 
(14)  The permittee shall promptly report to the city manager or his designee when the work authorized by the permit is completed. 
(15)  The permittee shall provide written notice to any and all adjacent private property owners prior to performing work in public rights-of-way that are adjacent to private properties. Such notice shall include the following: 1) the full name of the permittee; 2) the permit number; 3) when the work will be performed; 4) the name and telephone number of the employee, agent, or representative of the permittee who is responsible for supervising the work; and 5) the telephone number for the city's permitting office. The written notice shall be provided to the private property owner by a door hanger on the property owner's front door, which shall be placed on the door at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to permittee commencing work, but no more than seven (7) days before such work is commenced. In the case of an emergency in which the permittee is required to immediately commence repair work, the permittee shall provide the written notice described herein, but the notice may be provided contemporaneously with the commencement of the repair work. 
(b)  When any work or installation for which a permit is required by this division will or may disturb or obstruct any natural or artificial drainage medium, including ditches, storm sewers, ravines and the like, the permit shall specify the manner in which surface water shall be controlled during the progress of the work and thereafter, if the disturbance or obstruction is a permanent nature. 
(Code 1965, §§ 32-26, 32-27; Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 2999, 9-4-07)  
Sec. 33-64. - Authority of city when work done without permit. 
Whenever any person uses a street for any purpose for which a permit is required under the provisions of this division, without such permit, the city may remove such work and restore the street to its original condition. Where the city exercises such right, it shall have the right to recover from such person its cost and expense. 
(Code 1965, § 32-35)  
Secs. 33-65—33-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT, INSPECTION AND GUARANTEE FEES 
 
Sec. 33-71. - Schedule. 
(a)  Permit, inspection and guarantee fees for work for which a permit is required by this article shall be required or not required in accordance with the following schedule: 
	Type of Project 	Permit Fee 	Inspection Fee 	Minimum Guarantee Fee 
(1) 	One (1) permit for work of a continuing nature 	$100.00 	Based on 1.5% the total cost of construction as provided in the engineer's cost estimate, excluding water, sewer and street light costs, with a $50.00 minimum. 	Deposit in accordance with estimated cost 
(2) 	Logging road, tram road and other temporary entrances 	$100.00 	$50.00 	Deposit in accordance with estimated cost 
(3) 	Cutting, trimming or spraying trees or shrubs 	$100.00 	$50.00 	$25.00 
(4) 	Blanket permit 	$500.00 	$0.00 	
(5) 	Single- or two-family driveway aprons 	$35.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 
(6) 	Single permit 	$100.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 
(7) 	All other work 	$100.00 	Based on 1.5% of the total cost of construction as provided in the engineer's cost estimate, excluding street light costs, with a $50.00 minimum; provided, however, that water and sewer fees shall be based on 10% of the construction cost up to $7,500.00 plus 1.5% of the construction cost in excess of $7,500.00, with a $50.00 minimum. 	Deposit in accordance with estimated cost. 
 
(b)  At the time easement or dedication plats are submitted a review fee in the amount of eighty-four dollars ($84.00) shall be required. 
(Code 1965, § 32-49; Ord. No. 1869, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 2377, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 2633, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2808, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 2876, 5-10-05; Ord. No. 3021, 5-13-08) 
_____ 
Sec. 33-72. - Technology fee. 
In addition to any fees otherwise required by this chapter, there shall be a fee in the amount of five dollars ($5.00) for permits issued pursuant to section 33-51. Such fee shall be for the following purposes: 
(a)  To improve community access to general information about cases, applications, permits and inspections by providing online, user-friendly search and viewing tools; 
(b)  To facilitate communications with property owners, consultants and contractors through use of on-line checklist and activity tracking that automatically emails notifications and updates regarding permit status and other information not previously available on-line; 
(c)  To increase transparency and accountability in business operations by providing users the ability to track all transactions online; 
(d)  To enhance performance and revenue reporting by providing the ability to produce ad hoc reports on demand; and 
(e)  To improve and expand electronic document storage, management and retrieval by including scanned images as part of the on-line permit record. 
(Ord. No. 3231, 5-8-12, eff. 7-1-12)  
Sec. 33-73. - Payment before issuance of permit; bond in lieu of guarantee fee. 
Fees required by section 33-71 shall be paid before the city manager designee shall issue a permit under the provisions of this article; provided, however, that a bond may be accepted by the city manager or his designee in lieu of a guarantee fee required by such section. 
(Code 1965, §§ 32-44, 32-45; Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91)  
Sec. 33-74. - Sufficiency of guarantee fees. 
Guarantee fees under this division shall be sufficient to cover the estimated cost of completing the work and/or restoring the street to a satisfactory condition should the holder of a permit issued under the provisions of this article fail to do so. 
(Code 1965, § 32-46; Ord. No. 2377, 3-26-96)  
Sec. 33-75. - Return of guarantee fee. 
Whenever work done pursuant to a permit provided for in this article is completed and approved by the city manager or his designee or the city has made the necessary corrections, the city manager or his designee shall return the guarantee fee, after deducting therefrom any inspection fee and such other deductions as are provided for in this article, to the permittee. 
(Code 1965, § 32-48; Ord. No. 1078, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2073, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 2377, 3-26-96)  
Secs. 33-76—33-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - INSTALLATION OR REPAIR OF UNDERGROUND UTILITIES PRIOR TO STREET IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 33-86. - Notice of intention to improve street. 
Whenever the city shall determine to pave or surface any street in the city, the director of public works shall notify, in writing, at the time plans are completed and prior to advertisement for bids and award of the contract, if the work is not performed by the city forces, at least one hundred twenty (120) days in advance of actual construction, all utility companies, corporations, firms, associations, receivers and other fiduciaries, governmental agencies and political subdivisions of the state operating in the city of the intention of the city to pave, surface or otherwise improve such street. 
(Code 1965, § 32-50)  
Sec. 33-87. - Installation of new pipes, wires, etc. 
The recipients of the notice provided for in section 33-86 shall, within one hundred twenty (120) days, at their own expense and cost, lay, install, construct and complete new underground pipes, mains, wires, conduits, equipment and utilities where none are then installed, including house services for each lot abutting a residential street, in advance of the street improvements contemplated by the city; provided, however, that this section is not intended to require utility companies and corporations to place existing overhead wires or cables underground nor is it intended to hold a utility company in default where, pursuant to the terms of this article, house services have been installed but the size of the services are found to be inadequate within the one-year period referred to in section 33-89. 
(Code 1965, § 32-51)  
Sec. 33-88. - Repair of existing pipes, wires, etc. 
Repair of existing pipes, wires, where the mains, repair of existing pipes, conduits, wires, equipment and utilities necessary to render adequate and proper service to the abutting property are already in the street at the time of receipt of the notice provided for in section 33-86, the recipients of such notice shall examine the same carefully and repair or replace the same wherever needed, at their own expense and cost, in a proper and satisfactory order and condition and install the house service for each lot abutting on such street. Such repairs and replacement and the installation of house service shall be made and completed within one hundred twenty (120) days after receipt of such notice. 
(Code 1965, § 32-52)  
Sec. 33-89. - Subsequent street openings by persons failing to comply with sections 33-87 and 33-88. 
If any person whose duty it is to comply with sections 33-87 and 33-88 shall fail to comply with the requirements of such sections within the time specified, and subsequently, within one year from the date of the notice provided for in this article, shall, without reasonable excuse satisfactory to the director of public works, or shall, in event of an emergency, install new underground pipes, mains, wires, conduits, equipment and utilities, including house services, and in so doing cut into the street surface or in manner disturb the street pavement or hard surface, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each street opening shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, such person shall restore the pavement or hard surface required under this Code and other ordinances of the city at his own cost and expense. 
(Code 1965, § 32-53)  
Secs. 33-90—33-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STREET NUMBERS FOR BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8. 
 
Sec. 33-101. - System; blocks and base lines. 
All houses and business buildings in the city shall be numbered pursuant to the grid system, as administered by the planning commission. The entire city shall be divided into blocks, with the Norfolk and Southern Railroad right-of-way being the base line from which all blocks on the north and south are to be computed and the Atlantic Ocean being the base line from which all blocks west are to be computed. 
(Code 1965, § 32-54)  
Sec. 33-102. - Display of number generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of each house or business building in the city to properly display, in or at the front thereof, in a position easily observed from the street, the proper number of his house or building, for the ascertainment of which he shall apply to the planning commission. 
(b)  In addition to, but not in lieu of, the requirements of subsection (a) above, it shall be permissible to display the number of a house or building on the curb in front thereof. Any display of such number on the curb shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  The numerals shall be in block form painted with black paint. 
(2)  The numerals shall be four (4) inches high and three-fourths (¾) inches wide. 
(3)  There shall be no more than two (2) inches between numerals. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor, and each day that such violation continues after conviction thereof shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1965, § 32-55)  
Sec. 33-103. - Display of improper number. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the occupant or the owner of any building in the city to which a street number has been assigned or would be assigned upon request, to attach or paint or permit to be or remain attached to or painted on such building any figure tending or purporting to indicate the street number of such building, unless the number so indicated is the street number assigned, or which would be assigned upon request, to such building. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor and each day that such violation continues after conviction thereof shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1965, § 32-56)  
Secs. 33-104—33-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - VACATION OF PUBLIC STREETS, ALLEYS, EASEMENTS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1142, enacted Jan. 26, 1981, added art. V to ch. 32 of the 1965 code; at the editor's discretion, these materials have been designated as art. V, §§ 33-111, 33-112 hereof. 
 
Sec. 33-111. - Fee for processing application and viewers' services. 
A fee of four hundred ten dollars ($410.00) shall be paid to the city for the processing of an application and for the viewers' services regarding said application for the vacation of any street or alley. Such fee shall include all costs of notifications and advertising. The planning director or his authorized representative shall not accept any application unless such fee be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 1142, 1-26-81; Ord. No. 1607, 6-23-86; Ord. No. 1747, 7-13-87; Ord. No. 3546, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-364, 15.1-364.1.  
Sec. 33-111.1. - Posting of signs. 
In addition to the notice of public hearings as required by general law, upon the application of any person to vacate any street or alley, the applicant shall erect, on or immediately adjacent to such property, a suitable sign, clearly visible and legible from the public streets. Such signs hall be erected not less than fifteen (15) days before, and given notice of, the public hearing before the planning commission, and shall display information as to the nature of the application and date and time of the scheduled planning commission hearings. Signs may be purchased in the planning department office, or must be duplicated in size, format, lettering, coloring, and wording. Such signs may not be removed by the applicant until after the hearing before city council at which tentative approval of the street closure is issued, and shall be removed by the applicant within five (5) days after said city council hearing. Notwithstanding the above, when such signs have been inadequately posted, city council may deny or defer the application. 
(Ord. No. 1637, 9-29-86; Ord. No. 1676, 4-13-87)  
Sec. 33-111.2. - Appointment of viewers for one year terms. 
Three (3) viewers shall be appointed each year to serve terms of one year beginning July 1 to view each and every street or alley proposed to be altered or vacated during the term. The applicant for closure of streets or alleys shall not be required to advertise, and city council shall not be required to hold a separate hearing, for appointment of viewers for each specific street or alley proposed to be altered or vacated. The notice requirements of section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia and section 33-111.1 of the Code of Virginia Beach shall be complied with for each hearing regarding discontinuance of the street or alley proposed to be altered or vacated. The cost of public notices required by section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia shall be charged to the applicant. Also, the applicant and city council shall comply with all other provisions of section 15.2-2006 of the Code of Virginia for the alteration and vacation of streets and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 2494, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 3282, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13)  
Sec. 33-112. - Sale of public street, alley, easement and other public ways. 
The city council, as a condition to a vacation or abandonment, may require the fractional portion of its streets, alleys, easements or other public ways to be purchased by any abutting property owner or owners; and the price shall be no greater than its fair market value or its contributory value to the abutting property, whichever is greater, or the amount agreed to by the parties. No such abandonment shall be concluded until the agreed price has been paid. If any abutting property owner does not make such payment for such owner's fractional portion within one (1) year, or other time period made a condition of the vacation or abandonment, of the city council action to vacate or abandon, the vacation or abandonment shall be null and void as to any such property owner. 
(Ord. No. 1142, 1-26-81; Ord. No. 1819, 11-21-88; Ord. No. 2165, 8-4-92) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-366.  
ARTICLE VI. - ENCROACHMENTS INTO PUBLIC STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS, PLACES OR PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 33-113. - Provisions applicable to all encroachments. 
(a)  Encroachments into, over, under or upon any public street, road, alley or other public right-of-way or public property, shall be unlawful unless expressly authorized pursuant to the provisions of the city code or by franchise, license, lease or other legal instrument approved by the city council. The city council may deny or grant permission to encroach subject to such terms and conditions as it may, in its discretion, deem proper. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no encroachment that is determined to be detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare or interest shall be approved. 
(b)  Any authorization for an encroachment granted pursuant to this article is hereby deemed to be a license only, and may be revoked, conditioned or otherwise limited, with or without notice, at the pleasure of the city council. 
(c)  Authorization for encroachments other than those allowed pursuant to subsection (b) of section 33-114.3 shall be in writing, approved as to legal sufficiency by the city attorney and recorded in the Clerk's Office of the Circuit Court. 
(d)  Unless otherwise provided by the city council, it shall be a condition of every encroachment authorized pursuant to any of the provisions of this article that: 
(1)  The owner or occupant shall remove the encroachment, at no expense to the city, within thirty (30) days after notification by the city or such other time as may be directed by the city manager or his designee; 
(2)  The owner shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its agents, officers and employees, from and against all claims, damages, losses, and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, in any action arising out of the location or existence of such encroachment; 
(3)  The owner shall obtain and maintain liability insurance with the city as named insured, in the minimum amounts of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person injured and property damage per incident combined or, for subdivision identification signs, two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per person injured and property damage per incident; 
(4)  The encroachment shall not be unsightly or constitute a hazard; 
(5)  Prior to construction within or affecting any existing public street, road, alley, or other public right-of-way or public property, the owner or his agent shall obtain a permit from the permits and inspections division of the department of planning in accordance with the provisions of Article II of this chapter; 
(6)  No open cut of a public roadway shall be made unless specifically allowed by the permit; 
(7)  No construction within or affecting any existing public street, road, alley, or other right-of-way shall be allowed without an approved traffic control plan; and 
(8)  The owner shall submit for review and approval, a survey of the area being encroached upon or "as-built" plans of the encroachment if required by either the city engineer's office or the engineering division of the public utilities department. Such survey or plans shall be certified by a professional engineer, surveyor or such other qualified professional licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Virginia as the city manager or his designee may require; provided, however, that this requirement may be waived if, in the judgment of the city manager or his designee, the nature of the work to be performed renders it unnecessary. 
(e)  Authorization to any person to construct and maintain an encroachment shall not relieve such person from complying with all other applicable laws, regulations and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 3428, 10-6-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3428, adopted October 6, 2015, amended § 33-113 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 33-113, pertained to application; processing fee. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 33-113.01. - Violations; enforcement. 
(a)  In the event the city manager or his designee determines that there exists any unauthorized encroachment, or that any encroachment is in violation of any applicable provision of this article or condition of approval therefor, he shall give notice thereof to the owner or occupant of such encroachment, stating the nature of the violation and ordering the removal of the encroachment or correction of the violation within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice. Such notice shall be in writing and served upon the owner or occupant of the encroachment or his agent, and may be served personally, sent by certified or registered mail to the last known address of the owner or occupant or his agent as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records, posted in a conspicuous place in or upon such encroachment, or served by any other means authorized by law. 
(b)  Such notice shall also state that the owner or occupant shall respond to the notice within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, in writing, by electing to: (i) remove the encroachment or otherwise correct the violation within the time period specified in the notice; or (ii) apply for approval of the encroachment within sixty (60) days of the date of the notice. If the owner or occupant fails to respond to such notice within the aforesaid thirty (30) days, the city manager or his designee shall proceed in accordance with provisions of subsection (c). In the event the owner or occupant elects to seek approval of the encroachment, the city manager shall not take enforcement action unless the applicant fails to file an application within the required time. 
(c)  Failure to comply with the terms of such notice within the time specified therein shall be remediable in the following manner. The election by the city of any one or more or the remedies set forth in this subsection shall not preclude the city from seeking any other such remedy: 
(1)  By a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day that the unauthorized encroachment continues; 
(2)  By legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this section or by action in ejectment or other appropriate legal proceeding to recover possession of the street, road, alley or other public right-of-way or public property; 
(3)  By removal of such encroachment by or on behalf of the city, in which event the cost thereof shall be charged to the owner or occupant of the encroachment and collected as real estate taxes are collected; 
(4)  By charging, the owner or occupant of the encroachment, pending the removal of any such encroachment, compensation for the use of such portion of the street, road, alley or other public right-of-way or public property at the equivalent of the tax upon the land so occupied if it were property of the owner or occupant; or 
(5)  By abatement as a nuisance. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the city manager or his designee may, without notice, remove or cause the removal of any unauthorized encroachment, without liability to the owner or occupant of such encroachment, if he determines that such encroachment: 
(1)  Interferes with the intended use of a public street, road, alley or other public right-of-way or public property; 
(2)  Constitutes or causes a physical or visual obstruction to vehicles, pedestrians, bicyclists or other persons; 
(3)  May interfere with the response to an emergency on the property on which the encroachment is located; or 
(4)  Otherwise constitutes an imminent hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 3428, 10-6-15)  
Sec. 33-113.02. - Applications for encroachments. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, applications for encroachments into public streets, roads, alleys or other public rights-of-way or other public property shall be made to the city manager of his designee. A fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be paid to the city for the processing of an application for an encroachment. No such application shall be accepted unless the fee therefor is paid at the time the application is filed. The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to adopt a procedure for the processing of such applications and, where city council approval is required, the reporting to the city council of any detrimental effect which a requested encroachment may have on the public health, safety, welfare or interest. 
(Ord. No. 3428, 10-6-15)  
Sec. 33-113.1. - Encroachments by private underground utilities and subdivision signs. 
(a)  The city council hereby authorizes the city manager or his designee to approve any encroachments into public streets, roads, alleys or other public rights-of-way or other public property by private underground utilities and subdivision signs, as defined herein, upon the following conditions, in addition to those required by section 33-113: 
(1)  If the encroachment consists of private water mains or private gravity sanitary sewer laterals or force mains, the owner shall comply with the provisions of section 28-2 or 37-5 at such time as public sanitary sewer or public water service becomes available to the site being serviced by the encroachment; and 
(2)  Subdivision signs shall not be greater in area than thirty-two (32) square feet per face, have more than two (2) faces, or exceed six (6) feet in height above the natural grade at the curb. Landscaping approved by the department of parks and recreation shall be provided. No subdivision sign shall be located so as to constitute a traffic or other hazard, and such signs shall not contain any commercial advertising and shall conform to all applicable sign regulations of the City Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them herein, except in those instances when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  "Private underground utilities" shall mean any private gravity or pressurized pipe for the conveyance of raw sewerage, water or storm drainage, other than stormwater conveyance facilities described in subdivision (iii) of section 33-114.5, private irrigation systems and underground conduit for wires and cables. 
(2)  "Subdivision sign" shall mean any permanent sign located at the entrance to a residential subdivision, and shall include the electrical components necessary to light the sign and associated landscaping and irrigation around the sign. 
(c)  No application for an encroachment that does not comply with all of the criteria set forth in this section shall be approved by the city manager or his designee; provided, however, that upon denial of the application, the applicant may seek authorization of the encroachment by making application in accordance with the provisions of section 33-113.02. 
(Ord. No. 3428, 10-6-15; Ord. No. 3445, 4-19-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3428, adopted October 6, 2015, amended § 33-113.1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 33-113.1, pertained to criteria for administrative approval of certain encroachment applications. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 33-113.2. - Administrative approval of temporary encroachments into Neighborhood Dredging Special Service Districts. 
(a)  City council hereby authorizes the city manager or his designee, upon proper application to the department of public works, to approve any temporary encroachment into city-owned waterways and city-owned property adjacent to waterways for boatlifts, bulkheads, rip-rap, piers, boat-ramps, decks, shoreline stabilization projects, pilings, wharves, and associated walkways and landscaping in any of the council-approved neighborhood dredging special service districts when the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The owner has procured any permits required by the city or other applicable regulatory body; and 
(2)  The owner has secured approval from any board or body appointed by the city to oversee the general health and welfare of the Chesapeake Bay, wetlands, and any rivers, beaches or waterways; and 
(3)  The city attorney or his designee has reviewed and approved the encroachment request for compliance with relevant local ordinances and resolutions, the city code, state law, federal law and regulations, and that adjacent property owners have been notified. 
(b)  The application and processing fee for such temporary encroachment shall be as provided by section 33-113.02. 
(c)  The applicant shall provide the required 15-foot vegetated riparian buffer area or shall provide payment to the city for offsetting buffer improvements. 
(d)  Any application that includes a boathouse is excluded from the authorization for an administrative process set forth by this section. 
(e)  The application for such encroachment shall include proof of notice to the adjacent property owner. If an adjacent property owner objects to such application because of navigational concerns, the application shall be excluded from the authorization for an administrative approval set forth by this section. 
(Ord. No. 3421, 6-16-15; Ord. No. 3428, 10-6-15)  
Secs. 33-114—33-114.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3428, adopted October 6, 2015, repealed §§ 33-114—33-114.2, which pertained to criteria for administrative approval of wall-mounted signs; removal, etc., of certain unauthorized encroachments; administrative approval of encroachments by awnings. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 33-114.3. - Administrative approval of encroachments within certain zoning districts. 
Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this article: 
(a)  The city manager or his designee may, and is hereby vested with the authority to, enter into written agreements allowing encroachments upon or over any public street, road, alley or other public right-of-way or public property or sidewalk in any zoning district listed in Section 102(a)(13), pertaining to districts implementing a Strategic Growth Area Plan, or in the B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District, by outdoor cafes, fixed furniture or planters, decorative architectural features, privately-maintained bus shelters or other storefront appurtenances that are expressly allowed by the regulations of the district in which they are located, provided that such encroachments conform to applicable regulations and design guidelines for the district in which they are located. Such encroachments shall also comply with all applicable zoning and building codes, regulations and standards. 
(b)  Encroaching signs, fabric awnings, building-mounted light fixtures, non-fixed objects, and other storefront appurtenances, other than encroachments authorized pursuant to subsection (a), that are expressly allowed pursuant to the regulations of any zoning district listed in Section 102(a)(13), shall be permitted, without payment of a fee and without a written agreement. Such encroachments shall conform to the applicable regulations and design guidelines of the district in which they are located and to all applicable zoning and building codes. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), open-air cafes on public property in the OR Oceanfront Resort District or the RT-1 or RT-3 Resort Tourist Districts shall require the approval of the city council pursuant to franchise and shall be subject to the provisions of the Resort Open Air Café Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2701, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 2845, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 3250, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3329, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3428, 10-6-15)  
Sec. 33-114.4. - Encroachments by certain directional signs concerning the location of farms or farm stands. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 33-114.1 of this Code, the city manager or his designee may, and is hereby authorized to, approve the encroachment, in, upon or over any public street or other publicly-owned property, of any sign conforming to the following criteria: 
(1)  Such sign shall be owned by the city, and may be located, relocated or removed at the discretion of the city manager; 
(2)  Such sign may contain only the following matter: 
(i)  The name of a farm or farm stand on which at least fifty (50) percent by value of the products sold at such farm or farm stand have been produced on the farm of the operator thereof, or the name of a farm on which agriculturally-related recreational and amusement activities are conducted; 
(ii)  Directional arrows indicating the general direction of each such farm or farm stand; and 
(iii)  Such logo or other pictorial or graphic matter as may be approved by the city manager; 
(3)  Such sign shall be of a size, type and design approved by the city manager, and shall be located on public property at or near street intersections south of the Green Line; and 
(4)  The name of any such farm or farm stand may be displayed on a maximum of four (4) such signs at any one time. 
(b)  Application for the inclusion of the name of a farm or farm stand upon a sign or signs authorized by subsection (a) hereof shall be made annually by no later than January 15. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount determined by the city manager or his designee to be sufficient to defray the costs of including such farm or farm stand on the number of signs requested. 
(c)  In addition to the signs authorized by subsection (a) hereof, the city manager or his designee may also authorize the encroachment in, upon or over any public street or other publicly-owned property, of signs, not exceeding an area of twenty-four (24) square feet per face, displaying words or pictorial or other graphic matter generally promoting agriculture in the City of Virginia Beach. Such signs may be located at the intersections of roads deemed by the city manager or his designee to be significant entryways to, or major travel routes within, the city's rural service area. 
(Ord. No. 2624, 3-27-01)  
Sec. 33-114.4.1. - Roadside guide signs. 
Roadside guide signs located on city property may be permitted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(a)  Signs shall be allowed only by resolution of the city council upon the application of the owner or operator of a use or establishment operated exclusively for cultural, literary, scientific or artistic purposes and on a not-for-profit basis, and only if the city council, in its discretion, finds that the use or establishment: (1) is of outstanding cultural, literary, scientific or artistic value to the city, its residents and visitors; and (2) significantly contributes to the city's image as an attractive year-round destination and desirable place to live; 
(b)  Applications for such signs, which shall include an application fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), shall be made to the Director of Planning on forms prescribed by him; 
(c)  No signs shall be larger than five (5) square feet in area or higher than nine and one-half (9½) feet above ground level, and all such signs shall have a minimum clearance from ground level to the bottom of the sign face of seven (7) feet; 
(d)  No use or establishment shall be the subject of more than three (3) roadside guide signs; provided, however, that the city council may allow additional signs if it finds that three (3) signs are insufficient to provide motorists with adequate guidance to the use or establishment; 
(e)  The lettering, graphic elements and background shall be consistent with the applicable standards for such signage; 
(f)  Signs shall be erected only in the specific locations approved by the city council as necessary to provide route confirmation and continuity of guidance to the use or establishment. The city manager or his designee may relocate a sign if necessary to accommodate public signage requirements; and 
(g)  Signs shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Any sign not in good condition shall be subject to removal and disposal by the city manager or his designee. 
(h)  As used in this section, the term "roadside guide sign" shall mean a sign intended to provide traffic directions concerning the location of a use or establishment described in subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 3445, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 33-114.4.2. - Public art sponsorship signs. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee may permit signs in conjunction with exhibitions of public art authorized by the city council and located on public property. Such signs shall not be illuminated or larger than one (1) square foot in area, and no more than one such sign per individual item of public art shall be permitted. 
(b)  As used in this section, "public art" shall mean works expressing creative skill or imagination in a visual form, such as painting or sculpture, which are intended to beautify or provide aesthetic influences to public areas or areas that are visible from public areas. 
(Ord. No. 3445, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 33-114.5. - Exempted encroachments. 
The following improvements upon city-owned property shall be exempt from the provisions of this article, provided such improvements are otherwise properly permitted and do not present a safety risk: (i) driveway aprons; (ii) private sidewalks that connect to public sidewalks; (iii) extension of private underground stormwater conveyance facilities that connect to public systems within a public street, public right-of-way, public easement, or other public property, provided such connections remain within the property's extended side lot lines; and (iv) fences along extended side lot lines between privately owned real property and a sound wall or similar noise attenuation structure. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize the construction or maintenance of any improvement upon city property that constitutes a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, and nothing herein shall relieve the owner of any such improvement from the duty to remove such encroachment if a public need for its removal should arise. 
(Ord. No. 3428, 10-6-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3428, adopted October 6, 2015, amended § 33-114.5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 33-114.5, pertained to improvements not considered encroachments. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
ARTICLE VII. - SALE OF PROPERTY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1605, adopted June 23, 1986, added § 33-115 to Art. VII of Ch. 33. At the discretion of the editor, said Art. VII has been titled "Sale of Property"; § 33-115 is included as enacted. 
 
Sec. 33-115. - Disposition of excess property. 
Applications for the sale of excess property shall be submitted to the real estate division of the department of public works. A nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to the city for the processing of the application. The department of public works is hereby authorized and directed to prepare and adopt a procedure for the processing of such applications and the reporting to city council of any detrimental effect the sale of the excess property may have on the public's health, safety, welfare or interest. 
City council may deny or approve the sale of the excess property and direct, the city manager to execute the necessary documents to effectuate the sale of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1605, 6-23-86)  
Secs. 33-116—33-119. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - NEWSRACKS IN THE RESORT AREA 
 
Sec. 33-120. - Legislative intent and purpose. 
The City Council of the City of Virginia Beach hereby finds and declares that: 
(1)  The uncontrolled placement of newsracks and newspaper vending machines in public rights-of-way presents an inconvenience and danger to the safety and welfare of the public, including pedestrians, persons entering and leaving vehicles and buildings, and persons performing essential utility, traffic control, and emergency services; 
(2)  The ready availability of newspapers and other publications is beneficial to the public and to government, for without an informed public, government cannot properly function. However, the uncontrolled placement of newsracks in the public rights-of-way can constitute a public nuisance; 
(3)  The city's economic vitality depends in large measure upon its continued growth as a major center of tourism and as a place in which business can flourish. The resort area of the city, in particular, is a unique and valuable asset to the city and its citizens, inasmuch as it is a major center of tourism generating substantial revenue for the public benefit. The continued revitalization of the resort area, and especially Atlantic and Pacific Avenues, will be promoted by regulating the location and characteristics of newsracks. An appealing, well-kept appearance is critical to the city's continued ability to attract visitors and businesses; 
(4)  Moreover, maintaining and improving the appearance of the city is vital to the well-being of the residents of the city. An attractive and harmonious community enhances the quality of life of the city's residents; and 
(5)  It is the intention of city council in adopting this section to carefully weigh and balance the benefits of regulating the placement and other characteristics of newsracks in public rights-of-way against the potential impacts which may result from such regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2975, 4-24-07)  
Sec. 33-121. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall be construed as follows: 
City manager shall mean the city manager or such other employee of the city as may be designated by the city manager to perform the duties prescribed in this article. 
City of Virginia Beach or city shall mean employees or agents of the City of Virginia Beach. 
Distributor shall mean a person, firm, corporation or other entity responsible for placing or maintaining a newsrack in the public right-of-way. 
Newsrack shall mean any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser that rests or projects, in whole or in part, in or upon any portion of the public rights-of-way, and is installed, used or maintained for the display, sale, or distribution of newspapers or other publications. 
Resort area shall mean that area bordered on the north by the northernmost curb line of 38th Street, on the east by the mean low water line of the Atlantic Ocean, on the south by Rudee Inlet, and on the west by the imaginary line running north to south, fifteen (15) feet to the west of the westernmost curb line of Pacific Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 2975, 4-24-07)  
Sec. 33-122. - Applicability. 
This article applies only to newsracks located in the public rights-of-way in the resort area. 
(Ord. No. 2975, 4-24-07)  
Sec. 33-123. - General prohibitions. 
No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained in any public right-of-way in the resort area unless such placement, installation, use, or maintenance is explicitly authorized by this article and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2975, 4-24-07)  
Sec. 33-124. - Location of newsracks. 
The city manager surveyed the resort area and determined the locations that are suitable for newsracks. The locations are set forth in appendix A. In evaluating each location, the city manager used, and shall use in the future if additional locations are required, the following general criteria: 1) effect on pedestrian, emergency services, and public transportation access on, to, and from streets and sidewalks; 2) required maintenance of public facility infrastructure; 3) vehicular safety; 4) the effect of the location, mass, and bulk of newsracks on the streetscape aesthetics of each block; 5) sidewalk width; 6) parking meter access, including access by persons with disabilities; 7) access to bicycle parking; 8) access to fire hydrants; 9) access to bus stops; 10) access to benches and trash receptacles; 11) maintenance and access to street trees, planters, and utility and signal poles; 12) access generally from the street to the sidewalk and the sidewalk to the street; 13) blocking of views at intersections, alleys, and driveways; and 14) distance from intersections and driveways and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 2975, 4-24-07)  
Sec. 33-125. - Installation of newsracks. 
The space available at each location identified in appendix A shall be available to distributors on a first-come, first served basis. Distributors may not install more than one (1) newsrack per publication at each location identified in appendix A. A distributor may not divide, split, or separate a publication into two (2) or more publications that are substantially similar for purposes of evading this article. A subcommittee of the resort advisory commission shall advise the city's director of the convention and visitors bureau as to whether two or more publications are substantially similar. The subcommittee shall consist of at least three (3) members, and none of the members may be distributors or publishers of similar publications. Upon receiving the subcommittee's recommendation, the city's director of the convention and visitors bureau shall make a determination as to whether the publications are substantially similar. If the director concludes that two (2) or more publications are substantially similar, in accordance with section 33-129, he shall inform the distributor in writing that only one of those publications may be placed in each location. Any distributor, person, or other entity who claims to be aggrieved by a finding under the provisions of this section may appeal pursuant to section 33-129(d). 
(Ord. No. 2975, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 2980, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 33-126. - General standards for newsracks. 
(a)  Each newsrack shall have permanently affixed, in a readily visible place, the current name, address, and telephone number of the distributor. 
(b)  Each newsrack shall have a door, covering, and/or other appropriate device(s) preventing the publications therein from getting wet or flying out due to rain, wind, or similar environmental conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2975, 4-24-07)  
Sec. 33-127. - Standards for installation and maintenance of newsracks. 
In addition to the standards set forth in section 33-18.1, newsracks shall comply with the standards set forth in this section: 
(a)  Newsracks shall only be placed in the resort area in the locations specifically identified in appendix A. 
(b)  When installing a newsrack, if one or more newsracks have previously been installed in said location, a distributor shall install his/her newsrack in such a manner so that the newsrack is immediately contiguous to another newsrack previously installed in said location. 
(c)  If any portion of a newsrack, including the door when ajar or the coin collection mechanism, is outside of the four corners of the location designated by the city manager for newsracks to be placed in the public rights-of-way, the city manager may remove the newsrack pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 33-129. 
(d)  In the event that demand for newsrack space exceeds availability, the city manager shall consider the general criteria set forth in section 33-124 and may add additional newsrack locations. 
(e)  No portion of any newsrack shall project into or be located in any roadway. 
(f)  No portion of any newsrack shall be located directly in front of any display window. 
(g)  Only drop-in type anchor bolts may be used to secure newsracks to the public right-of-way. 
(h)  Newsracks shall not be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to the private property of another, any street furniture, tree, sign, or other permanently fixed object. 
(i)  Each newsrack shall be maintained in a reasonably neat and clean condition and in good repair, including: (1) reasonably free of dirt, trash, debris, foreign objects, graffiti, stickers, dents, and grease; (2) reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling, and cracked paint in any visible painted areas; (3) reasonably free of rust and corrosion in any visible unpainted metal areas; (4) any clear parts through which publications are visible shall be unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, scratches, dents, blemished, and discoloration; (5) any paper or cardboard parts or inserts shall be reasonably free of tears, peeling, or fading; and (6) no structural components shall be broken or unduly misshapen. 
(Ord. No. 2975, 4-24-07)  
Sec. 33-128. - Standards for removal of newsracks by distributors. 
Upon removal of any newsrack, the distributor shall eliminate any potential hazards to the public, such as bolts, brackets, or holes, and shall restore any disturbed area in the public right-of-way to the same or reasonably similar condition as any adjoining public right-of-way by removing any protrusions, cleaning the cavity of debris, filling the cavity with high strength epoxy or grout to meet the elevation of the adjoining public right-of-way, and avoiding potential depressions by taking into account shrinkage and settlement of new materials. The public right-of-way shall be level and free of protrusions or depressions. The distributor shall match as close as reasonably possible the color, texture, and material of any adjoining public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2975, 4-24-07)  
Sec. 33-129. - Removal of newsracks by city manager. 
(a)  If the city manger determines (1) a newsrack has been installed or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article, or section 33-18.1; (2) the condition or placement of a newsrack poses a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of pedestrians or wheelchair users, or the safe flow of vehicles; or (3) that the identification of a distributor, publisher or other party responsible for a newsrack in not readily identifiable or affixed to the newsrack, the newsrack may be removed by the city manager and stored in temporary custody, subject to the notice requirements set forth below. 
(b)  Prior to removing a newsrack, the city manager shall provide the distributor with a notice to correct the violation. Such notice shall be deemed to constitute sufficient notice of a violation if it is properly addressed and mailed to the distributor by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address set forth on the newsrack. The notice shall specifically describe the violation and set forth the action(s) necessary to correct the violation. The notice shall also specify that failure to correct the violation within ten (10) days following the date of receipt of the notice will result in the removal of the newsrack by the city manager and its storage in temporary custody. The notice shall advise the distributor as to the location of the newsrack and the procedure for claiming same. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b), if any newsrack (i) has been installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article and (ii) does not display the name and address of the distributor, notice of violation shall be sufficient by posting such notice on the newsrack. Failure to correct the violation within seven (7) days following the date of posting will result in removal and storage of the newsrack as set forth in subsection (b). 
(d)  Any distributor, person, or other entity who claims to be aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice or action taken under the provisions of this section may appeal to the city manager. An appeal shall be perfected within three (3) days after receipt of a notice of violation or other action by filing with the office of the city manager a letter of appeal stating the basis for such appeal. The city manager shall schedule a hearing of such appeal on a date not later than ten (10) days after the filing of the appeal; provided, however, that such hearing may, at the discretion of the city manager, be rescheduled for good cause shown. The city manager shall take no action during the pendency of an appeal. Failure to correct a violation of this section within seven (7) days following (i) the expiration of the time for noting an appeal or (ii) the denial of an appeal, shall result in the removal and storage of the newsrack or newspaper vending machine. 
(e)  Any newsrack removed pursuant to this section must be claimed by the distributor within thirty (30) days of such removal. Additionally, any distributor of any newsrack removed and stored pursuant to this subsection may be charged a reasonable fee for such removal, restoring any part of the public right-of-way, and storage. If the distributor fails to claim the newsrack or refuses to pay storage, removal, or restoration costs, the city manager may dispose of same. Any proceeds or monies from the disposal of a newsrack shall be forwarded to the city treasurer for deposit into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2975, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 2980, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 33-130. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are severable. 
(Ord. No. 2975, 4-24-07)  
Sec. 33-131. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3073, adopted March 24, 2009, repealed § 33-131, which pertained to sunset provision and derived from Ord. No. 2975, 4-24-07.  
Chapter 34 - SWIMMING POOLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2351, adopted Oct. 17, 1995, amended and reordained Ch. 34 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to such amendment, Ch. 34 contained similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 1668, adopted Feb. 2, 1987. 
Cross reference— Building regulations, Ch. 8. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Virginia Beach Swimming Pool Ordinance." 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95)  
Sec. 34-2. - Scope. 
(a)  The Virginia Board of Health Swimming Pool Regulations and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as amended, including all future amendments thereto and editions thereof, and all model building codes and portions of other model codes or standards which are, or may hereinafter be, referenced, adopted or incorporated therein, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into this chapter of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all type 2 swimming pools as indicated and defined in section 34-3, including but not limited to commercial pools, public or private school pools, gymnasium pools and health establishment pools. Type 2 swimming pools for which building permits are issued subsequent to the effective date of this chapter shall be constructed in accordance with provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, fire prevention code, the zoning ordinance and this chapter. The administrative authority or authorized agent shall order reasonable changes in any public pool or related facility or in its operation if it finds any condition(s) that endanger the life, health or safety of the users of such type 2 swimming pools. In considering whether to order such changes, the administrative authority shall consider the magnitude of the danger, cost of the change(s) required, and the requirements imposed by this chapter upon newly constructed type 2 swimming pools. 
(c)  Type 1 swimming pools shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and the zoning ordinance. 
(d)  The provisions of the chapter shall apply to all auxiliary structures and equipment provided and maintained in connection with type 2 pools, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Locker rooms. 
(2)  Shower rooms. 
(3)  Dressing rooms. 
(4)  Disinfecting equipment. 
(5)  Safety equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-3. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the enforcement of this chapter. The word "shall" as used herein, indicates a mandatory requirement. 
Administrative authority: The director of public health or his designee. 
Hydrostatic relief valve: A valve which, when properly installed will relieve underground water pressure caused by high water table under the pool shell. 
Maximum load: The number of bathers permitted in the pool area, to be determined by dividing the total water surface area in square feet (or square meters) of the swimming, spa or wading pool water space by twenty-seven (27) feet (8.18 meters). 
Operator or manager: The person appointed or engaged to conduct the operation and management of the swimming facility. 
Operator's certificate: A certificate that proves competency in pool operation issued by a source approved by the administrative authority. 
Owner: The person in whose name the license or use permit is issued. 
Pool management company: Any person, firm corporation or association contracting to manage or operate two (2) or more type 2 swimming pools. 
Pool permit: a permit issued to the facility by the administrative authority to allow for the operation of the type 2 pool. 
Spa and hot tubs: Type 2 pools designed for recreational or quasi-therapeutic use for physiological and psychological relaxation that include but are not limited to: hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold water, mineral baths, air induction systems or any combination of these. 
Turnover rate: The time it takes (in a 24-hour period) to circulate an amount of water equivalent to the volume of a swimming pool, wading pool or spa. A swimming pool requires six (6) hours, a wading pool requires two (2) hours and a spa requires thirty (30) minutes. 
Type 1 swimming pool: Any structure that contains water over twenty-four (24) inches (610 mm) in depth and which is used, or intended to be used, for swimming or recreational bathing in connection with an occupancy in residential use group R-3 and which is available only to the family and guests of the householder. This includes residential in-ground, aboveground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. 
Type 2 swimming pool: Any pool, other than a type 1 swimming pool. 
Water slides/rides: Combination of pools and immersion troughs carrying water from pool to pool. 
Wading pool. A pool designed for wading or partial immersion of the human body which is capable of impounding water to a depth not greater than twenty-four (24) inches (0.6 meter) and which is separate from any other pool within the facility. 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 3233, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 34-4. - Plans, construction and inspection. 
(a)  A person proposing to construct, reconstruct or alter a swimming pool or auxiliary structure or equipment shall submit legible plans and specifications to the administrative authority for review and written approval prior to the issuance of any building, plumbing or electrical permit. 
(b)  The administrative authority may require the submission of such additional information as may be required to determine the compliance of plans and specifications submitted for approval. 
(c)  Within ten (10) days of the receipt of final plans and specifications, the administrative authority shall notify the person submitting the plans and specifications of their approval or disapproval. 
In addition to these regulations, all applicable ordinances, including but not limited to plumbing, building, electrical and zoning shall also apply in the construction, maintenance and operation of all type 2 swimming pools. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-5. - License required; fee. 
(a)  No person shall operate a type 2 swimming pool unless an annual permit has been secured from the administrative authority of the health department. This permit shall be issued only after approval by the administrative authority, submittal of an inspection report by a state registered electrician, certified by the department of professional and occupational regulations, on forms approved by the administrative authority, application and payment to the health department of a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The inspection report shall certify to the health department and the City of Virginia Beach that the type 2 swimming pool has been inspected by a registered electrician and there are no electrical defects that could affect the type 2 swimming pool's safe operation. The inspection report shall further certify that the type 2 swimming pool is in compliance with all applicable electrical codes. The operation and maintenance of any type 2 swimming pool in a manner not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter will be justification for cancellation of this permit. 
(b)  A type 2 swimming pool permit shall be posted in view of the public at the swimming pool involved. 
(c)  No type 2 swimming pool permit shall be transferable and any person holding such a permit shall give notice in writing, to the administrative authority within twenty-four (24) hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of his interest in or control of the pool involved. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such pool. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2625, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 3233, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 34-6. - Inspections. 
(a)  The administrative authority shall have the power to enter, at reasonable times, upon any private property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter or regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(b)  In addition to the inspections required by the department of planning, division of permits and inspections, all piping and appurtenances included in the recirculation and filter system shall be inspected prior to covering. All piping shall be tested at the time of inspection pursuant to the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95)  
Sec. 34-7. - Owner's certificate. 
(a)  To secure a pool permit, each type 2 pool shall have a person employed who holds a valid operator's certificate issued by a source approved by the administrative authority. This person is the certified pool operator for this facility. Operator's certificate shall be issued only to an individual over the age of sixteen. An applicant for an operator's certificate shall demonstrate basic knowledge of the water treatment process in type 2 swimming pools. Presentation of a certificate from a swimming pool operator's training course acceptable to the administrative authority shall constitute demonstration of such knowledge. No certified pool operator shall oversee more than one (1) swimming pool facility per certificate. All individuals holding an operator's certificate shall be recertified every five (5) years. 
(b)  Every type 2 pool shall have a certified operator on premises at all times during periods of operation, who is fully capable of and shall assume responsibility for compliance with all requirements relating to pool operation, maintenance and safety of bathers. 
(c)  Routine (e.g., daily and weekly) operating procedures shall be permanently posted in a location accessible to and frequented by the operator. 
(d)  Manufacturer's instructions for operation and maintenance of mechanical and electrical equipment shall be kept available for the operator. 
(e)  No type 2 pools shall be used or available for use until all requirements of sections 34-5 and 34-7 are complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 3233, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 34-8. - Suspension or revocation of type 2 pool permit. 
(a)  If the administrative authority finds that the health and safety of those who utilize a type 2 swimming pool is endangered, due to improper operation or continued or flagrant violation, he may order the immediate suspension or revocation of the pool's permit until such time as he finds that the danger no longer exists. No person shall operate any type 2 swimming pool when subject to an order of suspension or revocation. 
(b)  The administrative authority shall notify the owner, in writing, stating the reason(s) for the suspension or revocation. The owner shall have the right to appeal the suspension or revocation to the administrative authority. However, such appeal shall not affect the order for suspension or revocation until such time that the appeal is heard and the order changed. The owner may request a reinspection when the condition(s) causing the suspension has been corrected. Upon compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the suspension shall be removed. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the refusal to grant, or by the revocation or suspension of the permit of a swimming pool, shall have the right to appeal therefrom to the circuit court of the City of Virginia Beach after an administrative hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-9. - Violations of provisions governing prosecutions, notice, etc. 
The provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall govern the prosecution of violations relating to the design and construction of swimming pools and installation of related equipment. A violation of any other provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor: provided, however, that violations of section 34-35 shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or confinement in jail for not more than thirty (30) days, either or both, and each day's violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No 2470, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 2866, 4-5-05)  
Sec. 34-10. - Pool management companies; duties. 
All pool management companies, within ten (10) days after commencing operation of a type 2 pool, shall provide the administrative authority with the names and locations of all type 2 pools they operate in Virginia Beach and the names, telephone numbers and addresses of their operating personnel. Such companies shall be responsible for assuring compliance with sections 34-5 and 34-7 of this chapter. Pool management companies shall not act as the certified pool operator. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-11. - Applicability of chapter to existing pools. 
The structural and equipment provisions and requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any type 2 pool constructed prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 391 from which this chapter was originally derived, except as follows: 
(1)  Any alteration, placement or replacement of any equipment shall comply with such requirements. 
(2)  The provisions and requirements of this chapter with respect to operational procedures and standards, chemical feeding equipment, flow meters, pressure gauges and lifeguards shall be complied with by all type 2 swimming pools, regardless of date of construction. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 3233, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 34-12. - Modifications. 
The administrative authority may grant modifications, upon conditions and requirements established by the administrative authority, to any of the provisions of this chapter which are not under the jurisdiction of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. The administrative authority has the authority to revoke any modifications granted upon good cause, which includes but is not limited to, other violations, violations of conditions of the modification, and any health or safety concerns. 
(Ord. No.3233, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 34-13. - Severability clause. 
Should any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter in its entirety or of any part thereof other than that so declared to be invalid.  
Secs. 34-14—34-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 34-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2995, adopted July 17, 2007, repealed § 34-21, which pertained to location and derived from Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95.  
Sec. 34-22. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-23. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-24. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-25. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2995, adopted July 17, 2007, repealed § 34-26, which pertained to shape and derived from Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95.  
Sec. 34-27. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-28. - Recirculation systems. 
(a)  Filter room. Type 2 pools shall be provided with a structure or room to contain the filtration equipment, pumps and other recirculation system appurtenances, and disinfection equipment. The room shall be finished in a light color and be constructed of materials which are impervious to water and chemicals necessary for the operation of the pool. Adequate illumination of twenty (20) footcandles measured twenty-four (24) inches (61 centimeters) above floor level, shall be provided. The floor of the filter room shall be designed to provide for an adequate drainage with a minimum floor slope of 1:50 and a maximum of 1:24 to the drain and shall be kept dry, particularly in the vicinity of electrical panels. The filter room shall be adequately cross-ventilated, which may, upon the decision of the administrative authority, require mechanical ventilation and all equipment shall be installed so that it is convenient to operate and repair. Adequate headroom shall be provided above all filters. The provision of any facility for discharging filter backwashing water into the filter room floor is prohibited. The room shall be provided with a door(s) of sufficient width to permit the removal of equipment, and shall be capable of being secured against entry by unauthorized persons. The entrance to the filter room shall be adjacent to the pool area or so located that the operator can enter the room without having to exit the enclosed pool area. 
(b)  Filters. The recirculation system shall be equipped with a filtration system that will filter the entire contents of the pool at the required rate. Filtration equipment shall be operated continuously twenty-four (24) hours per day, unless a variance has been granted by the administrative authority to allow the filtration equipment to operate less frequently, as provided in section 34-28.1. Design criteria for the indicated type of filters shall be as follows: 
(1)  Rapid sand filter. A filter utilizing sand as the filter media, with filtration flow rate not exceeding three (3) gallons per minute per square foot (122 liters per minute per square meter) of filter area. The backwash rate of flow shall be three (3) times the filtration rate. 
(2)  Anthracite filter. A filter utilizing anthracite as a filter media, with filtration flow rate not exceeding three (3) gallons per minute per square foot (122 liters per minute per square meter) of filter area. The backwash rate of flow shall be three (3) times the filtration rate. 
(3)  High rate filter. A filter utilizing a media capable of filtration at a high rate of flow. The rate of flow shall be greater than five (5) gallons per minute per square foot (203.7 liters per minute per square meter) of filter area. The backwash rate of flow shall be the same as filtration rate. 
(4)  Diatomaceous earth filter. A filter utilizing diatomaceous earth as a filter media. There are two (2) types of these filters. 
a.  Pressure or vacuum-type. A diatomaceous earth filter through which the rate of flow does not exceed two (2) gallons per minute per square foot (81.5 liters per minute per square meter). 
b.  Pressure or vacuum-type with slurry feeder. A filter equipped to continuously feed a diatomaceous earth suspension and having a rate of flow not to exceed three (3) gallons per minute per square foot (122 liters per minute per square meter). 
A backwash sump pit with a stand pipe shall be installed to collect spent diatomaceous earth so that it can be collected and disposed of with solid waste. Any other method for accomplishing this may be submitted for consideration. Other filtration systems which are equal to or better than those described above may be used in a pool recirculation system with the approval of the administrative authority. 
(c)  Gauges. Gauges shall be installed as required, on all filter systems to readily indicate the operating pressures of recirculating systems. All gauges shall measure pressure directly in pounds per square inch or kilograms per square meter and shall have an indicator at least two (2) inches (5.08 centimeters) in diameter. 
(d)  Rate of flow indicators. The recirculating system shall be equipped with a rate of flow indicator, which has been approved by the administrative authority, and is located to visibly indicate the rate of flow. The indicator shall read in gallons per minute or liters per minute and shall be located to indicate the rate of flow of filtered water being returned to the pool. The indicator shall be of fixed calibration and properly sized so as to indicate the designed rate of flow at approximately midscale. 
(e)  Hair and lint strainer. At all installations where it is possible for water from the pool to pass through the filters, a strainer shall be provided on the suction side of the pump to prevent hair, lint and other matter from reaching the pump and filters. Strainers shall be corrosion-resistant with openings not over one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch in size providing a free flow area at least four (4) times the area of the pump suction line at the strainer connection and shall be accessible for frequent cleaning. 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 3233, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 34-28.1. - Variance procedure for recirculation systems. 
Variance procedure for type 2 condominium pools: Owners of type 2 condominium pools may apply for a variance to the recirculation system requirement for continual operation of the filtration system. 
(1)  Variances to the requirements of this section may be granted by the administrative authority where: 
a.  The pumps, filters, disinfectant and chemical feeders, flow indicators, gauges and all related parts of the swimming pool purification systems shall be kept in operation whenever the pool is available for use; 
b.  The pumps, filters, disinfectant and chemical feeders, flow indicators, gauges and all related parts of the swimming pool purification systems shall be kept in operation at all additional times and periods as may be necessary to maintain the water in the swimming pool in a clear and disinfected condition; and 
c.  The variation in flow during the filtration cycle shall not reduce the flow below sixty-five (65) percent of the required turnover rate; and 
d.  There is no degradation of public health or safety. 
(2)  The application for a variance to the administrative authority shall be on forms provided by the administrative authority and must include: 
a.  A statement indicating that the pool operator understands and agrees to comply with all of the requirements above; and 
b.  The reasons why the public health and safety will not be jeopardized if the variance is granted. 
(3)  Within a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days from the receipt of a complete written application the administrative authority shall grant, deny or grant with conditions such variance. The administrative authority shall consider, in addition to the requirements of subdivision (1), the following factors: 
a.  Any circumstances unique to the applicant's facility; 
b.  The effects that the variance would have on the health and safety of the public; and 
c.  Any other health and safety factors, as determined by the administrative authority. 
(4)  The administrative authority shall notify the applicant in writing of the approval of the variance, the effective date of the variance and the conditions attached to the approval of the variance. Failure to comply with the conditions or the degradation of disinfection or clarity shall result in the immediate revocation of the variance. A denial of the variance shall also be in writing giving the reasons for the denial. 
(5)  Each variance approved shall be conspicuously posted in public view in the pool area. 
(6)  Variances expire on October 1 and must be applied for on a yearly basis. 
(Ord. No. 3233, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 34-29. - Piping systems. 
(a)  The piping system for type 2 pools shall be composed of N.S.F.(National Sanitation Foundation) approved materials or equal, designed for the following operations: 
(1)  Filling the pool; 
(2)  Washing each filter to waste; 
(3)  Recirculating the pool water through the treatment equipment; 
(4)  Backwashing to waste; 
(5)  Operating suction cleaner; 
(6)  Emptying the pool; and 
(7)  Draining the system. 
(b)  There shall be no direct connections between the pool recirculating system and the sewer or the potable water supply. Fill spouts may be located under diving boards, under guard chairs or adjacent to pool ladder handrails. Fill spouts shall be installed a minimum of two (2) inches (5.08 centimeters) above the coping, or submersed fill spouts shall be equipped with a backflow preventer. 
(c)  Waste from backwashing shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer or in a manner approved by the administrative authority. 
(d)  The piping system within the filter room shall be securely anchored and shall be color coded as follows: 
Freshwater—Blue (to check valve). 
Backwash—Black. 
Influent—Yellow. 
Effluent—White. 
Vacuum—Orange. 
(e)  All piping shall be designed to reduce friction losses to a minimum and to carry the required quantity of water at a maximum velocity not to exceed ten (10) feet per second (3.05 meters per second) for discharge piping, except for copper wire where the velocity for piping should not exceed eight (8) feet per second (2.44 meters per second). Suction velocity for all piping should not exceed six (6) feet per second (1.83 meters per second). Design system head calculations shall be required to confirm the adequacy of proposed pipe sizing and pump selection. 
(f)  A permanent specification placard shall be conspicuously displayed on or adjacent to the filter and shall be properly lighted. Specifications, shall be printed or typed and readily legible. The following information shall be included on the placard: 
(1)  Name and location of facility; 
(2)  Date of construction; 
(3)  Capacity in gallons (liters); 
(4)  Water surface area in square feet (square meters); 
(5)  Turnover rate in hours; and 
(6)  Rate of flow in gallons per minute (liters per minute). 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-30. - Pool outlets. 
(a)  All pools shall have one (1) or more main outlets in their deepest part for continuous removal of water for treatment and reuse or for emptying the pool. A main outlet shall be no less than three and three-tenths (3.3) feet (1.14 meters) nor more than nineteen and seven-tenths (19.7) feet (6 meters) from another main outlet nor more than sixteen and four-tenths (16.4) feet (5.98) meters from a pool wall. 
(b)  A main outlet opening shall be covered with a grating which is not hazardous to bathers, is secured in place, and is removable with tools. The grate opening area shall be large enough to have water entrance velocities not exceeding two (2) feet per second (0.6 meter per second). 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95)  
Sec. 34-31. - Operational safety. 
(a)  Pumps, filters and other mechanical and electrical equipment for type 2 pools shall be enclosed in such a manner accessible only to authorized persons. Construction and drainage shall be such as to avoid the entrance and accumulation of water in the vicinity of the electrical equipment. 
(b)  The crossing of outdoor type 2 swimming pools by overhead electrical conductors is prohibited. 
(c)  All metal barriers or railings on which a broken electrical conductor might fall shall be effectively grounded. 
(d)  All lighting fixtures shall be prohibited directly above the water surface except as permitted by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, and shall be protected in a manner which will prevent broken glass from falling on any surface within the pool area. All electrical switches and receptacles shall be of weatherproof construction and resistant to corrosion. 
(e)  Lights shall be prohibited directly above or within one (1) meter horizontally of the pool rim in any indoor or covered swimming pool except as permitted in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-32. - Hydrostatic relief valve requirement. 
In all in-ground pools, one (1) or more hydrostatic relief valves shall be installed for the purpose of relieving the water pressure on the pool shell. 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95)  
Sec. 34-33. - Pool lighting. 
(a)  Where type 2 swimming pools are to be used after dark, the swimming pool area shall be equipped with lighting fixtures of such number and design as to light all parts of the pool, the water therein, and the entire area. Fixtures should be installed in such a manner as to create no hazard to the bathers. The design and installation of the fixtures should be such that lifeguards can clearly see every part of the swimming pool, including decks, spring board and other appurtenances without being blinded by glare. 
(b)  Underwater lighting for such pools shall provide nine (9) watts per square yard (8.2 watts per square meter) of water surfaces and shall require ground fault circuit interrupters (GFCI), such that all areas of the pool surface are clearly visible. (See Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code.) 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 3233, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 34-34. - Decks. 
All fill under decks shall be properly tamped and proper supports shall be provided to prevent decks from settling. Roof runoff or other drainage shall not be allowed to drain onto the deck. All areas surrounding the deck shall have surface drainage directed away from the deck area. Decks shall be free of cracks, pooling or standing water and made of non-skid materials. Pool decks shall not create a nuisance or health hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 3233, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 34-35. - Closure of swimming pool gates. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any gate in a fence surrounding an outdoor swimming pool to remain unfastened while the pool is not in use. 
(Ord. No. 2866, 4-5-05)  
Sec. 34-36. - Swimming pool fences. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own or control any outdoor swimming pool without having a fence surrounding such swimming pool, irrespective of the date on which such swimming pool was constructed. Such fence shall be in compliance with the International Residential Code or any successor provision. 
(b)  Violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) Each day's violation shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to such penalty, and not in lieu thereof, the city may seek to enjoin a continuing violation of this section by civil action filed in the circuit court. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any swimming pool operated by or in conjunction with any hotel located on a governmental reservation. 
(Ord. No. 3008, 4-22-08; Ord. No. 3233, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 34-37. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-38. - Pool inlets. 
Where inlets are in pool walls, such inlets shall be spaced not more than nineteen and seven-tenths (19.7) feet (6 meters) on center around the pool perimeter. Where inlets are in the pool bottom, the number of such inlets and location shall be so designed as to ensure the proper distribution of filtered water. All inlets, except freshwater inlets and wading pool inlets, shall be at least fifteen (15) inches (38.1 centimeters) below the overflow level of the pool except for prefabricated gutters with forty-five (45) degree angle inlets in the bottom. Each inlet shall be provided with a means of adjusting flow through a range of at least fifty (50) percent of its design capacity. The control shall be readily accessible. 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95)  
Sec. 34-39. - Suction cleaner. 
A suction cleaner shall be provided. Where a suction cleaner is operated by the recirculating pump, a device shall be provided for throttling the flow(s) from the various pool outlet(s) (main drain, skimmer, surge tank, etc.). The suction cleaner line shall be connected through a hair catcher. Portable vacuum cleaner units shall be provided with outlets near the pool for the discharge of effluent. Hydraulic jet type suction cleaners shall be permitted in lieu of the above where freshwater pressure is thirty (30) psi (2.1 kilograms per centimeter 2 ) or greater and is provided with an approved backflow prevention or antisiphon device if connected to the public or private potable water supply. 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95)  
Sec. 34-40. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-41. - Safety and rescue equipment; other safety features. 
Every type 2 swimming pool shall be equipped with the following aids to safety and rescue which shall be readily accessible at all times: 
(1)  One (1) or more safety tubes recommended by the American Red Cross, YMCA or other accredited agency for lifesaving personnel, to be used by a certified lifesaver. There shall also be available lightweight but strong poles with blunted ends or shepherd's hooks, not less than twelve (12) feet (4 meters) in length. 
(2)  One (1) or more throwing ring buoys of less than fifteen (15) inches (38 centimeters) in diameter having a one hundred and fifty (150) pound (68.4 kilogram) test line attached of sufficient length to reach twice the width the pool, placed on racks at strategic points adjacent to the pool. 
(3)  A lifeline shall be provided at the break in grade between the shallow and deep portions of the swimming pool, or six (6) inches (15.2 centimeters) of either shallow side of the break with its position marked with visible floats at not greater than seven-foot (2.10-meter) intervals. The lifeline shall be securely fastened to wall anchors or corrosion-resistant materials and of a type which shall be recessed or have no projection which shall constitute a hazard when the line is removed. The line shall be of sufficient size and strength to offer a good handhold and support loads normally imposed by bathers. 
(4)  A readily-accessible room or area designated and equipped for emergency care of casualties. Minimum equipment shall be an approved first aid kit meeting Red Cross standards. 
(5)  A direct-dial telephone with numbers for police, fire and rescue shall be readily accessible at all times. 
(6)  Approved signs shall be maintained in a legible manner as follows: 
a.  Occupant load signs. A sign with clearly legible letters, not less than four (4) inches (10.2 centimeters) high shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the main entrance to a pool which shall indicate the number of occupants permitted for each pool. 
b.  Spa/hot tub pool. The occupant capacity of a spa/hot tub pool shall be based on one (1) bather for every ten (10) square feet (1.9 meters 2 ) of pool water surface area. 
c.  The occupant capacity of all other pools shall be based on one (1) bather for every twenty-seven (27) square feet (2.50 meters 2 ) of pool water surface area. Exception: Occupant capacity requirements do not apply to wading pools. 
d.  Permanent and conspicuous signs shall be posted indicating the most direct route to the pool for emergency, fire and rescue personnel and vehicles. 
(7)  In areas so indicated, signs with clearly legible letters not less than four (4) inches (10.2 centimeters) high shall be posted in a conspicuous place and shall state "NO DIVING ALLOWED." 
(8)  Warning signs for pools using gas chlorine. Pools at which gas chlorine is used for disinfection shall have a conspicuously posted sign on the exterior side of the entry door to the chlorine room, or on the adjacent wall area. In addition to displaying the appropriate hazard identification symbol for gas chlorine, the sign shall state with clearly legible letters not less than four (4) inches (10.16 centimeters) high, "DANGER: GASEOUS OXIDIZER-CHLORINE." 
(9)  Spa/hot tub warning signs. A precautionary sign with clearly legible letters shall be posted in a prominent place near the entrance to a spa pool which shall contain the following language: 
"CAUTION 
"a.  Elderly persons, pregnant women, infants and those with health conditions requiring medical care should consult a physician before entering the spa. 
"b.  Unsupervised use by children under the age of fourteen (14) is prohibited. 
"c.  Hot water immersion while under the influence of alcohol, narcotics, drugs or medicines may lead to serious consequences and is not recommended. 
"d.  Do not use alone. 
"e.  Long exposure may result in nausea, dizziness or fainting." 
(10)  The depth of water in pools shall be marked at one-foot increments (30.48 centimeters) and at least every twenty (20) feet (6.1 meters) on both the horizontal deck surface and vertical surfaces of the pool wall. Numerals and letters shall be at least four (4) inches (10.16 centimeters) in height and have a good contrast with the pool walls and deck. 
(11)  Fixed and floating platforms in type 2 swimming pools shall be constructed with an air space of at least one (1) foot (0.3 meters) between the water surface and the underside of the platform. 
(12)  There shall be one (1) elevated lifeguard chair provided for every public pool with a depth of over five (5) feet (1.52 meters) and two thousand (2,000) square feet (202.99 meters 2 ) of water surface. An additional chair will be required for each additional one thousand (1,000) square feet (92.8 meters 2 ) of water surface. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 3233, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 34-42. - Disinfection equipment. 
(a)  Chemical feeding equipment. Means shall be provided for regulating the feeding of chemicals to the water in the recirculation system. The installation and use of mechanical, automatically operated, positive displacement chemical feeders or dye type chemical feeders is required. 
(b)  Chlorinating equipment. All type 2 pools shall be provided with approved chlorinating equipment which shall be capable of applying a dose of not less than ten (10) ppm of chlorine within the turnover time. 
(c)  The use of chlorine gas as a disinfectant shall require the approval of the administrative authority. Such approval will be granted only after it has been demonstrated that the gas chlorinator room or area will be located in a manner which will not adversely affect the safety and health of patrons, pool personnel or the public. Chlorine gas feeding equipment and chlorine gas cylinders and other hazardous chemicals shall be installed in an enclosed space or room, separate from the filter room and electrical panels and shall be equipped with a door capable of being locked. The operating gas cylinder shall be placed on an accurate scale and fastened in place during storage and use. Gas chlorinator rooms shall be equipped with a forced draft fan exhausting to the outside room from the floor level. The exhaust fan shall be capable of providing sixty (60) air changes per hour against the resistance offered by duct work or any other local factors. A fresh air inlet shall be provided near the ceiling. The gas chlorinator shall be protected from direct sunlight. 
(d)  An approved, self-contained gas mask for chlorine or a gas mask with a supply of oxygen under positive pressure or compressed air, either of which have been approved by the Bureau of Mines, in addition to local approval by the fire department, shall be provided where chlorine gas is being utilized. The mask shall be located accessible to, but outside of, the gas chlorinator room. 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-43. - Water heating. 
Indoor type 2 pools shall be provided with water heating equipment thermostatically controlled and capable of maintaining the entire pool contents between seventy (70) and eighty-five (85) degrees Fahrenheit (twenty-one (21) degrees Centigrade and twenty-nine and forty-eight one hundredths (29.48) degrees Centigrade). All heated pools, spas and hot tubs shall maintain a minimum halogen residual of two (2.0) ppm or mg/l at all times. Spas and hot tubs shall have, on display, a clock and thermometer visible to occupants. Spas and pool water temperature shall not exceed one hundred and four (104) degrees Fahrenheit at any time that is occupied. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-44. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-45. - Showers, water closets, lavatories, etc. 
(a)  Showers, water closets and lavatories shall be provided for each sex, in accordance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. The part of the structure containing the showers, water closets, urinals and lavatories shall be designed so that these facilities shall be in the line of travel used by the patrons prior to entering the pool area and shall be provided with an entrance and a separate exit opening directly to the pool deck; however, such exit shall not be near the deep portion of the pool. 
(b)  Floor for all dressing rooms, showers, toilets and lavatories shall be smooth but must have nonslip finish and the room shall be ventilated so that the floors do not remain damp or wet. Walls and floors for all dressing rooms, toilet rooms and lavatories shall be of waterproof, easily cleanable materials. 
(1)  Dressing rooms. Separate dressing rooms may be provided for both sexes. When provided, metal lockers, wire baskets, hooks or other sanitary means of storage of clothing and personal accessories shall be provided. All storage containers for clothing shall be kept clean and sanitary. 
(2)  Showers. Showers shall be provided in the proportion of one (1) for each forty (40) persons at the time of maximum load. Each shower shall supply an adequate quantity of tempered water. Water from each shower shall be provided with suitable facilities for making soap available. 
(3)  Toilets. Toilet facilities shall be provided as set forth in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(4)  Lavatories. Lavatories shall be provided as set forth in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(5)  [Application of items (1) through (4) to certain bathers.] Items (1) through (4) shall not apply when bathers have access to these facilities either in living quarters located not more than five hundred (500) feet (152.4 meters) in travel distance from the pool or in an adjacent building such as a recreational facility, clubhouse or cabana. 
(6)  Mirrors. Mirrors, if provided, shall be constructed in accordance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(7)  Baby changing tables. A baby changing table shall be located in each lavatory. 
(8)  Stocked. All lavatories shall be stocked at all times with hand soap, toilet tissue, and disposable towels or hand dryers. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 3233, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 34-46. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-47. - Spectators/spectator areas. 
Spectator areas shall be so separated from the pool area that spectators do not have access to the pool area. Spectator balconies shall not overhang any portion of the pool surface. 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95)  
Sec. 34-48. - Wading pools. 
(a)  The slope of the bottom of any wading pool shall be no greater than 1:15 nor less than 1:40. 
(b)  Wading pools shall be so designed that no obstructions are within an area bounded by a line five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside of the pool perimeter. 
(c)  Wading pools shall be separated from the main pool by a suitable barrier with a self-closing and self-latching device. 
(d)  Wading pools shall be provided with their own water return line to provide an adequate flow of chlorinated water, or shall have a filter system completely separate from the main pool with a turnover of two (2) hours or less. 
(e)  Wading pools shall be required to have a vacuum line. 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95)  
Secs. 34-49—34-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION 
 
Sec. 34-60. - Conditions and equipment. 
All equipment shall be maintained in satisfactory operating condition during operation of a type 2 pool. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-61. - Water supply. 
All type 2 pools using well water shall have a satisfactory bacteriological sample taken prior to opening each year. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-62. - Clarity of water. 
When a type 2 pool is open and in use, the water shall be sufficiently clear to permit the main drain to be clearly visible from the pool deck at all distances up to ten (10) yards. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-63. - Water treatment. 
(a)  Chemicals other than chlorine, bromine, hypobromous acid, sodium hypochlorite, calcium hypochlorite, muriatic acid, lime soda ash, sodium bicarbonate, aluminum sulfate (alum), cyanuric acid and sodium bisulfate shall not be used to treat swimming pool water without written permission from the administrative authority. 
(b)  The impounded water shall at all times be treated in a manner which will prevent the growth of algae and the breeding of mosquitoes or other vermin. 
(c)  When the unheated swimming pool is open for use, a minimum of one (1.0) ppm (parts per million) free chlorine residual shall be maintained in all parts of the pool. 
(d)  When the swimming pool is open for use, the pH of the pool water shall be kept between 7.2 and 7.8 with a minimum total alkalinity of eighty (80) ppm, calcium hardness of one hundred fifty (150) ppm. 
(e)  Approved test kits for all tests required in this article shall be available and in good working condition at all times. 
(f)  The operator or manager of each type 2 swimming pool shall maintain and operate all mechanical equipment in a safe and proper manner. 
(g)  Where cyanuric acid is used as a stabilizing agent for residual chlorine, or if the source of residual chlorine is from a chlorinated cyanurate, a chlorine residual of at least one and five-tenths (1.5) ppm shall be maintained with cyanuric acid residuals of at least forty (40) ppm. 
(h)  The operator or manager of each swimming pool shall cause an adequate supply of chemicals for the proper treatment of pool water to be on hand and available for use at all times. 
(i)  Protective clothing, i.e., respirators, goggles, eye protection, face masks, rubber gloves and aprons or coveralls, shall be provided for personnel handling chlorine chemical compounds and other caustic chemicals. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-64. - Records. 
(a)  Record forms supplied by the administrative authority shall be maintained up-to-date and shall be available for inspection while the pool is in use and shall be retained for a period of three (3) months. 
(b)  Unless otherwise modified by the administrative authority, disinfection tests, i.e., free chlorine residual and pH tests, shall be made and recorded at least once every two (2) hours while the pool is in operation. Alkalinity and calcium hardness tests shall be made and recorded at least weekly. 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95)  
Sec. 34-65. - Placards. 
Placards approved by the administrative authority and covering personal health and safety regulations shall be posted within the swimming facility. Areas restricted to operating personnel shall be prominently identified. Signs warning employees of emergency procedures to be followed in case of exposure or contact with hazardous materials shall be posted in the room or area where such hazardous materials are stored and/or used. 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95)  
Sec. 34-66. - Food and drink area. 
Any person in the process of eating or drinking shall be restricted to the area designated for the preparation and serving of food and drink. This area shall be at least ten (10) feet (3.05 meters) from the pool edge. 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95)  
Sec. 34-67. - Cleaning and maintenance. 
(a)  All parts of the pool and related pool facilities and equipment shall be kept clean and maintained in good repair. Floors shall be kept free from cracks and other defects. Walls, ceilings, partitions, doors, lockers and similar surfaces and equipment shall be refinished in a manner acceptable to the administrative authority as often as necessary to be kept in good repair. 
(b)  Hoses shall be provided for regular flushing and cleaning. The whole pool area shall be kept clean, sanitary, and free of litter and vermin. 
(c)  Toilets, urinals, showers, wash basins and other plumbing fixture shall be maintained in a clean condition and in good repair. 
(d)  General housekeeping and health spa facilities. All floors, walls, ceilings, showers, bathtubs, saunas, steam and vapor rooms, cabinets, toilets, stalls and other physical facilities of the health spa must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. All equipment and fixtures shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively disinfected as often as needed to prevent the development of algae, fungi, mildew, mold or bacteria which may endanger the public safety or health. 
(Ord. No 2351, 10-17-95)  
Sec. 34-68. - Precautions relative to communicable diseases. 
Any person having an obvious skin disease, nasal or ear discharge, inflamed eyes, or any communicable disease shall be excluded from the type 2 swimming facility pool. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-69. - Security. 
Type 2 swimming pools shall be maintained in a manner which will not create a nuisance or hazard to the public safety and well-being when not in use, and the pool shall be adequately secured against entry by the public in general. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-70. - Lifeguards. 
(a)  There shall be at least one (1) lifeguard on duty at all times when the type 2 pool is of two thousand (2,000) square feet (185.79 square meters) of water surface or more and when open for use. 
(b)  Type 2 pools which are less than two thousand (2,000) square feet (185.79 square meters) may be used by adults, or children supervised by adults, without a designated lifeguard, provided it is posted as follows: "WARNING: No lifeguard on duty. Children under the age of fourteen (14) should not be allowed to use a pool without an adult in attendance." 
(c)  Any individual retained as a lifeguard for type 2 pools of two thousand (2,000) square feet (185.79 square meters) or more shall possess a current certification for meeting the standard of a lifesaver as recommended by the American Red Cross, YMCA or other accredited agency for lifesaving personnel. 
(d)  The ratio of lifeguards to bathers shall be one (1) lifeguard on duty for the first seventy-five (75) bathers and an additional lifeguard for every additional fifty (50) bathers, or fraction thereof. Lifeguards shall wear distinguishing emblems or clothing while on duty. 
(e)  Variance procedure for type 2 condominium pools: Owners of type 2 condominium pools greater than two thousand (2,000) square feet and less than three thousand (3,000) square feet may apply for a variance to the lifeguard requirements of this section. 
(1)  Variances to the requirements of this section may be granted by the administrative authority where: 
a.  The pool area is access controlled; 
b.  The entrance to and the pool area are under surveillance at all times when the pool is open without a lifeguard; 
c.  Pool rules, which are distributed to all members of the condominium, state that no minors under the age of 16 shall be in the pool area unless accompanied by an adult when no lifeguard is provided; and 
d.  There are conspicuously posted legible signs that contain the following language: 
WARNING: NO LIFEGUARD ON DUTY. 
MINORS UNDER THE AGE OF 16 ARE NOT ALLOWED TO USE THE POOL UNLESS ACCOMPANIED BY A RESPONSIBLE ADULT. 
(2)  The application for a variance to the administrative authority shall be on forms provided by the administrative authority and must include: 
a.  A statement requesting specific times for the variance to apply and the reasons for those times; and 
b.  The reasons why the public health and safety will not be jeopardized if the variance is granted. 
(3)  Within a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days from the receipt of a complete written application the administrative authority shall grant, deny or grant with conditions such variance. The administrative authority shall consider, in addition to the requirements of subdivision (e)(1), the following factors: 
a.  Any circumstances unique to the applicant's facility; 
b.  The effects that the variance would have on the health and safety of the public; and 
c.  Any other health and safety factors, as determined by the administrative authority. 
(4)  The administrative authority shall notify the applicant in writing of the approval of the variance, the effective date of the variance and the conditions attached to the approval of the variance. Failure to comply with the conditions shall result in the immediate revocation of the variance. 
A denial of the variance shall also be in writing giving the reasons for the denial. 
(5)  Each variance approved shall be conspicuously posted in public view in the pool area. 
(6)  Variances expire on October 1 and must be applied for on a yearly basis. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-71. - Laundering. 
Bathing suits, towels and other reusable cloth materials furnished by a type 2 pool shall be properly laundered so as to be sanitary before being issued to bathers. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 34-72. - Animals. 
Animals, fowl and/or pets shall not be permitted within the type 2 swimming pool. This section shall not apply to working dogs, such as seeing-eye dogs. 
(Ord. No. 2351, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 2995, 7-17-07)  
Chapter 35 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Deduction of taxes due city when paying warrant, § 2-190; dog license tax, § 5-48; license code, Ch. 18; payment of personal property taxes prerequisite to licensing of vehicles, § 21-77; gross receipts tax on bus operators, § 36-19. 
State Law reference— Taxation, Code of Virginia, title 58.1; city tax levies, § 58.1-3005 et seq.; general authority of city relative to taxes and assessments, § 15.1-841. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 35-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2441, adopted March 25, 1997, deleted § 35-1, which pertained to the police powers of special tax auditor, and which derived from Code 1965, §§ 33-57, 33-73, and 33-88.  
Sec. 35-2. - Payment of taxes by use of credit card. 
Any local levies authorized and imposed by this chapter may be paid by use of a credit card approved by the city treasurer. In addition to any penalties and interests arising pursuant to law, there shall be added to such payment a sum not to exceed four (4) percent of the amount of the tax, penalty and interest paid, as a service charge for acceptance of such card. Such service charge shall not exceed the percentage charged to the city by the credit card company. 
(Ord. No. 980, 8-20-79) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3013.  
Sec. 35-3. - Exoneration from payment or refund in cases of erroneous assessment. 
(a)  If the commissioner of revenue, or the real estate assessor for real property taxes, is satisfied that an applicant has been erroneously assessed with any local levies, as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3980 and 58.1-3981, he shall certify to the city treasurer the amount erroneously assessed. When the commissioner of revenue or the real estate assessor who made the erroneous assessment has been succeeded by another person, such person shall have the same authority as the commissioner or the real estate assessor making the original erroneous assessment; provided he makes diligent investigation to determine that the original assessment was erroneously made and certifies thereto to the city treasurer and to the city council. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the certification provided for in subsection (a), above; the city treasurer shall, if the levies have not been paid, exonerate from payment so much thereof as is erroneous, and if such levies have been paid, the city treasurer shall refund to the applicant the amount erroneously paid, together with any penalties and interest paid thereon. 
(c)  No refund shall be made under this section in any case when application therefor is made more than three (3) years after the last day of the tax year for which such taxes were assessed; provided that, if any tax is declared to be unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the city council may grant a refund of such tax hereunder to all taxpayers for those years to which the court proceeding was applicable. 
(Code 1965, § 33-1; Ord. No. 3254, § 2, 8-14-12) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3990.  
Sec. 35-3.1. - Waiver of penalty and interest. 
The commissioner of revenue, or the real estate assessor for real property taxes, is hereby authorized to waive any penalty and interest imposed by law for failure to file a return or to pay a tax provided that he first makes a determination that the failure to file the return or to pay the tax was not in any way the fault of the taxpayer. 
Upon making such a determination, the commissioner of revenue or the real estate assessor shall notify the city treasurer in writing of the waiver of penalty and interest. Upon receipt of such letter, the city treasurer shall no longer be responsible for collecting such penalty and interest and shall mark his records accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 1473, 7-9-84; Ord. No. 3254, § 2, 8-14-12)  
Sec. 35-3.2. - Payment of interest on refunds of erroneously assessed local taxes. 
In the event that a taxpayer is owed a refund because of an erroneous assessment of local taxes, interest shall be paid on the refund at the same rate as charged on delinquent payments of such taxes, unless (i) the amount of the refund is ten dollars ($10.00) or less or (ii) the refund is the result of a proration of personal property taxes made pursuant to section 35-6.1 of this article. Unless specifically provided for otherwise, interest on any such refund shall be paid from the date the tax was paid. Any person owed interest pursuant to this section may be required, as a prerequisite to receiving the interest, to provide his or her social security account number or federal tax identification number, along with appropriate documentation to verify such number. 
(Ord. No. 2547, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2592, 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 35-4. - Tax, valuation, etc., date for tangible personal property, machinery and tools; date for filing returns; penalties. 
(a)  Tangible personal property and machinery and tools, except as provided under section 35-6.1, shall be taxed as of January first of each year. The status of all persons, firms, corporations and other taxpayers liable to taxation on any such property shall be fixed as of such date in each year and the value of such property shall be taken as of such date. 
(b)  (1)  Every person owning any tangible personal property or machinery and tools on January first of any year shall file a return thereof with the commissioner of the revenue. 
(2)  With the exception of any person leasing a motor vehicle that is subject to the tax imposed under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2402, every person leasing any tangible personal property or machinery and tools from the owner thereof on January first of any year shall file a return with the commissioner of the revenue when such property is located within the city, giving the name and address of the owner. 
(3)  The returns required by subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) shall be filed on or before March first of each year. The commissioner of the revenue may grant a reasonable extension of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, for the filing of a return provided good cause exists. A record shall be kept by the commissioner of every such extension. If any taxpayer who has been granted an extension of time for filing a return fails to file such return within the extended time, such taxpayer shall be treated as if no extension was granted. 
(c)  (1)  If a return for tangible personal property, including machinery and tools, is not filed on or before the due date set forth in subsection (b)(3) above, there shall be added a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the tax assessable on such return or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax assessable. Such penalty shall not be assessed until the day after the return is due. Any such penalty, when assessed, shall become part of the tax. 
(2)  No penalty for failing to file a return shall be assessed if such failure was not the fault of the taxpayer or was the fault of the commissioner of the revenue. The commissioner of the revenue shall make determinations of fault relating to failure to file a return. The failure to file a return due to the death of the taxpayer or a medically determinable physical or mental impairment suffered by the taxpayer on the date the return is due, shall be presumptive proof of lack of fault on the taxpayer's part, provided the return is filed within thirty (30) days of the due date; however, if there is a committee, legal guardian, conservator or other fiduciary handling the taxpayer's affairs, such return shall be filed within one hundred twenty (120) days after the fiduciary qualifies or begins to act on behalf of the taxpayer. Any such fiduciary shall, on behalf of the taxpayer, by the due date, file any required returns which come due after the 120-day period. 
(d)  A willful failure or refusal to file any return required by this section, as well as the act of making false statements with intent to defraud in any such return, shall be unlawful. Such an offense shall be punished as a Class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of the tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, and as a Class 1 misdemeanor if the amount of the tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 981, 8-20-79; Ord. No. 1347, 12-6-82; Ord. No. 2586, 6-13-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3515.  
Sec. 35-5. - When personal property taxes due and payable. 
City taxes on personal property, except as provided under section 35-6.1, for each year shall be due and payable on or before June fifth of the year in which the same are assessed, except that, when assessment is made after June fifth, such taxes shall be due and payable on or before December fifth of the year in which the same are assessed. 
(Code 1965, § 33-8; Ord. No. 981, 8-20-79; Ord. No. 1347, 12-6-82) 
State Law reference— Authority to fix time for payment of taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-39.6.  
Sec. 35-6. - Penalty and interest when personal property taxes not paid on time. 
(a)  In the event any taxes on personal property are not paid on or before the time the same are due and payable as set forth in section 35-5, there shall be added thereto a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of such unpaid taxes or the sum of ten dollars ($10.00), whichever shall be greater, and such taxes and penalty shall bear interest commencing on the first day following the day such taxes were due, at the rate of nine and six-tenths (9.6) percent per annum during the first year such taxes are delinquent, and thereafter at the rate of eight and four-tenths (8.4) percent per annum. Provided however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax due. 
(b)  The assessment of a penalty under this section shall not be deemed a defense to a criminal prosecution for failing to make such return of taxable property as may be required by law. 
(c)  No amendment to this section shall reduce the amount of penalty and interest which has been assessed or was assessable on delinquent taxes prior to the date of such amendment. 
(d)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916, as amended, the city treasurer is hereby authorized, for good cause shown which shall be reflected in a written record, to waive the penalty and interest imposed by this section. 
(Code 1965, § 33-9; Ord. No. 1096, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 1338, 11-1-82; Ord. No. 1364, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 1449, 5-7-84; Ord. No. 1610, 6-23-86; Ord. No. 2344, 7-11-95) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.  
Sec. 35-6.1. - Personal property tax on motor vehicles and trailers; proration thereof. 
(a)  There shall be a personal property tax at a rate established each year by the city council on motor vehicles and trailers (hereafter referred to in this section as "taxable property") which have a situs within the city on January first of each year and which acquire a situs within the city on or after January the second of each year. When taxable property acquires a situs within the city on or after January second, the personal property tax for that year shall be assessed to the owner prorated on a monthly basis for the portion of the tax year during which the taxable property has situs within the city. When taxable property with a situs in the city is transferred to a new owner within the city, the personal property tax shall be assessed to the new owner prorated on a monthly basis for the portion of the tax year during which the new owner owns the taxable property. For purposes of proration, a period of more than one-half of a month shall be counted as a full month and a period of less than one-half of a month shall not be counted. All taxable property shall be assessed as of January first of each year or, if it acquires situs or has its title transferred after January first, as of the first day of the month in which the taxable property acquires situs within the city or has its title transferred. The owner of taxable property acquiring situs within the city or to whom taxable property is transferred shall file a declaration of property ownership to the commissioner of revenue within thirty (30) days of the date on which such property acquires a situs within the city or has its title transferred to such owner. 
(b)  When any taxable property loses its situs within the city or its title is transferred to a new owner, the taxpayer shall from that time be relieved from personal property tax on such taxable property and receive a refund of personal property tax already paid, or a credit toward taxable property newly transferred to the taxpayer, or a credit against personal property taxes outstanding against the taxpayer, at the option of the commissioner of revenue, on a monthly prorated basis, upon application to the commissioner of the revenue, provided that application is made within three (3) years from the last day of the tax year during which the taxable property lost situs or had its title transferred. The commissioner of revenue shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain and notify any taxpayer entitled to a prorated refund of personal property taxes pursuant to this subsection. The city treasurer shall stamp or have printed, on the application for a duplicate city decal for new or substitute vehicles as required by section 21-84 of this Code, notification to the applicant that he may be entitled to a prorated refund of personal property taxes assessed against any vehicle which he sold or transferred to a new owner. 
(c)  Taxes on all taxable property with a situs within the city on January first of each year, shall be paid on or before June fifth of each year. Taxes on all taxable property which acquires situs within the city or has its title transferred after January first and on or before April first of each year shall be paid on or before June fifth of each year. Taxes on all taxable property which acquires a situs within the city or has its title transferred after April first but on or before October first of each year shall be paid on or before December fifth, of the same year. Taxes on all taxable property which acquires situs within the city or has its title transferred after October first but on or before December fifteenth of each year shall be paid on or before March fifteenth of the following year. 
(d)  Any person who fails to pay personal property taxes on or before the date due as provided above shall incur a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax due, or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater, which shall become part of the taxes due. Interest at the rate of nine and six-tenths (9.6) percent per annum from the first day following the day such taxes are due, shall be paid upon the principal and penalties of such taxes remaining unpaid. 
(e)  An exemption from this tax and any penalties arising therefrom shall be granted for any tax share or portion thereof during which the property was legally assessed by another jurisdiction and proof is presented to the commissioner of revenue indicating that such tax on the assessed property was paid. 
(Ord. No. 1347, 12-6-82; Ord. No. 1509, 1-7-85)  
Sec. 35-7. - Exemption of certain household goods and personal effects. 
The following household goods and personal effects are exempt from taxation and shall not be assessed for that purpose: 
(1)  Bicycles. 
(2)  Household and kitchen furniture, including gold and silver plates, plated ware, watches and clocks, sewing machines, refrigerators, automatic refrigerator machinery of any type, vacuum cleaners and all other household machinery, books, firearms and weapons of all kinds. 
(3)  Pianos, organs, phonographs and record players and records to be used therewith, and all other musical instruments of whatever kind, radio and television instruments and equipment. 
(4)  Oil paintings, pictures, statuary, curios, articles of virtu and works of art. 
(5)  Diamonds, cameos and other precious stones and all precious metals used as ornaments or jewelry. 
(6)  Sporting and photographic equipment. 
(7)  Clothing and objects of apparel. 
(8)  All other tangible personal property used by an individual or a family or household incident to maintaining an abode. The classification above set forth shall apply only to such property owned and used by an individual or by a family or household incident to maintaining an abode. 
(Code. 1965, § 33-10) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3504.  
Sec. 35-7.1. - Exemption of farm animals, grains, farm machinery and implements, and agricultural products. 
Farm animals, grains, farm machinery and implements, and agricultural products, as described in 58.1-3505(A) and (C) of the Code of Virginia, are hereby exempt from personal property taxation and shall not be assessed for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2676, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 35-8. - Service charge on certain real property exempt from taxation—Generally. 
(a)  A service charge shall be imposed upon and collected from the owners of all real estate within the city which is exempted from taxation under subsection (1) of section 58-12 [58.1-3606] of the Code of Virginia, which is property owned directly or indirectly by the commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof. 
(b)  The service charge imposed under this section shall be based on the assessed value of the real estate and the amount which the city shall have expended, in the year preceding the year such charge is assessed, for the purpose of furnishing police and fire protection, for the collection and disposal of refuse and the cost of public school education, in the case of faculty and staff housing of an educational institution, excluding any amount received from federal or state grants specifically designated for such purposes. The expenditures for services not provided for certain real estate shall not be applicable to the calculations of the service charge for such real estate, nor shall such expenditures be applicable when a service is currently funded by another service charge. The service charge shall not be applicable to public roadways or property held for future construction of such roadways. The service charge, which shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the real estate tax rate, shall be fixed by dividing such expenditures by the assessed fair market value of all of the real estate within the city, except real estate owned by the United States Government or any of its instrumentalities, expressed in hundred dollars, including nontaxable property. 
(c)  The service charges imposed pursuant to this section are to be assessed and collected in the same manner as taxable real estate in the city, pursuant to the various sections of this Code and the Code of Virginia that are applicable thereto. 
(Code 1965, §§ 33-7.8, 33-7.9, 33-7.12) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3400.  
Sec. 35-9. - Same—When due and payable; penalty and interest on delinquencies. 
(a)  The service charges imposed pursuant to section 35-8 shall be due and payable during the year for which the same are assessed in two (2) equal installments as follows: One-half (&half) on December first and one-half (½) on June first of such year. In the event that the service charges are assessed after December first, such charges shall be due and payable on the following June first of each fiscal year. 
(b)  In the event any installment of the service charges imposed pursuant to section 35-8 is not paid on or before the time the same is due and payable, as set forth in this section, there shall be added thereto a penalty of five (5) percent of the amount of such unpaid installment and such installment and penalty shall bear interest at the rate of nine and six-tenths (9.6) percent per annum from the end of the sixth month next following the month such installment was due, but not paid, until paid. 
(Code 1965, §§ 33-7.10, 33-7.11; Ord. No. 1095, 10-6-80)  
Sec. 35-10. - Same—Exemptions. 
The real estate lawfully owned by the City of Norfolk, the Hampton Roads Sanitation District Commission and the Chesapeake Bay Bridge Tunnel Commission lying wholly or partly within the corporate limits of the city shall be exempt from the service charge imposed pursuant to section 35-8. 
(Code 1965, § 33-7.13) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3400.  
Sec. 35-11. - Payment of administrative costs in collection of delinquent taxes or charges. 
The treasurer of the city is hereby authorized to impose a fee to cover the administrative cost associated with the collection of delinquent taxes or other delinquent charges. Such fee shall be in addition to all penalties and interests, and shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) for taxes or other charges collected more than thirty (30) days after notice of delinquent taxes or charges has been provided, pursuant to Virginia Code § 58.1-3919, but prior to any judgment. The fee shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for taxes or other charges collected subsequent to judgment. 
(Ord. No. 1291, 6-14-82; Ord. No. 2083, 7-9-91; Ord. No. 2595, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 2773, 6-24-03)  
Sec. 35-12. - How tax payments credited by treasurer. 
Any payment of local levies received by the treasurer shall be credited first against the most delinquent local account of the person making payment unless the treasurer shall deem it appropriate to apply such payment to a local account which is less delinquent in time. 
(Ord. No. 1322, 9-13-82)  
Sec. 35-13. - Applications for personal property tax relief by elderly or disabled persons. 
Any deadline for submission of an affidavit or written statement for relief from personal property taxes by qualifying persons totally and permanently disabled or not less than 65 years old shall be the same as provided in section 35-66. 
(Ord. No. 3317, 11-26-13)  
Secs. 35-14—35-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REAL ESTATE TAXES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Assessment of real estate for local taxation, § 8.07; authority of city to levy higher tax in areas receiving additional or more complete governmental services, § 2.02(b). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 35-26. - Office of real estate assessor created; appointment, term and general powers and duties of assessor. 
The office of city real estate assessor is hereby created, such office to be filled by the appointment of a single assessor by the city council. The person so appointed shall be known as the city real estate assessor, shall hold office at the pleasure of the council and shall give his entire time to the duties of his office. He shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by the laws of the state for assessors of real estate and all the duties now devolved upon the commissioner of revenue of the city with respect to the assessment of real estate for taxation and assembly of the land book shall be transferred to and devolve upon the city real estate assessor upon his taking the oath of office. 
(Code 1965, §§ 33-4.1, 33-4.2; Ord. No. 3254, § 2, 8-14-12) 
Charter reference— Appointment and duties of assessors, § 8.07.  
Sec. 35-27. - Annual assessments generally. 
(a)  All real estate in the city not exempted from taxation by the Constitution of the state and not assessable for taxation by the state corporation commission as provided by law shall be assessed annually, by the city real estate assessor, for taxation by the city. 
(b)  The city real estate assessor shall assess annually for taxation at its fair market value all real estate within the city subject to assessment by him, which shall include all lands, buildings, structures and improvements thereon and all rights thereto and interests therein, and he shall have the right and power to do all things necessary to assess such property. Except with respect to new construction and other cases where such assessments are not practicable, such assessments shall be completed not later than the thirty-first day of January of the year, preceding the year for which such assessments shall be effective, and taxes for each fiscal year on such real estate shall be made on the basis of the last assessment made prior to such fiscal year, subject to such changes as may have been lawfully made. 
(Code 1965, §§ 33-4.1, 33-4.3) 
State Law reference— Real estate assessments, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3200 et seq.  
Sec. 35-28. - Assessment of new buildings substantially completed or fit for use, occupancy or enjoyment; abatement of levies on buildings razed, destroyed, or damaged. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, all new buildings substantially completed and fit for use, occupancy and enjoyment shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of section 58-811.1 [58.1-3292] of the Code of Virginia, as of the first day of each quarter. Likewise, levies on buildings which are razed or destroyed or damaged by a fortuitous happening beyond the control of the owner shall be abated in accordance with the provisions of section 58-811.2 [58.1-3222] of the Code of Virginia, as of the first day of each quarter. 
(Code 1965, § 33-4.7)  
Sec. 35-29. - Assessment of closed streets and alleys. 
Whenever any ordinance shall be passed closing any street, alley or other public place to public use or travel, the city clerk shall send a certified copy of such ordinance to the city real estate assessor and the city real estate assessor shall enter on the land book for the next ensuing year, in the name or names of the abutting owners or persons who may be entitled to such property, the parcels of land formerly occupied by such street, alley or other public place. 
(Code 1965, § 33-4.9)  
Sec. 35-30. - Notice of change of assessment. 
(a)  Whenever the assessment of any real estate is changed by the city real estate assessor, he shall cause notice to be given by mail directly to each property owner to whom tax bills are sent, as shown by the land books of the city, whose assessment has been changed. Such notice shall be sent by postpaid mail, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of a hearing to protest such change, to the address of the property owner as shown on such land books, but the validity of such assessment shall not be affected by any failure to give or receive notice. 
(b)  Every notice given pursuant to this section shall, among other matters, show the district in which the real estate is located, the amount and the new appraised value of land, the new appraised value of improvements, the new assessed value of each, if different from the appraised value, and the assessment ratio employed by the city. It shall further set out the time and place at which persons may appear before the city real estate assessor and present objections thereto. 
(c)  Any person who receives tax bills on behalf of the owner of real property and, as a result thereof, also receives a notice given pursuant to this section shall transmit the notice to such owner, at his last known address, immediately on receipt thereof, and shall be liable to such owner, in an action at law, for liquidated damages in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), in the event of a failure to so transmit the notice. Mailing such notice to the last known address of the property owner shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of this subsection. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the above provisions of this section, if the address of a taxpayer, as shown on the tax record, is in care of a lender, the lender shall, upon request, furnish the real estate assessor the current address of the taxpayer, as it appears on the books of the lender, or the parties may, by agreement, permit the lender to forward notices provided for in this section to the property owner, with the cost of postage to be paid by the city. 
(Code 1965, § 33-4.4; Ord. No. 2500, 8-4-98) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3330.  
Sec. 35-31. - Form of completed assessments and extension of taxes thereon; delivery of land book to circuit court clerk; etc. 
Upon final completion of assessments pursuant to this article, the city real estate assessor shall make four (4) copies thereof in the form in which the land books are made out, which shall be delivered to the commissioner of revenue of the city and on which the commissioner of revenue shall extend the taxes levied thereon. A copy of the land book containing such assessments shall be delivered to the clerk of the circuit court of the city. The assessor shall, upon the completion of each annual assessment, certify on the land book, on oath, that all real estate subject to taxation by the city has been assessed by him at the fair market value thereof, and that there are no errors on the face of the land book. 
(Code 1965, § 33-4.5)  
Sec. 35-32. - Effective date of assessments; tax and assessment year. 
Each annual assessment shall be effective on the first day of July of the year for which the assessment is made and the taxes and other charges shall be extended on the basis of every such assessment. The beginning of the tax and assessment year for the assessment of taxes on all real estate assessable by the city for taxation shall be July first and the owner of such real estate on that day shall be assumed with taxes for the year beginning on that day. 
(Code 1965, § 33-4.6)  
Sec. 35-33. - Authority of assessor to direct personal appearance and testimony and production of books and records; remedy for failure to comply with such directive. 
(a)  The city real estate assessor, in performing his duties, shall have authority to direct taxpayers, their agents and other persons who may have information on the subject to appear and testify under oath concerning the ownership and value of real estate assessable by the city real estate assessor and to require the production of books of account and other papers and records containing such information for inspection by the city real estate assessor. 
(b)  The city council may, by resolution, apply to the judge of the general district court for a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum against any person refusing to answer a directive of the city real estate assessor or failing or refusing to furnish information or to produce books of account, papers or other records required by the city real estate assessor. Any person failing to comply with any such subpoena shall be subject to punishment for contempt by the court issuing the subpoena. 
(Code 1965, § 33-4.8; Ord. No. 1010, 12-3-79)  
Sec. 35-34. - Information to be supplied assessor by other city departments and bureaus. 
The departments and bureaus of the city having in their possession or under their control data or information which will aid the city real estate assessor in carrying out his duties, shall furnish same to the city real estate assessor on written application therefor. 
(Code 1965, 33-4.10)  
Sec. 35-35. - Equalization of assessments. 
(a)  In order to equalize assessments of real estate annually, the city real estate assessor shall hold hearings between March fifteenth and April thirtieth of each year, or as often as may be necessary as determined by the city real estate assessor, for the purpose of receiving such evidence as may be presented to him by any taxpayer with respect to the inequality of his assessment made during the twelve-month period ending January thirty-first last ensuing. Any taxpayer feeling aggrieved by any such assessment of his property may apply to the city real estate assessor for the equalization thereof on forms provided by the city real estate assessor for that purpose. 
(b)  At least fifteen (15) days before the hearings provided for in this section, notice thereof shall be given by publication one time in one of the newspapers having general circulation in the city. Notwithstanding such notice, such hearings may be granted by the city real estate assessor upon appointments. 
(c)  After hearing the evidence referred to in subsection (a) above, the city real estate assessor may take such action as he may deem necessary to equalize assessments and shall record the action taken in the land book. Each taxpayer having made application for such hearing and any other taxpayer affected by the action of the city real estate assessor shall be advised of the decision of the city real estate assessor with respect to such assessment. 
(d)  The city real estate assessor may authorize persons employed in his office who are competent so to do to hold any hearing referred to in this section, provided the evidence presented or a summary thereof is transmitted to the city real estate assessor for action with respect thereto. 
(e)  The board of equalization shall have the powers to revise, correct and amend any assessment of real estate, other than real estate assessable by the state corporation commission. The board shall begin hearing assessment appeals the first Thursday in July of each year. An application for appeal to the board must be received by August 30 of the year in which the assessment was made. The city real estate assessor shall include this deadline in the notice of assessment. 
(Code 1965, §§ 33-4.11—33-4.14; Ord. No. 3144, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3215, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 3607, 1-7-20) 
Charter reference— Board of equalization, § 8.07. 
Note— The effective date of this section shall be January 1, 2011.  
Sec. 35-36. - When taxes due and payable. 
City taxes on real estate for each year shall be due and payable during the year for which the same are assessed in two (2) equal installments, as follows: One-half (½) on December fifth and one-half (½) on June fifth of such year. In the event that such taxes are assessed after December fifth, they shall be due and payable on the following June fifth. 
(Code 1965, § 33-2) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.  
Sec. 35-37. - Penalty and interest when installment not paid on time. 
(a)  In the event any installment of taxes on real estate is not paid on or before the time the same is due and payable as set forth in section 35-36, there shall be added thereto a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of such unpaid installment or the sum of ten dollars ($10.00), whichever shall be greater, and such installment and penalty shall bear interest commencing on the first day following the day such taxes were due, at the rate of nine and six-tenths (9.6) percent per annum during the first year such taxes are delinquent, and thereafter at the rate of eight and four-tenths (8.4) percent per annum. Provided however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax due. 
(b)  The assessment of a penalty under this section shall not be deemed a defense to any criminal prosecution for failing to make such return of taxable property as may be required by law. 
(c)  No amendment to this section shall reduce the amount of penalty and interest which has been assessed or was assessable on delinquent taxes prior to the date of such amendment. 
(d)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916, as amended, the city treasurer is hereby authorized, for good cause shown which shall be reflected in a written record, to waive the penalty and interest imposed by this section. 
(e)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916, the city treasurer is hereby authorized, for good cause shown which shall be reflected in a written record, to extend the period of time for a taxpayer to pay real estate taxes, not to exceed ninety (90) days from the due date. If any taxpayer who has been granted an extension of time for filing his return fails to pay the taxes within the extended time, his case shall be treated the same as if no extension had been granted, with the penalty and interest being assessed on the first day following the day the taxes would have been due absent the extension. 
(Code 1965, § 33-3; Ord. No. 1094, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 1339, 11-1-82; Ord. No. 1361, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 1450, 5-7-84; Ord. No. 1611, 6-23-86; Ord. No. 2344, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 3034, 6-24-08) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.  
Sec. 35-38. - Suits in equity to enforce liens for delinquent taxes. 
(a)  Pursuant to article 8 of chapter 21 of title 58 (Code of Virginia, § 58-1117.1 et seq.) [58.1-3965 et seq.] of the Code of Virginia, the city attorney may institute and conduct, in the name of the city, all necessary and proper suits in equity for the purpose of enforcing all the liens of the city for real estate taxes on any real estate on which taxes are delinquent and unpaid for a period of three (3) years or more, exclusive of the then current year. 
(b)  The city attorney is hereby authorized to appoint such special assistants to the city attorney as are necessary for the specific purpose of instituting suits for the enforcement of liens of the city of real estate taxes. Such special assistants to the city attorney shall be compensated from the proceeds of the enforcement of the lien. 
(c)  No less than thirty (30) days prior to the initiation of any legal proceedings under this section, notice shall be mailed by the city treasurer to the record owner of any such real estate at his last known address as listed in the tax records of the city, and to his current address as listed in the telephone directory if it is different from the address listed in the tax records. 
(Code 1965, § 33-7; Ord. No. 1341, 11-8-82; Ord. No. 1428, 1-16-84) 
Cross reference— City attorney, § 2-166 et seq.  
Sec. 35-39. - Apportionment of city taxes when part of real estate becomes separately owned. 
Upon application of the owner of the separate part, the circuit court of the city may, when any part of real estate assessed with city taxes has become, since such assessment, separate property of any of the original owners or of any other person in interest, determine the value, as of the date of the original assessment, of any portion of such real estate so separately owned. The court may also determine what part of the whole amount of the taxes, and of the penalties, if penalties have accrued upon the taxes, and of the expenses of the sale, if the property has been sold for the nonpayment of such taxes, may be paid by such owner of such separate part, his heirs or assigns, in order to release or redeem such part from the lien of the taxes originally assessed. The amount so fixed shall bear the same relation to the whole amount of such taxes, penalties and expenses as the value of such part of such real estate bore to the value of the whole, as of the date of the original assessment. The city attorney and the commissioner of revenue shall have at least five (5) days' notice of such application, and the order of the court shall show that fact. Upon the payment of the amount so fixed, including all costs, the owner of any such part, his heirs, or assigns, shall hold the same free from any lien for city taxes for the year or years in question. 
(Ord. No. 1510, 1-14-85) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3224.  
Sec. 35-40. - Release of lien on portion of real estate upon payment of delinquent taxes. 
When an individual purchases or acquires a portion of a tract of real estate, the individual or treasurer may apply to the commissioner of revenue, or the real estate assessor, to determine the amount of any tax or assessment that is properly chargeable against such portion of real estate. The treasurer shall release such portion of real estate from any lien for delinquent taxes, upon receipt of payment for the total amount of taxes and penalty and interest due on such portion of real estate. 
(Ord. No. 1835, 3-20-89)  
Sec. 35-41. - Energy efficient buildings. 
(a)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3221.2, as amended, energy-efficient buildings, not including the real estate or land on which they are located, are a separate class of property from other classifications of real property. 
(b)  The definition of "energy-efficient buildings" and requirements for certification as an "energy-efficient building" shall be in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3221.2, as amended. 
(c)  The owner of an energy-efficient building may apply to the city building official on forms provided by the city building official for certification as an energy-efficient building. 
(d)  Upon application by the owner of an energy-efficient building, the city building official shall inspect the property and certify that the building meets the technical requirements for classification. 
(e)  Any appeal of a determination of the city building official under this section shall follow the appeals process provided by local and state law for appeals of determinations under the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(f)  Upon review and certification by the city building official, the application and certification shall be forwarded to the real estate assessor for purposes of the city land book and assessment. 
(Ord. No. 3134, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 3254, § 2, 8-14-12)  
Sec. 35-42. - Administration of tax exemption program for disabled veterans, surviving spouses of servicemembers killed in action, and surviving spouses of certain first responders killed in the line of duty; application of exemption programs to special service districts. 
(a)  The disabled veteran real property tax exemption, surviving spouse of servicemembers killed in action, and surviving spouse of certain first responders killed in the line of duty programs shall be administered by the commissioner of the revenue. The commissioner of the revenue shall administer these programs in accordance with the Virginia Constitution and the Virginia Code. 
(b)  For the programs described in subsection (a), the exemption or partial exemption authorized by the General Assembly shall extend in the same manner to any additional levies imposed by special service districts. 
(Ord. No. 3254, § 2, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 3504, § 2, 6-6-17, eff. 7-1-17; Ord. No. 3601, 9-17-19)  
Secs. 35-43—35-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ASSESSMENT OF LAND DEVOTED TO AGRICULTURAL, HORTICULTURAL, FOREST OR OPEN SPACE USES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinance similar to this division, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3231. 
 
Sec. 35-46. - Findings of fact. 
The city council finds that the preservation of real estate devoted to agricultural, horticultural, forest and open space uses within its boundaries is in the public interest and, having heretofore adopted a land-use plan, hereby ordains that such real estate shall be taxed in accordance with the provisions of article 1.1 of chapter 15 of title 58 (§ 58-769.4 et seq.) [58.1-3229] of the Code of Virginia and of this division. 
(Code 1965, § 33-7.1)  
Sec. 35-47. - Application for classification and assessment generally. 
(a)  The owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in sections 58-769.5 [58.1-3230] and 58-769.7(b) [58.1-3233] of the Code of Virginia shall submit an application for taxation on the basis of a use assessment to the city real estate assessor, within thirty (30) days after his notice of increase in assessment is mailed, or by May first, whichever is later. Such application shall be on forms provided by the state department of taxation and supplied by the city real estate assessor and shall include such schedules, photographs, drawings and additional information as may be required by the city real estate assessor. A separate application shall be filed for each use for which qualification is sought. 
Applications may be filed no more than sixty (60) days after the filing deadline specified herein, upon the payment of a late filing fee of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(b)  Those property owners who previously made application or revalidations for 1977 shall be required to revalidate that approved application or revalidation by June 30, 1977. Thereafter, property owners must revalidate annually any previously approved application with the real estate assessor no later than June 5 on forms prepared by the city real estate assessor and approved by the city council. 
Revalidation forms may be filed after June 5, but no later than July 1, upon the payment of a late filing fee of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(c)  An application shall be submitted under this section whenever the use or acreage of such land previously approved changes, except when a change in acreage occurs solely as the result of a conveyance necessitated by governmental action or condemnation of a portion of any land previously approved for taxation on the basis of use assessment. 
(Code 1965, § 33-7.2; Ord. No. 1598, 4-28-86)  
Sec. 35-48. - Determination by assessor. 
(a)  Promptly upon receipt of any application under this division, the city real estate assessor shall determine whether the subject property meets the criteria for taxation hereunder. If the assessor shall determine that the subject property does meet such criteria, he shall determine the value of such property for its qualifying use, as well as its fair market value. 
(b)  In determining whether the subject property meets the criteria for "forest use," the city real estate assessor may request an opinion from the director of the state department of conservation and economic development and, in determining whether the subject property meets the criteria for "open space use," he may request an opinion from the director of the state commission of outdoor recreation. Upon the refusal of the director of conservation and economic development or the director of the commission of outdoor recreation to issue an opinion or in the event of an unfavorable opinion which does not comport with standards set forth by the respective director, the party aggrieved may seek relief from any court of record wherein the real estate in question is located, and in the event that the court finds in his favor, it may issue an order which shall serve in lieu of an opinion for the purposes of this division. 
(Code 1965, § 33-7.3)  
Sec. 35-48.1. - Special requirements as to open-space uses. 
In addition to all other requirements recited in this division, no property shall qualify for assessment on the basis of an "open-space use" unless the real estate assessor shall first determine that such property is (i) within an agricultural, a forestal, or an agricultural and forestal district entered into pursuant to chapter 36 of title 15.1, Code of Virginia, or (ii) subject to a recorded perpetual easement that is held by a public body, and promotes the open-space use classification, as defined in section 58.1-3230, Code of Virginia, or (iii) subject to a recorded commitment entered into by the landowners with the local governing body not to change the use to a nonqualifying use for a time period stated in the commitment of not less than four (4) years nor more than ten (10) years. Such commitment shall be subject to uniform standards prescribed by the director of the department of conservation and historic resources pursuant to the authority set out in section 58.1-3240, Code of Virginia. Such commitment shall run with the land for the applicable period, and may be terminated in the manner provided in section 15.1-1513, Code of Virginia, for withdrawal of land from an agricultural, a forestal or an agricultural and forestal district. 
(Ord. No. 1910, 9-11-89)  
Sec. 35-49. - Land book entries; tax to be extended from use value. 
The use value and fair market value of any property qualifying under this division shall be placed on the land book before delivery to the city treasurer and the tax for the next succeeding tax year shall be extended from the use value. 
(Code 1965, § 33-7.4)  
Sec. 35-50. - Roll-back tax when use changes to nonqualifying use or when property is rezoned. 
There is hereby imposed a roll-back tax, in such amount as may be determined under Code of Virginia, section 58.1-3237, upon any property as to which either the use changes to a nonqualifying use under this division or for which a change in zoning to a more intensive use at the request of the owner or his agent occurs, plus simple interest on such roll-back taxes at the same interest rate applicable to delinquent real estate taxes pursuant to section 35-37 of this Code. The real estate assessor shall determine and assess the roll-back tax of the owner of any real estate liable for such tax, which shall be paid to the city treasurer within thirty (30) days after the assessment. Failure of the owner to pay such tax within thirty (30) days shall cause the owner to be liable for an additional penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the roll-back tax, which penalty shall be collected as part of the tax. In addition to such penalty, there is hereby imposed interest at the same interest rate applicable to delinquent real estate taxes pursuant to section 35-37 of this Code on the amount of roll-back tax for each month or fraction thereof during which failure to pay continues. For property rezoned after July 1, 1988, but before July 1, 1992, no penalties or interest, except as provided in subsection B of Code of Virginia, section 58.1-3237, shall be assessed, provided the rollback tax is paid on or before October 1, 1992. 
(Code 1965, §§ 33-7.5, 33-7.6; Ord. No. 1117, 11-17-80; Ord. No. 1406, 10-3-83; Ord. No. 2164, 7-7-92)  
Sec. 35-50.1. - Removal of delinquent parcel from land use program. 
If on December first of any year the taxes for any prior fiscal year on any parcel of real property which has a special assessment as provided for in this division are delinquent, the treasurer shall forthwith send notice of that fact and the general provisions of this division to the property owner by first class mail. If after sending such notice, such delinquent taxes remain unpaid on May first, the treasurer shall notify the real estate assessor who shall remove such parcel from the land use program. 
(Ord. No. 1117, 11-17-80) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1117, adopted Nov. 17, 1980, amended Code 1965, § 33-7.6 by adding a new subsection (b), codified at the editor's discretion as § 33-50.1.  
Sec. 35-51. - Misstatements in application filed under division. 
Any person making a material misstatement of fact in any application filed pursuant to this division shall be liable for all taxes, in such amounts and at such times as if such property had been assessed on the basis of fair market value as applied to other real estate in the taxing jurisdiction, together with interest and penalties thereon, and he shall be further assessed with an additional penalty of one hundred (100) percent of such unpaid taxes. 
(Code 1965, § 33-7.6; Ord. No. 1117, 11-17-80)  
Sec. 35-52. - Applicability of general tax law. 
The provisions of title 58 of the Code of Virginia applicable to local levies and real estate assessment and taxation shall be applicable to assessments and taxation under this article mutatis mutandis including, without limitation, provisions relating to tax liens and the correction of erroneous assessments, and for such purposes the roll-back taxes shall be considered to be deferred real estate taxes. 
(Code 1965, § 33-7.7)  
Secs. 35-53—35-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EXEMPTION, DEFERRAL OR FREEZE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABLED PERSONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to provide for the exemption provided for in this division and restrictions and conditions for such exemption, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210 et seq. 
 
Sec. 35-61. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this division, the term "permanently and totally disabled" means unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of such person's life. 
(b)  As used in this division, reference to the "city manager" shall include the city manager's authorized representative, as well as the city manager. 
(c)  As used in this division, "tax freeze" refers to the total exemption of that portion of the real estate tax which represents the increase in such tax since the taxpayer initially applied or re-applied and qualified for exemption under this division, so that the taxpayer's real estate tax will be frozen at the amount assessed in the fiscal year in which the taxpayer initially applied or re-applied and qualified. If, for any year following the initial qualification of a taxpayer for a tax freeze such taxpayer becomes disqualified, any subsequent application for exemption by such taxpayer shall be treated as an initial application for purposes of determining the tax freeze. An applicant may re-apply if the tax burden decreases from the initial application for any given year, and the amount frozen will be the amount of tax at time of re-application. 
(d)  As used in this division, the term "tax exemption" shall mean the exemption of that portion of the real estate tax owed by a qualified taxpayer as determined by section 35-67 of this division. 
(Code 1965, § 33-2.1[b], [g]; Ord. No. 1424, 12-12-83; Ord. No. 2491, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 3396, § 1, 3-3-15)  
Sec. 35-62. - Authorized. 
Real estate tax exemption or freeze is provided for qualified property owners, who are not less than sixty-five (65) years of age, or who are permanently and totally disabled, or who jointly hold land with a spouse who is permanently and totally disabled, and who are eligible according to other terms of this division. Persons qualifying for such exemption or freeze are deemed to be bearing an extraordinary real estate tax burden in relation to their income and financial worth. 
(Code 1965, § 33-2.1[a]; Ord. No. 1121, 11-24-80; Ord. No. 1274, 5-14-82; Ord. No. 1424, 12-12-83; Ord. No. 3396, § 1, 3-3-15)  
Sec. 35-63. - Administration; rules and regulations of city manager. 
The exemption or freeze provided for in this division shall be administered by the city manager according to the general provisions contained in this division. The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt and enforce such rules and regulations, including the requirement of answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for the exemption or freeze provided for in this division. The city manager may require the production of certified tax returns, appraisal reports and other certifications to establish income, financial worth or disability. The city manager has designated the commissioner of the revenue as his agent for purposes of the administration of the exemption or freeze program, and the commissioner of the revenue shall have all of the duties and functions provided herein to the city manager. 
(Code 1965, § 33-2.1[b]; Ord. No. 1121, 11-24-80; Ord. No. 1274, 5-14-82; Ord. No. 1424, 12-12-83; Ord. No. 3254, § 2, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 3396, § 1, 3-3-15)  
Sec. 35-64. - General prerequisites to grant; effect of residency in hospital, nursing home, etc. 
(a)  Either the exemption or freeze, but not more than one (1), as provided for in this division shall be granted to persons subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The title to the property for which exemption or freeze is claimed is held, or partially held, on June 30 immediately preceding the taxable year, by the person or persons claiming exemption, deferral or freeze and is occupied as the sole dwelling of such person or persons. 
(2)  The head of the household occupying the dwelling and owning title or partial title thereto or either spouse in a dwelling jointly held by a husband and wife is either permanently and totally disabled or is sixty-five (65) years of age or older on June 30 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year; provided, however, that a dwelling jointly held by a husband and wife may qualify if either spouse is over sixty-five (65) years of age. 
(3)  For the tax exemption programs, the total combined income received from all sources during the preceding calendar year by: (i) the owner or owners of the dwelling who use it as their principal residence and (ii) the owner's or owners' relatives who live in the dwelling, shall not exceed fifty-seven thousand eight hundred and twenty-nine dollars ($57,829.00) provided that the first ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of income of each relative, other than a spouse of the owner, who is living in the dwelling, shall not be included in such total; and provided further that the first ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or any portion thereof of income received by a permanently and totally disabled owner shall not be included in such total. 
(4)  For the tax freeze program, the total combined income received from all sources during the preceding calendar year by: (i) the owner or owners of the dwelling who use it as their principal residence and (ii) the owner's or owners' relatives who live in the dwelling, shall not exceed seventy-five thousand four hundred and fifty-five dollars ($75,455.00) that the first ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of income of each relative, other than a spouse of the owner, who is living in the dwelling, shall not be included in such total; and provided that the first ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or any portion thereof of income received by a permanently and totally disabled owner shall not be included in such total. 
(5)  For the tax exemption programs, the net combined financial worth, including equitable interests, as of December 31 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year, of the owners, and of the spouse of any owner, excluding the value of the dwelling and the land (not exceeding ten acres) upon which it is situated, shall not exceed three hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($350,000.00). 
(6)  For the tax freeze program, the net combined financial worth, including equitable interests, as of December 31 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year, of the owners, and of the spouse of any owner, excluding the value of the dwelling and the land (not exceeding ten acres) upon which it is situated, shall not exceed three hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($350,000.00). 
(7)  The dwelling is occupied. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subdivision (a) of this section, if an owner qualifies for an exemption or freeze under this article, and if the owner can prove by clear and convincing evidence that his physical or mental health has deteriorated to the point that the only alternative to permanently residing in a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home or other facility for physical or mental care is to have a person move in and provide care for the owner, and if a person does then move in for that purpose, then none of the income of the person or of the person's spouse shall be counted towards the income limit, provided that the owner of the residence has not transferred assets in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) without adequate consideration within a three-year period prior to or after the person moves into such residence. 
(c)  The fact that owners who are otherwise qualified for tax exemption or freeze pursuant to this division are residing in hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes or other facilities for physical or mental care for extended periods of time shall not be construed to mean that the real estate for which tax exemption or freeze is sought does not continue to be the sole dwelling of such owners during such extended periods of other residence, so long as such real estate is not used by or leased to others for consideration. 
(Code 1965, § 33-2.1[c]; Ord. No. 1121, 11-24-80; Ord. No. 1225, 9-28-81; Ord. No. 1274, 5-14-82; Ord. No. 1325, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 1424, 12-12-83; Ord. No. 1692, 4-27-87; Ord. No. 1897, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 1939, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 2181, 10-6-92; Ord. No. 2200, 1-5-93; Ord. No. 2262, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 2491, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 2535, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2580, 5-9-00; Ord. No. 2639, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2695, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 2746, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 2818, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 2836, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 2871, 5-10-05; Ord. No. 2941, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 2978, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3023, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3044, 7-8-08; Ord. No. 3133, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 3350, 5-13-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3363, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3396, § 1, 3-3-15; Ord. No. 3454, 6-21-16, eff. 7-1-16; Ord. No. 3500, 5-9-17, eff. 7-1-17; Ord. No. 3555, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18; Ord. No. 3586, 5-14-19, eff. 7-1-19; Ord. No. 3615, 5-12-20, eff. 7-1-20)  
Sec. 35-64.1. - Income exclusions. 
For purposes of calculating income in accordance with this article, the Commissioner of the Revenue shall not include: 
(a)  Payments from a bank or other financial institution that result from a reverse mortgage or similar instrument, provided the reverse mortgage is an encumbrance upon the applicant's sole dwelling; 
(b)  Disability payments from a governmental entity or agency; 
(c)  Payments made to foster care providers for or regarding the care of children in foster care. 
(Ord. No. 3429, § 1, 10-20-15; Ord. No. 3573, § 1, 12-4-18)  
Sec. 35-65. - Mobile home as real estate for purposes of division. 
For purposes of this division, a mobile home shall be real estate if the owner's intention that it be permanently affixed is shown by the fact that: 
(1)  It is located on land belonging in whole or in part to the owner of the mobile home, his spouse, parent or child, and is connected to permanent water or sewage lines or facilities; or 
(2)  Whether or not it is located on land belonging to persons described in (1) above, it rests on a permanent foundation and consists of two (2) or more mobile units which are connected in such a manner that they cannot be towed together on a highway, or consists of a mobile unit and other connected rooms or additions which must be removed before the mobile unit can be towed on a highway. 
(Code 1965, § 33-2.1[i])  
Sec. 35-66. - Application for exemption; certificate of disability. 
(a)  Each person (or persons) claiming an exemption or freeze under this division shall file a real estate tax exemption/freeze affidavit or written statement with the city manager. The affidavit or written statement shall be filed between January 1 and June 30 preceding the tax year for which relief is sought. Such affidavit or written statement shall set forth, in a manner prescribed by the city manager, the location and assessed value of the property and the names of the related persons occupying the dwelling for which exemption or freeze is claimed, their gross combined income and their net combined financial worth. The affidavit or written statement shall also include indication as to whether the person or persons claim either the exemption or freeze option. Each affidavit or written statement filed pursuant to this section shall be deemed valid for a period of three (3) years; provided, however, that each year during the three-year period and within the time requirement for filing affidavits or written statements, the person or persons claiming exemption or freeze shall file with the city manager a certification that the information contained on the affidavit or written statement has not changed or that, if any change has occurred, that such change does not serve to violate the limitations and conditions provided in this division. 
(b)  If the applicant is under sixty-five (65) years of age, the affidavit or written statement required by subsection (a) above shall have attached thereto a certification by the Social Security Administration, the Veterans Administration or the Railroad Retirement Board, or if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two (2) medical doctors licensed to practice medicine in the commonwealth, to the effect that such person is permanently and totally disabled, as defined in section 35-61. The affidavit of at least one of such doctors shall be based upon a physical examination of the applicant by such doctor. The affidavit of one of such doctors may be based upon medical information contained in the records of the civil service commission which is relevant to the standards for determining permanent and total disability, as defined in section 35-61. 
(c)  The city manager is hereby authorized to accept and process late filings of the affidavits or written statements described in subsections (a) and (b) above until July 31 of the tax year for which exemption or freeze is sought. The city manager shall accept and process such late filings in cases of (1) first time applicants, or (2) where he determines that the failure to grant the exemption or freeze would serve to create an extreme hardship for the applicant. 
(d)  The city manager may accept applications after the July 31 date but before March 31 of a given fiscal year when the applicant provides, to the satisfaction of the city manager, that the failure to apply during the applicable period of time was due to medical emergency or other exigent circumstance. The reason for such waiver of the application deadline shall be reduced to writing, and the city manager shall retain such writings and make them available for inspection by the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 33-2.1[c], [d]; Ord. No. 1121, 11-24-80; Ord. No. 1274, 5-14-82; Ord. No. 1424, 12-12-83; Ord. No. 1573, 1-6-86; Ord. No. 1897, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 2431, 11-26-96; Ord. No. 3396, § 1, 3-3-15; Ord. No. 3512, 6-20-17) 
State Law reference— Authority for subsection (c), above, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3213.  
Sec. 35-67. - Amount of exemption. 
When a person claiming exemption under this division conforms to the standards and does not exceed the limitations contained in this division, the tax exemption shall be as shown on the following schedule: 
Total income, All Sources 	Tax Exemption 
$0.00—$44,133.00 	100% 
$44,133.01—$47,557.00 	80% 
$47,557.01—$50,981.00 	60% 
$50,981.01—$54,406.00 	40% 
$54,406.01—$57,829.00 	20% 
 
No lien shall accrue as a result of the amount certified as exempt. 
(Code 1965, § 33-2.1[e]; Ord. No. 1164, 4-20-81; Ord. No. 1274, 5-14-82; Ord. No. 1424, 12-12-83; Ord. No. 1692, 4-27-87; Ord. No. 1939, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 2200, 1-5-93; Ord. No. 2491, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 2535, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2580, 5-9-00; Ord. No. 2639, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2695, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 2746, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 2818, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 2871, 5-10-05; Ord. No. 2941, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 2978, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3023, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3133, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 3350, 5-13-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3396, § 1, 3-3-15, eff. 7-1-15; Ord. No. 3454, 6-21-16, eff. 7-1-16; Ord. No. 3500, 5-9-17, eff. 7-1-17; Ord. No. 3555, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18; Ord. No. 3586, 5-14-19, eff. 7-1-19; Ord. No. 3615, 5-12-20, eff. 7-1-20)  
Sec. 35-67.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3396, § 1, adopted March 3, 2015, repealed § 35-67.1, which pertained to amount of deferral; payment of accumulated deferred taxes. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 35-67.2. - When amount of exemption/freeze exceeds amount appropriated. 
In any tax year in which the amount appropriated by the city council for the purpose of providing real estate tax exemption and/or freeze under this division is not sufficient to afford the entire exemption and/or freeze allowable under the provisions of this division, the amount of exemption and/or freeze shall be computed as a fraction of that allowable under the provisions of this division, the numerator of the fraction to be the amount of the appropriation for the tax year and the denominator of the fraction to be the total amount of all allowable exemptions and/or freezes qualified for under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1274, 5-14-82; Ord. No. 1424, 12-12-83; Ord. No. 3396, § 1, 3-3-15)  
Sec. 35-68. - Nullification; change in circumstances. 
(a)  Changes in respect to income, financial worth, ownership of property, disability or other factors occurring during the taxable year for which the affidavit mentioned in section 35-66 is filed, and having the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations or conditions provided in this division shall nullify any relief of real estate tax liability for the then current taxable year and the taxable year immediately following. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), a change in ownership to a spouse, when such change resulted solely from the death of the qualifying individual, or a sale of such property shall result in a prorated exemption or freeze for the then current taxable year. The proceeds of the sale which would result in the prorated exemption or freeze shall not be included in the computation of net worth or income as provided in subsection (a). Such prorated portion shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the exemption or freeze by a fraction, wherein the number of complete months of the year such property was properly eligible for such exemption or freeze is the numerator and the number twelve (12) is the denominator. 
(c)  An individual who does not qualify for the exemption or freeze under this division based upon the previous year's income limitations or financial worth limitations may nonetheless qualify for the current year by filing an affidavit that clearly shows a substantial change of circumstances that was not volitional on the part of the individual to become eligible for the exemption or freeze and will result in income and financial worth levels that are within the limitations of this division. If the application pursuant to this subsection is approved, the exemption or freeze shall be prorated by multiplying the amount of the exemption or freeze by a fraction, wherein the number of complete months of the year such property would be eligible for such exemption or freeze is the numerator and the number twelve (12) is the denominator. Any exemption or freeze under this subsection is conditioned upon the individual filing another affidavit after the end of the year in which the exemption or freeze is granted, within sixty (60) days of the completion of the year showing that the actual income and financial worth levels were within the limitations of this division. If the actual income and financial worth levels exceeded the limitations, any exemption or freeze shall be nullified for the taxable year subject to treatment under this subsection and the taxable year immediately following. 
(Code 1965, § 33-2.1[f]; Ord. No. 1692, 4-27-87; Ord. No. 3396, § 1, 3-3-15; Ord. No. 3600, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 35-69. - False claims. 
Any person falsely claiming an exemption or deferral or freeze under this division shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 33-2.1[h]; Ord. No. 1274, 5-14-82; Ord. No. 1424, 12-12-83)  
DIVISION 3.1. - EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN REHABILITATED, RENOVATED OR REPLACEMENT COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 35-70. - Partial tax exemption for certain substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced commercial or industrial structures; policy and intent. 
It is the purpose of this division to implement the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 32 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia to permit the city to allow a partial tax exemption for certain substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced commercial or industrial structures. The exemption will (1) provide an economic incentive for improvement of real estate and (2) prevent deterioration and decay that is harmful to the health and welfare of the city and its residents. This division establishes a procedure for property owners within certain designated areas in the City of Virginia Beach to obtain partial real estate tax exemptions for certain substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced commercial or industrial structures. The eligibility criteria and the term of the exemption shall be established by ordinance for each district and may vary to reflect different property and economic conditions in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2786, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 35-71. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. 
Assessor: Real estate assessor for the City of Virginia Beach. 
Base value: The assessed value of the structure as of July 1 during the tax year in which the rehabilitation, renovation or replacement of the structure begins. 
Exemption: The real estate taxes resulting from the increase in the assessed value of a commercial or industrial structure that is determined by the assessor to be directly attributable to the substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement of the structure. 
Exemption districts: Described zones or districts with boundaries determined by the city council in which qualifying property may be partially exempted from real estate pursuant to the terms of this division or as provided for the district. 
Owner: All persons or entities holding title to real estate with a commercial or industrial structure or structures thereon for which an exemption is requested, including persons or entities with a leasehold interest as defined by § 58.1-3203 of the Code of Virginia. 
Rehabilitated structure: An existing commercial or industrial structure, no less than twenty (20) years of age, located in an exemption district that has been substantially rehabilitated or renovated, or a replacement commercial or industrial structure located in an exemption district that replaces an existing structure of no less than twenty (20) years of age. Each district shall have criteria established for the level of improvements required for the structure(s) that will be rehabilitated, renovated or replaced. 
Rehabilitation: Rehabilitation, renovation or replacement of an eligible structure. 
(Ord. No. 2786, 9-23-03)  
Sec. 35-72. - Partial exemption from taxation for certain rehabilitated, renovated or replacement structures. 
(a)  Exemption authorized amount. Partial exemption from real estate taxes is hereby authorized for qualifying property rehabilitated in accordance with the criteria set out in Article X, Section 6, Paragraph (h) of the Constitution of Virginia and §§ 58.1-3220.1 and 58.1-3221 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, and this division. The partial exemption shall be an amount equal to the increase in assessed value resulting from rehabilitation of an eligible commercial or industrial structure as determined by the assessor. 
(b)  Procedure to obtain exemption. 
(1)  The application shall be on a form created and supplied by the assessor. Applications must be filed with the assessor prior to the commencement of any rehabilitation for which an exemption is sought. No structure shall be eligible for exemption unless the appropriate building permits have been obtained. 
(2)  Upon receipt of an application for partial tax exemption, the assessor shall determine the base value of the existing structure. 
(3)  The application to qualify for tax exemption shall be effective until June 30 of the second calendar year following the year in which application is submitted. Except for properties located in the APZ-1 Property Tax Exemption District, if by such expiration date rehabilitation has not progressed to such a point that the assessed value of the structure is at least forty (40) percent greater than the base value of such structure to retain such eligibility, a new application to qualify for tax exemption must be filed and a new base value established. For properties located in the APZ-1 Property Tax Exemption District, if by such expiration date rehabilitation has not progressed to such a point that the assessed value of the structure is at least twenty (20) percent greater than the base value of such structure to retain such eligibility, a new application to qualify for tax exemption must be filed and a new base value established. 
(4)  The initial application to qualify for the rehabilitated structure tax exemption, and any subsequent application, must be accompanied by a payment of a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), which shall be applied to offset the cost of processing the application, making required assessments, and inspecting the progress of the work. 
(5)  During the period between the receipt of the application and the time the assessor ascertains that the structure has increased so that it qualifies for the exemption authorized by this article, the property shall be subject to taxation upon the full value of the existing improvements to the property. 
(6)  Any tax exemption shall become effective on the date of the next deadline for pay ment of real estate taxes following completion of the rehabilitation, renovation or replacement. 
(c)  Vacant land. Improvements on vacant land are not eligible. 
(d)  Credit on tax bill. The owner or owners of property qualifying for partial exemption of real estate taxes under this division shall be credited on the tax bill for the property in the amount of the difference between the taxes computed upon the base value and the initial rehabilitated assessed value of the property for each year of the partial exemption from real estate taxes. The amount of this credit shall not increase, even if the assessed value later increases. 
(e)  Decrease in assessment. If a qualifying property's assessed value decreases after the first year of any rehabilitation, the amount of the exemption shall be reduced to the difference between taxes computed on the base value and the decreased assessed value of the property. 
(f)  Exemption to run with land. The exemption from taxation authorized by this division shall run with the land. 
(Ord. No. 2786, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 2932, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 35-72.1. - Same; Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1). 
(a)  District established. The Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1) Property Tax Exemption District (the "District") is hereby established. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of the District shall be to encourage the redevelopment and revitalization of real property in APZ-1 by converting nonconforming uses, as determined pursuant to Section 1804 of the City Zoning Ordinance, to conforming uses. 
(c)  District boundaries. The District shall consist of all areas within APZ-1, as shown on the official zoning map of the City. 
(d)  Eligibility criteria; duration of exemption. Property qualifying for an exemption pursuant to this section shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The assessed value after the rehabilitation, renovation, or replacement of the structure shall be at least twenty (20) percent greater than the base assessed value; 
(2)  The property shall undergo rehabilitation, renovation, or replacement for commercial or industrial use; 
(3)  The plan shall be consistent with the City's comprehensive plan and zoning ordinances; 
(4)  The rehabilitation, renovation, or replacement shall result in the conversion of a nonconforming use to a conforming use; and 
(5)  Any partial exemption of property in the District shall be subject to and comply with the provisions of Virginia Code Sections 58.1-3220.1 and 58.1-3221 and City Code Sections 35-70 through 35-74, as applicable. 
(e)  Duration of exemption. Any partial exemption of property in the District shall run with the real estate for a period of fifteen (15) years from the date of the completion of the rehabilitation, renovation, or replacement. 
(Ord. No. 2932, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 35-73. - Assessor to provide exemption information; exemptions not to be set out in land book. 
(a)  By August 15 of each year of the period of exemption from real estate taxes, the assessor shall notify the city treasurer of the exemption and the amount to be credited to the owner's tax bill. 
(b)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 58.1-3221(C), the real estate assessor shall not list or display any exemption provided by this division in the land book. 
(c)  The assessor shall make available application forms in the assessor's office, in the office of the permits and inspections division of the planning department and on the city's website for use by property owners who propose to rehabilitate qualifying structures. 
(Ord. No. 2786, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 3254, § 2, 8-14-12)  
Sec. 35-74. - Forfeiture of exemption; penalty and interest. 
(a)  The partial exemption for each tax year shall be conditioned upon the payment of the nonexempt amount of real estate taxes on the property on the payment deadlines of each tax year; if, through the fault of the owner, these real estate taxes are not paid on or before these deadlines, the partial exemption for that tax year shall be forfeited. 
(b)  Late payments shall be subject to the penalty and interest provisions of section 35-37 of this Code, with penalty and interest calculated on the total amount of taxes due as if the property were not exempt. 
(Ord. No. 2786, 9-23-03)  
Secs. 35-75—35-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - EXEMPTION FOR REHABILITATED RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE 
 
Sec. 35-80.1. - Exemption for historically significant rehabilitated structures. 
(a)  Finding; purpose. The city council hereby recognizes the educational and cultural value of the city's historically significant structures. The purpose of this section is to assist in the preservation of such structures, and to that end, the substantial rehabilitation of historically significant structures shall entitle the owner to a partial exemption from real estate taxes or real estate tax credit, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this section. The real estate assessor shall administer this section with guidance from the director of planning as to the effect of rehabilitation projects on the historical significance of structures. 
(b)  Eligibility for exemption. To be eligible for the partial exemption from real estate taxation or tax credit provided by this section, a structure shall be historically significant and no less than fifty (50) years of age at the time the application is made. Any such exemption shall only apply to rehabilitated existing structures, and shall not apply to new construction. For the purpose of this section: 
(1)  "Rehabilitation" shall mean the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural values; 
(2)  "Historically significant structure" shall mean a structure listed on the Virginia Beach Historical Register, as established in section 8-91 of this Code, or a structure eligible for listing on the register, and for which an application for inclusion on the register is pending at the time rehabilitation commences; and 
(3)  "Qualifying costs" include the costs of all work done to the structural components, heating, plumbing and electrical systems of the building, work done to update kitchens and bathrooms, work necessary for compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act, the installation of fire suppression systems and fire escapes, reasonable architectural and engineering fees, construction period interest and taxes, and construction management costs. Acquisition costs, site work and landscaping elements and any expenses attributable to additions or enlargements of the building shall not be included. 
Structures rehabilitated for residential use, hotel or motel structures, and commercial or industrial structures, as provided by Code of Virginia §§ 58.1-3220, 58.1-3220.1, 58.1-3220.01, and 58.1-3221, respectively, shall be eligible for the partial exemption provided by this section. The tax credit provided by this section shall be available only to those property owners who, in addition to meeting the foregoing requirements, meet the requirements set forth in subsection (f)(2). 
(c)  Application for exemption; base value. To qualify for a partial tax exemption for the rehabilitation of a historically significant structure, the owner(s) of such structure shall, at the same time an application is made for a building permit to rehabilitate such structure, file with the real estate assessor an application and construction plans. The application shall be on a form created and supplied by the real estate assessor. Among the other information supplied, the applicant shall estimate on the application form the qualifying costs of the rehabilitation project and any increase in value of the structure that may result. Such application must be filed prior to the commencement of any rehabilitation work for which an exemption is sought. No structure shall be eligible for such exemption unless the appropriate building permit(s) have been acquired. 
(d)  Review of application and plans. The director of planning or his designee shall review all applications, plans and other information submitted that relate to a rehabilitation project for which the exemption provided by this section is sought. If, after reviewing the application and plans for a proposed rehabilitation project, the director of planning determines in writing that the proposed project will diminish the historical significance of the structure, the real estate assessor shall, by certified mail, inform the applicant that the exemption will be denied for the proposed rehabilitation. If the director of planning determines in writing that a proposed rehabilitation project will restore or maintain the historical significance of the structure, the real estate assessor shall notify the applicant that the project has been approved for the exemption, subject to compliance with the terms of this section. The assessment of the structure for the current tax year, prior to commencement of the rehabilitation, shall constitute the base value of the structure. The director of planning shall endeavor to make a determination within thirty (30) days from the date a completed application is received, and all applications, plans or other materials submitted by the applicant shall be returned to the real estate assessor after the review and inspection process is completed. 
(e)  Inspection; effective date. Within thirty (30) days of the rehabilitation project's completion, the owner shall notify the real estate assessor in writing that the project has been completed. The real estate assessor shall transmit this notice to the director of planning, which shall then inspect the rehabilitated structure to verify that the work has been completed as described in the previously filed application and plans. If the director of planning verifies in writing that such rehabilitation project has been satisfactorily completed, the real estate assessor shall so notify the applicant. The real estate assessor shall then reassess the rehabilitated structure, and record the new value as provided by law. Such verification and re-assessment shall be performed within sixty (60) days after such written notice of completion is received. Any tax exemption shall become effective on July 1 of the year following completion of the rehabilitation project. No structure shall be eligible for the partial exemption provided by this section unless the director of planning verifies that the rehabilitation work described on the application and plans has been completed in substantially the same manner described in the previously filed application and plans. In any case where the work performed substantially varies from the work described in the application and plans, the real estate assessor shall notify the applicant that the exemption will be denied. 
(f)  Exemption and tax credit for rehabilitated historically significant structures for residential use. The exemption for rehabilitated historically significant structures for residential use shall be calculated and applied as set forth below: 
(1)  For rehabilitated historically significant structures for residential use, the exemption shall be in an amount equal to the greater of the initial increase in assessed value of the structure resulting from the rehabilitation of the structure, as determined by the real estate assessor, or an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the qualifying costs of the rehabilitation, as defined in subsection (b)(3), not to exceed the amount of the assessment of the structure at any time after its rehabilitation. The applicant shall submit to the real estate assessor documentation of all qualifying costs incurred as a basis for the exemption, and shall execute an affidavit stating that all such costs were incurred as part of the project. The exemption shall run with the land for fifteen (15) years. No increase in assessment occurring after the first year of such rehabilitation exemption shall qualify for an increase in such exemption. In the event of a decrease in the property's assessed value after the first year of any rehabilitation exemption, the exemption shall be based on the difference in taxes computed on the base value and the decreased assessed value of the property. 
(2)  In addition to the exemption provided for in this subsection, there shall also be a real estate tax credit for rehabilitated historically significant structures for residential use for those property owners who have purchased and rehabilitated, in accordance with the provisions of this section, a historically significant structure for residential use which at the time of purchase was encumbered by local property tax liens exceeding fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the property. Such tax credit shall be in an amount equal to the total amount of the tax liens, not to exceed the amount by which the local property tax liens exceeded fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the property at the time of purchase. The credit shall be applied upon completion of the rehabilitation and may be allocated by the property owner over a period of no longer than ten (10) years. 
(3)  By August 15 of each year of the period of exemption from real estate taxes, the real estate assessor shall notify the city treasurer of the exemption and tax credit, if any, and the amount to be credited to the property owner's tax bill. 
(g)  Exemption for rehabilitated historically significant commercial or industrial structures. The exemption for rehabilitated historically significant commercial or industrial structures shall be calculated and applied as set forth below: 
(1)  For rehabilitated historically significant commercial or industrial structures, the exemption shall be an amount equal to the greater of the initial increase in assessed value of the structure above its base value resulting from the rehabilitation of the structure, as determined by the real estate assessor, or an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the qualifying costs of rehabilitating the structure; provided, however, that the amount of the exemption provided by this subsection shall not exceed the amount of the assessment of the structure at any time after its rehabilitation. This exemption shall run with the land for fifteen (15) years. No increase in assessment occurring after the first year of such rehabilitation exemption shall qualify for an increase in such exemption. In the event of a decrease in the property's assessed value after the first year of any rehabilitation exemption, the exemption shall be based on the difference in taxes computed on the base value and the decreased assessed value of the property. The applicant shall submit to the real estate assessor documentation of all qualifying costs incurred as a basis for the exemption, and shall execute an affidavit stating that all such costs were incurred as part of the project. 
(2)  By August 15 of each year of the period of exemption from real estate taxes, the real estate assessor shall notify the city treasurer of the exemption and the amount to be credited to the property owner's tax bill. 
(h)  Exemption for rehabilitated historically significant hotel or motel structures. The exemption for rehabilitated historically significant hotel or motel structures shall be calculated and applied as set forth below: 
(1)  For rehabilitated historically significant hotel or motel structures, the exemption shall be in an amount equal to ninety (90) percent of the total assessed value of the rehabilitated structure, not to exceed the increase in the assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation of the structure as determined by the real estate assessor. The exemption shall commence upon completion of the rehabilitation, renovation or replacement and shall run with the real estate for a period of twenty-five (25) years. No increase in assessment occurring after the first year of such rehabilitation exemption shall qualify for an increase in such exemption. In the event of a decrease in the property's assessed value after the first year of any rehabilitation exemption, the exemption shall be based on the difference in taxes computed on the base value and the decreased assessed value of the property. 
(2)  By August 15 of each year of the period of exemption from real estate taxes, the real estate assessor shall notify the city treasurer of the exemption and the amount to be credited to the property owner's tax bill. 
(i)  Land book. The real estate assessor shall not list or display any exemption provided by this section as a reduced value in the land book. 
(j)  Ineligibility for exemption or tax credit; termination of same. Improvements made upon vacant land, demolition or total replacements of historically significant structures, and rehabilitation efforts that the planning director has determined, in writing, will diminish the historical significance of a structure shall not be eligible for the partial exemption from real estate taxation or tax credit provided by this section. Failure to comply with any provision of this section or the making of false statements in applying for the exemption or tax credit provided by this section shall constitute grounds for denial of the exemption or tax credit. Changes to a structure that, after a rehabilitation project has been completed and an exemption or tax credit granted, cause it to be removed from the Virginia Beach Historical Register, shall terminate the exemption and tax credit provided by this section, effective July 1 of the next tax year. 
(Ord. No. 1964, 6-4-90; Ord. No. 2567, 11-23-99; Ord. No. 3022, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3254, § 2, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 3301, 8-13-13)  
ARTICLE III. - RETAIL SALES TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Retail sales and use tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-600 et seq. 
 
Sec. 35-81. - Levied; rate; price brackets; no discount. 
There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes and fees of every kind now imposed, a general retail sales tax at the rate of one percent to provide revenue for the general fund of the city. The rate of tax shall be added to the rate of the retail sales tax imposed by chapter 8.1 of title 58 [chapter 6 of title 58.1] of the Code of Virginia (Virginia Retail Sales and Use Tax) and such tax shall be subject to all of the provisions of such chapter and all amendments thereof and the rules and regulations published with respect thereto, except that the applicable brackets of prices shall be as prescribed in sections 58-441.50 and 58-441.51 [58.1-628] of the Code of Virginia for the combined tax, and except that no discount under section 58-441.25 [58.1-622] of the Code of Virginia shall be allowed on the tax levied by this section. This tax shall not apply to artificial or propane gas, firewood, coal or home heating oil used for domestic consumption as defined in section 58-441.6(g1) [58.1-608(9)] of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1965, § 33-92; Ord. No. 1233, 11-2-81)  
Sec. 35-82. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city council, in adopting this article, to levy the general retail sales tax authorized to be levied by section 58-441.49 [58.1-605] of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1965, § 33-91)  
Sec. 35-83. - Administration and collection. 
The general retail sales tax imposed and levied by this article shall be administered and collected by the state tax commissioner, as provided by law. 
(Code 1965, § 33.93) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605D.  
Secs. 35-84—35-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TAX ON NET CAPITAL OF BANKS 
 
Sec. 35-96. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
Bank shall be defined as in section 58-485.01 [58.1-1201] of the Code of Virginia. 
Net capital shall mean a bank's net capital computed pursuant to section 58-485.07 [58.1-1205] of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1050, § 33-41, 6-16-80)  
Sec. 35-97. - Levied; amount. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of chapter 10.01 of title 58 [chapter 12 of title 58.1] of the Code of Virginia, there is hereby levied and imposed, for the calendar year beginning January 1, 1980 and ending December 31, 1980, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless otherwise changed by the council, upon each bank located within the city, a tax on net capital equaling eighty (80) percent of the state rate of the franchise tax set forth in section 58-485.06 [58.1-1204] of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  There is also levied and imposed, in the same manner and at the same rate, a tax on the capital of any bank located within the boundaries of the city which is not the principal office, but is a branch extension or affiliation of the principal office. The tax upon such branch shall be apportioned as provided by section 58-485.012 [58.1-1211] of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1050, § 33-40, 6-16-80)  
Sec. 35-98. - Bank's return and schedules. 
(a)  On or after the first day of January of each year, but not later than March first of any such year, all banks whose principal offices are located within the city shall prepare and file with the commissioner of revenue a return, as provided by section 58-485.013 [58.1-1207] of the Code of Virginia, in duplicate, which shall set forth the tax on net capital computed pursuant to chapter 10.01 of title 58 [chapter 12 of title 58.1] of the Code of Virginia. The commissioner of revenue shall certify a copy of such filing of the bank's return and schedules and shall forthwith transmit such certified copy to the state department of taxation. 
(b)  In the event that the principal office of a bank is located outside the city and such bank has branch offices located within the city, in addition to the filing requirements set forth above in subsection (a), any bank conducting such branch business shall file with the commissioner of revenue a copy of the real estate deduction schedule, apportionment and other items which are required by sections 58-485.012 [58.1-1211], 58-485.013 [58.1-1207] and 58-485.014 [58.1-1212] of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1050, § 33-42, 6-16-80)  
Sec. 35-99. - Payment. 
Each bank, on or before the first day of June of each year, shall pay into the treasurer's office of the city all taxes imposed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1050, § 33-42, 6-16-80)  
Sec. 35-100. - Failure or neglect of bank to comply with article. 
Any bank which shall fail or neglect to comply with any provision of this article shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), which fine shall be recovered, upon motion, after five (5) days' notice, in the circuit court of the city. The motion shall be in the name of the city and shall be presented by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1050, § 33-43, 6-16-80)  
Secs. 35-101—35-113. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TAX ON PURCHASERS OF UTILITY SERVICES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Note— This Ord. No. 2615 shall be effective on January 1, 2001, and the conversion of tax to either monthly CCF delivered (in the case of natural gas) or monthly kWh delivered (in the case of electricity) shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed shall be in effect. 
 
Sec. 35-114. - Definitions. 
Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
CCF means a volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of one hundred (100) cubic feet. 
Consumer means every person who, individually or through an agent, employee, officer, representative or permittee, makes a taxable purchase of water, electricity, natural gas or other utility service in the City of Virginia Beach. 
Gas utility means a public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service in Virginia. 
Kilowatt hours (kWh) delivered means one thousand (1,000) watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called cogenerators) as defined in Code of Virginia § 56-594, it means kWh supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kWh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators. 
Master-metered means one metered utility service point serving more than one residential consumer. 
Person includes any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company or partnership, and any combination of individuals of whatever form and character. 
Pipeline distribution company means a person, other than a pipeline transmission company, which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas, manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or by-products thereof to a purchaser for purposes of furnishing heat or light. 
Residential consumer means the owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes as classified by the utility service provider. 
Service provider means a person who delivers utility services to consumers, including a person who delivers electricity, a gas utility or pipeline distribution company that delivers natural gas, or a person who delivers water. 
Used primarily relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric, natural gas or other utility service is furnished. 
Utility service includes electric service, water service and gas service, whether generally termed a utility service or not, for which the consumer is rendered a separate invoice by the service provider, furnished in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 33-11; Ord. No. 1227, 9-28-81; Ord. No. 2323, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2615, 10-24-00)  
Sec. 35-115. - Levy of water utility consumer tax. 
(a)  In accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814, as amended, there is hereby imposed and levied by the city, upon each residential consumer of water utility service, a tax in the amount of twenty (20) percent of the charge, exclusive of any federal tax thereon, made by the service provider against the consumer with respect to such water utility service. There is excluded from the tax imposed and levied by this section so much of the charge, exclusive of any federal tax thereon, made by the service provider against the consumer of water utility service in excess of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for any single-family unit for any month or part of a month. Where more than one single-family unit is served by one meter, in computing such maximum of fifteen dollars ($15.00), the same shall be multiplied by the number of single-family units served by such meter. 
(b)  In accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814, as amended, there is hereby imposed and levied by the city, upon each commercial or industrial consumer of water utility service, a tax in the amount of fifteen (15) percent of the first six hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00) of the monthly charge and five (5) percent on the amount between six hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00) and two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) of the monthly charge for any single billing for water utility service, exclusive of any federal tax thereon, made by the service provider against the consumer with respect to such utility service. The tax imposed by this section shall not be applied to any portion of a monthly charge for any single water utility service to a commercial or industrial consumer that exceeds two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the words "commercial or industrial consumer" shall not be construed to include a consumer in the business of renting apartments or other such dwelling units as to utility service furnished directly to an apartment or other such dwelling unit; provided, however, that utility services purchased by such consumer through separate meters for hallways, swimming pools, outside lighting and other accessory uses shall be deemed commercial or industrial consumption. 
(Code 1965, §§ 33-12, 33-20—33-21.2; Ord. No. 1178, 5-15-81; Ord. No. 1227, 9-28-81; Ord. No. 1535, 5-10-85; Ord. No. 2323, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2443, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 2615, 10-24-00)  
Sec. 35-115.1. - Levy of electric utility consumer tax. 
(a)  In accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity delivered by a service provider to the following classes of consumers, such classes to be defined by the service provider, as set forth below: 
(1)  Residential consumers, including residential consumers receiving service from a master meter, shall pay a minimum tax of one dollar and forty cents ($1.40), plus a tax at the rate of $0.014771 per kWh delivered monthly, with the total tax not to exceed three dollars ($3.00) per month. 
(2)  Non-residential consumers shall pay, for each meter, a monthly tax at the rates per month for the classes of non-residential consumers as set forth below: 
(i)  Commercial consumers shall pay a minimum tax of one dollar and seventy-two cents ($1.72), plus a tax at the rate of $0.010057 per kWh on the first nine thousand one hundred fifty-one (9,151) kWhs delivered monthly, and at the rate of $0.002831 per kWh on all remaining kWhs delivered monthly; provided, however, that the total monthly tax shall not exceed one hundred sixty-two dollars and fifty cents ($162.50). 
(ii)  Industrial consumers shall pay a minimum tax of one dollar and seventy-two cents ($1.72), plus a tax at the rate of $0.009253 per kWh on the first nine thousand nine hundred forty-six (9,946) kWhs delivered monthly, and at the rate of $0.001190 per kWh on all remaining kWhs delivered monthly; provided, however, that the total monthly tax shall not exceed one hundred sixty-two dollars and fifty cents ($162.50). 
(b)  Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this section if they are submitted twelve (12) times per year and cover periods of approximately thirty (30) days each. Accordingly, the tax for a bi-monthly bill (approximately sixty (60) days) shall be determined as follows: 
(i)  The kWh will be divided by 2; 
(ii)  A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; 
(iii)  The tax determined by (ii) shall be multiplied by 2; and 
(iv)  The tax in (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax." 
(Ord. No. 2615, 10-24-00) 
Note— This Ord. No. 2615 shall be effective on January 1, 2001, and the conversion of tax to either monthly CCF delivered (in the case of natural gas) or monthly kWh delivered (in the case of electricity) shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed shall be in effect.  
Sec. 35-115.2. - Levy of natural gas utility consumer tax. 
(a)  In accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of natural gas delivered to consumers by pipeline distribution companies and gas utilities, classified by "class of consumers" as such term is defined in Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814(J), as set forth below: 
(1)  Residential consumers, including residential consumers receiving service from a master meter, shall pay a minimum tax of one dollar and ninety-eight cents ($1.98), plus a tax at the rate of $0.162451 on each CCF delivered monthly, with the total tax not to exceed three dollars ($3.00) per month. 
(2)  Non-residential consumers shall pay, for each meter, a monthly tax at the rates per month for the classes of non-residential consumers as set forth below: 
(i)  Commercial consumers shall pay a minimum tax of one dollar and ninety-four cents ($1.94), plus a tax at the rate of $0.097668 per CCF on the first nine hundred sixty-one (961) CCFs delivered monthly, and at the rate of $0.031362 per CCF on all remaining CCFs delivered monthly; provided, however, that the total monthly tax shall not exceed one hundred sixty-two dollars and fifty cents ($162.50). 
(ii)  Industrial consumers shall pay a minimum tax of one dollar and ninety-four cents ($1.94), plus a tax at the rate of $0.097668 per CCF on the first nine hundred sixty-one (961) CCFs delivered monthly, and at the rate of $0.031362 per CCF on all remaining CCFs delivered monthly; provided, however, that the total monthly tax shall not exceed one hundred sixty-two dollars and fifty cents ($162.50). 
(b)  Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this section if they are submitted twelve (12) times per year and cover periods of approximately thirty (30) days each. Accordingly, the tax for a bi-monthly bill (approximately sixty (60) days) shall be determined as follows: 
(i)  The CCF will be divided by 2; 
(ii)  A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; 
(iii)  The tax determined by (ii) shall be multiplied by 2; and 
(iv)  The tax in (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax". 
(Code 1965, §§ 33-12, 33-20—33-21.2; Ord. No. 1178, 5-15-81; Ord. No. 1227, 9-28-81; Ord. No. 1535, 5-10-85; Ord. No. 2323, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2443, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 2615, 10-24-00) 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812, 58.1-3814.  
Sec. 35-116. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2323, adopted May 9, 1995, deleted provisions formerly codified as § 35-116, which pertained to the applicability of the tax levied by this article to telephone service, and which was derived from Code 1965, § 33-18.  
Sec. 35-117. - Exemptions. 
The United States of America and the state, together with the boards, commissions and authorities thereof, are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this article with respect to the purchase of utility services used by such governmental agencies. 
(Code 1965, § 33-17)  
Sec. 35-118. - Computation when service provider collects charges periodically. 
Except as provided otherwise in this article, when the service provider collects the price for utility services periodically, the tax imposed and levied by this article may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases or consumption, as applicable, during such period; provided, that the amount of the tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Code 1965, § 33-19; Ord. No. 2615, 10-24-00)  
Sec. 35-119. - Duty of service provider to collect, report and remit; penalty and interest. 
(a)  The service provider shall bill the utility tax to all consumers who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers utility service, and shall report and remit taxes collected each month to the city treasurer on or before the last day of the succeeding month of collection. The required report shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to the city in accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814(F) and (G), and Code of Virginia § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for utility service but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify the city treasurer of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and, upon collection of the bill or any part thereof, must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for utility service and the tax and remit the tax portion to the city. Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to the city. 
(b)  Failure to remit the taxes so collected to the city treasurer on or before the due date set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall result in a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount due or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater, which shall be added to the amount due. In addition, interest at the rate of ten (10) percent annually from the first day following the last day the taxes are due to be remitted may be added to the overdue principal and penalty, and collected from the delinquent seller. 
(Code 1965, §§ 33-12, 33-13, 33-15; Ord. No. 1178, 5-15-81; Ord. No. 2323, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2615, 10-24-00)  
Sec. 35-120. - Service provider's records. 
Each service provider shall keep complete records showing all purchases and consumption of utility services in the city, which records shall show the price charged against each consumer with respect to each purchase and amounts of service consumed, the date thereof and the amount of tax imposed under this article. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times for a period of three (3) years from the date such records were created. The duly authorized agents of the city may make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Code 1965, § 33-16; Ord. No. 2615, 10-24-00)  
Sec. 35-121. - Duties of city treasurer and commissioner of the revenue. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall be charged with the collection of the taxes levied and imposed by this article and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue shall be charged with registering service providers for collection of the taxes levied by this article and periodically auditing their reports of taxes collected. 
(Code 1965, § 33-14; Ord. No. 2615, 10-24-00)  
Sec. 35-122. - Failure of consumer to pay; violations of article by seller. 
Any consumer failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed or levied by this article and any service provider or officer, agent or employee of any service provider violating the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction for such violation shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Code 1965, § 33-22; Ord. No. 2615, 10-24-00)  
Sec. 35-123. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2323, adopted May 9, 1995, deleted § 35-123, which pertained to the utility tax for the E-911 telephone system, and which derived from Ord. No. 1562, adopted Oct. 14, 1985; and Ord. No. 2215, adopted May 11, 1993.  
Secs. 35-124—35-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TAX ON MEALS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2791, adopted Dec. 9, 2003, changed the title of Art. VI of this chapter from "Tax on Purchase of Food at Restaurants" to "Tax on Meals." 
Cross reference— Food establishments, Ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 35-136. - Definitions. 
Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Cater means the furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for compensation. 
City treasurer means the treasurer of the city and any of his duly authorized deputies, assistants or other employees. 
Commissioner of the revenue means the commissioner of the revenue of the city and any of his duly authorized deputies, assistants or other employees. 
Food means all food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time, or place of service. 
Food establishment means any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the city, including, but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, café, snack bar, lunch counter, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream or yogurt shop, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, brewery, winery, distillery, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private. The term "food establishment" shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food is sold for immediate consumption. A grocery store or similar establishment may be included in the definition of "food establishment" subject to the application of section 35-138(c). 
Meal means any prepared food or beverages, ready for immediate consumption, offered or held out for sale by a food establishment. All such food or beverages, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
Person means: 
(a)  Where the food establishment is a corporation, the president or managing agent of such corporation. 
(b)  Where the food establishment is an unincorporated partnership or association, the general partner, partners, or managing agent of such unincorporated partnership or association. 
(c)  Where the food establishment is a sole proprietorship, the owner or managing agent of such sole proprietorship. 
(Code 1965, § 33-75; Ord. No. 1316, 8-9-82; Ord. No. 2441, 3-25-97; Ord. No 2475, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2601, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 3505, § 1, 6-20-17; Ord. No. 3515, 8-1-17)  
Sec. 35-137. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby imposed and levied on each person a tax equivalent to five and one-half (5.5) percent on the total amount paid for any meal purchased from any food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not and whether consumed on the premises or not. The rate of this tax shall be reduced by one (1) percent on June 30, 2027. The tax shall be computed at a straight five and one-half (5.5) percent, any fraction of one-half or more being treated as one cent ($0.01). 
(Code 1965, § 33-76; Ord. No. 1181, 5-15-81; Ord. No. 1275, 5-14-82; Ord. No. 1371-1, 5-12-83; Ord. No. 1824, 12-19-88; Ord. No. 2020, 12-6-90; Ord. No. 2194, 11-24-92; Ord. No 2475, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2601, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 2637, 5-15-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2637, adopted May 15, 2001, which amended § 35-137 above, shall be effective July 1, 2001.  
Sec. 35-138. - Exemptions; limits on application. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on candy, gum, nuts, and other items of essentially the same nature served for on- or off-premises consumption. 
(b)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption: 
(1)  Donuts, crackers, chips, cookies, and other factory-prepackaged items of essentially the same nature. Such items that are not factory-prepackaged are subject to the tax imposed under this article provided the items are not sold in quantities that are exempted by subsection (b)(2). 
(2)  Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this article, a bulk sale shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary, and usual portion sold for on-premises consumption (e.g., a whole cake or a gallon of ice cream); a bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption. 
(3)  Alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages sold in factory-sealed containers. 
(4)  Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the Food Stamp Program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children. 
(5)  Any food or food product purchased for home consumption, as defined in the federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 U.S.C. § 2012, as amended, except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. The following items, whether or not purchased for immediate consumption, are excluded from the federal Food Stamp Act definition and are thus subject to the tax imposed under this article: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, and nonfactory-sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subparagraphs (d)(3), (4) and (5) herein below. 
(c)  A grocery store, supermarket, or convenience store shall be subject to the tax imposed under this article for prepackaged sandwiches and wraps, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, non-factory-sealed beverages, pizza slices, and non-factory-prepackaged items included in subsection (b)(1). 
(d)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following purchases of food and beverages: 
(1)  Food and beverages furnished by restaurants (or other food establishments) to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee. 
(2)  Food and beverages sold by a day care center, public or private elementary or secondary school, or any college or university to its students or employees. 
(3)  Food and beverages purchased for use or consumption by, and which are paid for directly by, the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth, or the United States. 
(4)  Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm or handicapped, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof. 
(5)  Food and beverages furnished by a nonprofit charitable organization to elderly, infirm, handicapped, or needy persons in their homes or at central locations. 
(6)  Food and beverages sold on an occasional basis, not exceeding three (3) times per calendar year, by a nonprofit educational, charitable, or benevolent organization, church, or religious body as a fund-raising activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for non-profit educational, charitable, benevolent, or religious purposes. 
(7)  Food and beverages sold through vending machines. 
(8)  Other food and beverages exempted by Code of Va., § 58.1-3840. 
(Code 1965, §§ 33-77, 33-86; Ord. No. 2475, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2601, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 3165, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 3515, 8-1-17)  
Sec. 35-138.1. - Gratuities and service charges. 
(a)  Where a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax imposed by this article, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's account; provided, in the latter case, that the full amount of the gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller. 
(b)  An amount or percent, whether designated as a gratuity, tip, or service charge, that is added to the price of the meal by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser, to the extent that such mandatory gratuity, tip or service charge does not exceed twenty (20) percent of the sales price, is not subject to the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2475, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2601, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 2967, 1-9-07)  
Sec. 35-139. - Collection. 
(a)  Every person receiving any payment for a meal subject to the tax levied under this article shall collect the amount of tax imposed under this article from the purchaser on whom the same is levied, or from the purchaser paying for such meal, at the time payment for such meal, is made. The taxes so collected shall be held in trust for the city by the person required to collect such taxes until remitted as provided in this article. The wrongful and fraudulent use of such collections other than remittance as provided by this article constitutes embezzlement, as provided by Code of Virginia § 58.1-3833. 
(b)  No blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Visually Handicapped and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes. 
(Code 1965, §§ 33-79, 33-80; Ord. No. 1316, 8-9-82; Ord. No 2475, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2601, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03)  
Sec. 35-140. - Reports and remittances generally. 
(a)  The person collecting any tax as provided in section 35-139 shall make out a report, upon forms created by the treasurer that shall request all information that the commissioner of the revenue and the treasurer may require, and shall sign and deliver such report to the city treasurer with a remittance of such tax. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the twentieth day of each month, covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. 
(b)  Late filing penalty. 
(1)  If a report is not filed on or before the due date set forth in subsection (a) above, there shall be added a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the tax assessable on such return or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax assessable. Such penalty shall not be assessed until the day after the report is due. Any such penalty, when assessed, shall become part of the tax. 
(2)  No penalty for failing to file a report shall be assessed if such failure was not the fault of the taxpayer or was the fault of the commissioner of the revenue. The commissioner of the revenue shall make determinations of fault relating to failure to file a report. 
(c)  The treasurer shall provide the commissioner of the revenue by the fifteenth of each month with copies of all reports submitted in the preceding month by persons required to collect the tax levied by this article. 
(Code 1965, § 33-81; Ord. No. 1316, 8-9-82; Ord. No 2475, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2601, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03)  
Sec. 35-141. - Collectors' records. 
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for a period of five (5) years, records showing all purchases taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date of each purchase, the taxes collected thereon, the amount of tax required to be collected by this article, and such other information as may be determined by the commissioner of the revenue to be necessary to assess the amount of tax such person may have been responsible for collecting and paying to the city. The commissioner of revenue shall have the power to inspect and make copies of such records at all reasonable times for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 33-84; Ord. No. 2475, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 35-142. - Duty of collector when going out or disposing of business. 
Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under this article to the city shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Code 1965, § 33-85)  
Sec. 35-143. - Penalty for late remittance. 
If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail to remit to the city treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid under this article within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the city treasurer a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount due or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall not exceed the amount due. A penalty for failure to pay the tax due under this article shall not be imposed if it was not the fault of the taxpayer or was the fault of the treasurer. 
(Code 1965, § 33-82; Ord. No 2475, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2800, 3-9-04)  
Sec. 35-143.1. - Willful failure to file returns or collect or truthfully account for tax. 
(a)  Any corporate, partnership or limited liability company officer who willfully fails to pay, collect, or truthfully account for and pay over the tax imposed under this article, or willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such tax or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to other penalties imposed by law, be liable for a penalty of the amount of tax evaded or not paid, collected, or accounted for and paid over, to be assessed and collected in the same manner as such taxes are assessed and collected. 
(b)  Any corporate, partnership or limited liability company officer as defined in this section, or any other person required to collect, account for, or pay over the tax imposed under this article, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for such tax, or who willfully evades, or attempts to evade such tax, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  The term "corporate, partnership or limited liability company officer" as used in this section means an officer or employee of a corporation, a member or employee of a partnership or a member, manager or employee of a limited liability company who, as such officer, employee, member or manager, is under a duty to perform on behalf of the corporation, partnership or limited liability company the act in respect of which the violation occurs and who (i) had actual knowledge of the failure or attempt as set forth herein, and (ii) had authority to prevent such failure or attempt. 
(Ord. No. 2475, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2601, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 3505, § 1, 6-20-17)  
Sec. 35-144. - Procedure upon failure to report, etc. 
(a)  If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, the reports and remittances mentioned in this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall obtain facts and information necessary to create an estimate of the tax due. Within ten (10) days from the date the tax was due, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and late filing penalty established at section 35-140(b), and shall notify such person, by hand delivery, facsimile or certified mail, of the total amount of such tax and penalties; a copy of the assessment shall be delivered simultaneously to the treasurer. The total amount thereof shall be payable immediately, and the treasurer shall proceed to collect same as authorized by law. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of revenue to ascertain the name of every person operating a food establishment in the city, liable for the collection of the tax levied by this article, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make, within the time provided by this article, the reports or remittances required by this article. The treasurer may apply for the issuance of a warrant or summons for such person, or, in the case of violations of Code of Virginia § 58.1-3833, request the assistance of the commonwealth's attorney, as provided by law. 
(c)  Any person issued an estimated assessment as described in subsection (a), who is aggrieved by the assessment, may apply to the commissioner of the revenue for correction as provided by Code of Virginia § 58.1-3980. 
(Code 1965, §§ 33-83, 33-87; Ord. No. 2441, 3-25-97; Ord. No 2475, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03)  
Sec. 35-145. - Food establishment operator not to advertise that he will pay or absorb tax. 
No person operating a food establishment shall advertise in any manner, directly or indirectly, that he will absorb or pay all or any part of the tax levied by this article. 
(Code 1965, § 33-78; Ord. No 2475, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 35-146. - Violations of article. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each violation of, or failure to comply with, this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the taxes provided for in this article. An agreement by any person to pay the taxes provided for in this article by a series of installment payments shall not relieve such person of criminal liability for violation of this article until the full amount of taxes agreed to be paid by such person is received by the treasurer. 
(Code 1965, § 33-89; Ord. No. 1316, 8-9-82; Ord. No 2475, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 35-147. - Duties of commissioner of the revenue and city treasurer. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue shall be charged with auditing the reports required by this article, ensuring that food establishments are registered to collect the tax levied by this article, and responding to all inquiries that may be made by taxpayers or persons operating food establishments. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall be charged with the receipt and collection of the taxes imposed and levied by this article, and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03)  
Secs. 35-148—35-157. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - TAX ON TRANSIENTS OBTAINING LODGING[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1185, adopted May 18, 1981, amended Art. VII (title) and Code 1965, § 33-47, deleting "board and" from the phrase "board and lodging." Following the apparent intent of the ordinance, after consultation with the city, the editor has deleted "board" wherever it appears in §§ 35-159—35-167. 
Cross reference— Hotels and similar establishments, Ch. 15. 
 
Sec. 35-158. - Definitions. 
Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words and phrases, when used in this article shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
City treasurer. "City treasurer" means the treasurer of the city and any of his duly authorized deputies and agents. 
Commissioner of revenue. "Commissioner of revenue" means the commissioner of revenue of the city and any of his duly authorized deputies and agents. 
Lodging. "Lodging" means any room or rooms, lodging or space furnished to any transient. 
Lodging place. "Lodging place" means any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or house, tourist camp, tourist cabin, camping grounds, motel, rooming house or other lodging place within the city offering lodging, for compensation, to any transient. 
Transient. "Transient" means any person who, for any period of not more than ninety (90) consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging in any lodging place. 
(Code 1965, § 33-47; Ord. No. 1185, 5-18-81; Ord. No. 2298, 11-1-94; Ord. No. 2441, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 35-159. - Levied; amount. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed on each transient a tax equivalent to eight (8) percent of the total amount paid for lodging, by or for any such transient, to any lodging place, plus a flat tax of two dollars ($2.00) for each night of lodging at any lodging place other than a campground. The percentage-based portion of the tax rate shall be reduced by two and one-half (2.5) percent on June 30, 2027. One dollar ($1.00) of the flat tax dedicated to the Tourism Advertising Program shall remain in effect through June 30, 2023, and the remaining one dollar ($1.00) dedicated to the Tourism Investment Program shall be in effect through December 31, 2021. 
(b)  There is hereby levied and imposed on each transient within the Sandbridge Special Service District (district) a tax, in addition to that levied in subsection (a) hereof, equivalent to one and one-half percent of the total amount paid for lodging within the district, by or for any such transient to any lodging place, excluding hotels, motels and travel campgrounds. 
(Code 1965, § 33-48; Ord. No. 1825, 12-19-88; Ord. No. 2019, 12-6-90; Ord. No. 044, 3-12-91; Ord. No. 2108, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 2192, 11-21-92; Ord. No. 35-159, 2-2-93; Ord. No. 2298, 11-1-94; Ord. No. 2347, 8-22-95; Ord. No. 2383, 5-24-96; Ord. No. 2447, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 2577, 5-9-00; Ord. No. 2635, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2819, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 3010, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3273, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 3408, § 1, 5-12-15; Ord. No. 3430, § 1, 11-3-15; Ord. No. 3557, 5-15-18) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 3408 states, "Subject to appropriation by the City Council, such revenues generated by the flat tax enacted above shall be dedicated to the Tourism Investment Program."  
Sec. 35-160. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be payable under this article in any of the following instances: 
(1)  On charges for lodging paid by any official or employee of the federal government or of this state or city, when on official business. 
(2)  On charges for lodging paid to any hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home or home for aged people. 
(Code 1965, § 33-55)  
Sec. 35-161. - Collection. 
Every person receiving any payment for lodging with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of such tax so imposed from the transient on whom such tax is levied, or from the person paying for such lodging, at the time payment for such lodging is made. The taxes required to be collected under this section shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect such taxes, until remitted as required in this article. 
(Code 1965, § 33-49)  
Sec. 35-162. - Reports and remittances generally. 
(a)  The person collecting any tax as provided in section 35-139 shall make out a report, upon forms created by the treasurer that shall request all information that the commissioner of the revenue and the treasurer may require, and shall sign and deliver such report to the city treasurer with a remittance of such tax. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the twentieth day of each month, covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. 
(b)  Late filing penalty. 
(1)  If a report is not filed on or before the due date set forth in subsection (a) above, there shall be added a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the tax assessable on such return or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax assessable. Such penalty shall not be assessed until the day after the report is due. Any such penalty, when assessed, shall become part of the tax. 
(2)  No penalty for failing to file a report shall be assessed if such failure was not the fault of the taxpayer or was the fault of the commissioner of the revenue. The commissioner of the revenue shall make determinations of fault relating to failure to file a report. 
(c)  The treasurer shall provide the commissioner of the revenue by the fifteenth of each month with copies of all reports submitted in the preceding month by persons required to collect the tax levied by this article. 
(Code 1965, § 33-50; Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03)  
Sec. 35-163. - Collector's records. 
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and to preserve, for a period of five (5) years, such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been responsible for collecting and paying to the city. The commissioner of revenue may inspect such records at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1965, § 33-53; Ord. No. 2966, 1-9-07)  
Sec. 35-164. - Duty of collector going out or disposing of business. 
Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under this article to the city shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Code 1965, § 33-54)  
Sec. 35-165. - Penalty for late remittance or false return. 
(a)  If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall file or refuse to remit to the city treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid under this article, within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the city treasurer a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount due or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall not exceed the amount due. 
(b)  A penalty for failure to pay the tax due under this article shall not be imposed if it was not the fault of the taxpayer or was the fault of the treasurer. 
(Code 1965, § 33-51; Ord. No. 2800, 3-9-04)  
Sec. 35-166. - Procedure upon failure to report, etc. 
(a)  If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail to make, within the time provided in this article, any report required by this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall obtain facts and information necessary to create an estimate of the tax due. Within ten (10) days from the date the tax was due, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and the late filing penalty established at section 35-162(b), and shall notify such person, by hand delivery, facsimile or certified mail, of the total amount of such tax and penalties, and a copy of the assessment shall be delivered simultaneously to the treasurer. The total amount thereof shall be payable immediately, and the treasurer shall proceed to collect same as authorized by law. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to ascertain the name of every person operating a hotel in the city, liable for the collection of the tax levied by this article, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or make, within the time provided by this article, the reports or remittances required in this article. The treasurer may apply for the issuance of a warrant or summons for such person in the manner provided by law. 
(c)  Any person issued an estimated assessment as described in subsection (a), who is aggrieved by the assessment, may apply to the commissioner of the revenue for correction as provided by Code. 
(Code 1965, § 33-52; Ord. No. 2441, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03)  
Sec. 35-167. - Violations of article. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Conviction of such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the taxes provided in this article. 
(Code 1965, § 33-58)  
Sec. 35-168. - Duties of commissioner of the revenue and city treasurer. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue shall be charged with auditing the reports required by this article, ensuring that lodging places are registered to collect the tax levied by this article, and responding to all inquiries that may be made by taxpayers or persons operating lodging places. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall be charged with the receipt and collection of the taxes imposed and levied by this article, and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03)  
Sec. 35-169. - Short-term rental registry. 
(a)  For purposes of this section only: 
(1)  "Operator" means the proprietor of any dwelling, lodging, or sleeping accommodations offered as a short-term rental, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, license, or any other possessory capacity; 
(2)  "Short-term rental" means the provision of a room or space that is suitable or intended for occupancy for dwelling, sleeping, or lodging purposes, for a period of fewer than thirty (30) consecutive days, in exchange for a charge for the occupancy. 
(b)  An operator of a short-term rental is required to register with the commissioner of the revenue annually. The registration shall be ministerial in nature and shall require operators to provide the complete name of the operator and the address of each property in the city offered for short-term rental by the operator. 
(c)  For purposes of defraying the costs of establishing and maintaining the registry set forth in subsection (b), the commissioner of the revenue shall collect a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). The commissioner of the revenue shall track the costs associated with establishing and maintaining the registry, and through the annual budget process, the commissioner may request the fee be adjusted to reflect such actual costs. 
(d)  Registration is not required if the operator or short-term rental is exempted from registration by Code of Virginia § 15.2-983(B)(2). 
(e)  The penalty for offering a property for short-term rental that is not registered in accordance with this section shall be a penal fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. Each day a property is offered for short-term rental that is not registered in accordance with this section is a separate violation. 
(f)  Unless and until an operator pays a penalty authorized by this section and registers such property, the operator may not offer such property for short-term rental. 
(g)  Upon repeated violations of this section as it relates to a specific property, an operator may be prohibited from registering and offering that property for short-term rental. Notice of such prohibition shall be sent to the specific property, and a copy may be provided to an alternate address if the commissioner believes such alternate address is the residence of the operator. The notice of prohibition is effective on the date received or three business days after mailing by the commissioner of the revenue, whichever is sooner. 
(h)  An operator may be prohibited from offering a specific property for short-term rental in the city upon conviction of three or more violations of one or more state or local laws, ordinances, or regulations that relate to the short-term rental. The notice of prohibition shall be sent in the same manner as the notice described in subsection (g). 
(i)  The commissioner of the revenue is directed to request contact information from each operator of a short-term rental that includes a person or agent designated to respond to calls or complaints received by the city's 311 Service. Such person or agent should be able to respond to such calls by providing in-person assistance and remediation within thirty (30) minutes of such call for service or assistance. 
(j)  The commissioner of the revenue shall monthly report to the department of planning the registry information and a list of those operators of a short-term rental that decline to provide the information described in subsection (i). The department of planning shall provide such information to the planning commission to assist in the development of appropriate land use controls for short-term rentals. 
(Ord. No. 3461, § 1, 8-16-16; Ord. No. 3507, §§ 1—3, 6-20-17, eff. 7-1-17)  
Secs. 35-170—35-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ADMISSIONS TAX[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Amusements, Ch. 4. 
State Law reference— Admissions tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 58-404.1, 58-404.2. 
 
Sec. 35-181. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Admission charge means the amount paid for admission to any event which is open to the general public and to which admission is charged, exclusive of any federal tax thereon, including a charge made for season tickets. In the case of season tickets, the basis for the admissions tax shall be the price of comparable tickets or seats; provided, however, that if there are no comparable tickets or seats, the basis for the admissions tax shall be the price of a season ticket divided by the number of events the season ticket holder is entitled to attend. If an event is comprised of several performances, and an admission charge must be paid for each separate performance, each performance shall constitute an "event" for purposes of this article. "Admission charge" shall not include the registration fee paid by persons who attend a conference, convention, seminar, symposium or similar event provided a majority of the attendees are, prior to registration, members of the organization conducting the event. 
City treasurer means the treasurer of the city and any of his duly authorized deputies and agents. 
Commissioner of the revenue means the commissioner of the revenue of the city and any of his duly authorized deputies and agents. 
Event promoter means a person or business entity that registers an admissions tax account with the commissioner of the revenue and such person or business entity does not meet the definition of a "place of amusement." 
Place of amusement has the meaning provided by section 35-182(a)(4). 
(Code 1965, § 33-59; Ord. No. 1202, 7-6-81; Ord. No. 1532, 5-13-82; Ord. No. 2193, 11-24-92; Ord. No. 2199, 1-5-93; Ord. No. 2441, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 2556, 7-13-99; Ord. No. 2622, 3-13-01; Ord. No. 3295, 6-25-13)  
Sec. 35-182. - Levy of taxes; classification; amount; administration. 
(a)  Classifications. Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 58.1-3817, events to which admission is charged are divided into the following classes, and there are hereby imposed and levied the following taxes: 
(1)  School-sponsored events. No tax shall be imposed or levied on the admission charge to attend any event at a public or private elementary, secondary, or college school-sponsored event, including any event sponsored by a school-recognized student organization. 
(2)  Museums, gardens and zoos. A tax of ten (10) percent of the admission charge for entry into museums, botanical or other similar gardens, and zoos. 
(3)  Participatory sports. A tax of five (5) percent of the amount charged to persons actively participating in sporting events or athletic contests or activities. Admission charges for spectators who observe, but do not participate in, sporting events or athletic contests or activities shall be taxed at the rate imposed and levied by subsection 35-182(a)(4). 
(4)  Admissions generally. A tax of ten (10) percent of the admission charge for all other admissions, including admissions to any place of amusement or entertainment. As used in this section, "place of amusement or entertainment" shall mean any place or event open to the public and located in the city where amusements and entertainments, including but not limited to the following, are located, performed, exhibited or conducted: 
(i)  Any motion picture, play, concert, dance or stageshow; 
(ii)  Any sporting or athletic contest, exhibition or event; 
(iii)  Any circus, carnival, fair or amusement park; 
(iv)  Any sporting or recreational activity, except where the person admitted is participating in the sporting or recreational activity; 
(v)  Any lecture, speech or dissertation; 
(vi)  Any show, display or exhibition (e.g., antique show, art exhibition, boat show, car show, computer show, craft show, wine tasting, etc.); and 
(vii)  Any restaurant, tavern, lounge, bar, cabaret or club. 
(b)  Admissions; gross receipts to charities. Subject to the conditions set forth below in subsection (d), no tax shall be imposed or levied on the admission charge to attend an event if, as described in Code of Virginia section 58.1-3817, the gross receipts from the event go wholly to charitable purposes. 
(c)  Admissions; net proceeds to charities. Subject to the conditions set forth below in subsection (d), no tax shall be levied on an event if, as described in Code of Virginia section 15.2-1104.1, its purpose is solely to raise money for charitable purposes and the net proceeds derived from the event are transferred to an entity exempt from sales and use tax pursuant to Code of Virginia § 58.1-609.11. For purposes of this subsection, "net proceeds" means the gross receipts derived from an event less the direct, ordinary and necessary costs associated with conducting the event. The phrase "direct, ordinary and necessary costs," as used herein, shall not include any allocable costs attributable to the event organizer's ongoing expenses, such as accounting fees, insurance premiums or the salaries of officers and staff. 
(d)  Conditions and procedures relating to subsections (b) and (c). An "event", as described in preceding subsections (b) and (c), is an occasional or irregular fund-raising activity, not exceeding forty-eight (48) hours in length, the gross receipts or net proceeds of which go wholly to "charitable purposes" as defined in Code of Virginia § 57-48. The following conditions and administrative procedures shall apply to all such events: 
(1)  The gross receipts or net proceeds must go to an entity (i) organized exclusively for charitable purposes, as reflected in its articles of incorporation, charter or bylaws, (ii) designated by the Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization to which contributions are tax deductible under 26 U.S.C. § 7701, or is a civic organization with a charitable purpose designated by the Internal Revenue Services as a 501(c)(4) organization, and (iii) registered with, or granted an exemption from registration by, the Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Division of Consumer Affairs, Charitable Solicitation Section. Furthermore, any professional solicitor conducting or promoting any such event shall also be required to provide evidence of registration with, or exemption from registration by, the Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Division of Consumer Affairs, Charitable Solicitation Section. As part of substantiation of the chartable status of the organization, the commissioner of the revenue may request current certification of exemption from sales tax pursuant to Virginia Code § 58.1-609.11. 
(2)  All determinations concerning the taxable status of events described in this subsection shall be made by the commissioner of the revenue on an event-by-event basis. 
(3)  Any person or organization seeking a determination that an event is not subject to taxation pursuant to this subsection shall apply to the commissioner of the revenue's office at least thirty (30) days prior to such event. All such determinations shall be made only by the commissioner of the revenue. The applicant shall supply, on forms provided by the commissioner of the revenue, a description of the event, the cost of admissions to the event, documentation of the charitable purpose(s) for which the proceeds will be used, a copy of any exemption from sales and use tax (if applicable), evidence of compliance with Code of Virginia § 57-49, and such other information as may be required by the commissioner of the revenue. Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of an application, the commissioner of the revenue shall make a preliminary determination as to whether the proposed event is subject to the admissions tax. Within forty-five (45) days of conclusion of the event, the applicant shall provide documentation that the gross receipts or net proceeds of the event have been utilized in accordance with the requirements of subsection (b). The failure of any person to obtain a determination that an event is not subject to taxation, to supply evidence of compliance with Code of Virginia § 57-49, or to otherwise fail to comply with the requirements of this subsection, shall subject the event to being taxed at the rate provided by subsection (a)(4). 
(4)  Within sixty (60) days after the end of each fiscal year, the commissioner of the revenue shall provide the city manager a list of all events benefiting charity for which no admissions tax was paid, and an estimate of the total amount of tax that would have otherwise been paid. 
(e)  All taxes levied by this section shall be paid by the person who pays the charge for admission or participation. 
(f)  All determinations concerning the classification of events and the applicable tax rate shall be made by the commissioner of the revenue. A request for a determination of classification of events shall be made in writing to the commissioner of the revenue on forms approved by the commissioner of the revenue. Upon such request, the commissioner of the revenue shall undertake an investigation of such activity, contest, or event to determine the appropriate classification among those classifications provided in subsection (a). Except for school-sponsored events, unless and until a determination concerning the classification of an event is made by the commissioner of the revenue, it shall be classified as general admissions and subject to the general admissions' tax rate as provided in subsection (a)(4), above. 
(g)  The commissioner of the revenue shall keep a list of all activities, contest, and events that have been determined to be "participatory sports." If a request for determination of classification is for an event that is identical to a previously determined "participatory sport," the commissioner of the revenue shall apply the "participatory sports" classification and tax rate to such events. Should the commissioner of the revenue determine the event is not identical to a previously determined "participatory sport," the commissioner shall undertake an investigation to make a determination as provided in subsection (f). 
(Ord. No. 3086, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 3160, 1-25-11; Ord. No. 3434, 1-5-16)  
Sec. 35-182.1. - Tax on amounts paid for refreshments, service or merchandise; events subject to tax. 
A tax equivalent to the rate charged for the appropriate classification is hereby imposed on all amounts paid for refreshments, service or merchandise at any place to which admission is charged or any place of amusement or entertainment, if the purchase of such refreshments, service or merchandise is made in lieu of an admission charge and required for the privilege of being admitted. 
(Ord. No. 2199, 1-5-93; Ord. No. 2622, 3-13-01)  
Sec. 35-182.2. - Barter or exchange. 
(a)  The tax levied in section 35-182 is also levied on the fair market value of any admission or right to participate that is bartered or exchanged for compensation paid other than in cash, if such non-cash compensation is taxable as gross income to the person providing the admission or right to participate, pursuant to Treasury Regulations sections 1.61-1 and 1.61-2(d)(1) in effect on July 1, 1999. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "fair market value" shall mean the face value of tickets or the posted price to attend an event, be admitted to a place of amusement or entertainment, or participate in a sport enumerated in subsection (a)(8). 
(Ord. No. 2556, 7-13-99; Ord. No. 2622, 3-13-01)  
Sec. 35-183. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2556, adopted July 13, 1999, repealed § 35-183, which contained an exception for certain free admissions and which was derived from Code 1965, § 33-67.  
Sec. 35-183.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 35-183.1 was repealed by Ord. No. 2199, adopted Jan. 5, 1993. The section was formerly derived from Ord. No. 1532, adopted May 13, 1985, and Ord. No. 2193, adopted and dealt with exception from taxation for certain participating sports. See § 35-182.1.  
Sec. 35-184. - Exception if admission charge is ten cents or less. 
Where the admission charge is ten cents ($0.10) or less, no tax shall be payable under this article. Amounts paid for admission by season tickets or subscription shall be exempt only if the amount to be charged the holder or subscriber for a single admission is ten cents ($0.10) or less. 
(Code 1965, § 33-69)  
Sec. 35-185. - Federal tax excluded from amount paid for admission. 
The amount paid for admission on which the tax imposed by this article is based shall be the amount paid for admission exclusive of any federal tax thereon. 
(Code 1965, § 33-71)  
Sec. 35-186. - Collection. 
Every person receiving any payment, or any type of compensation other than cash, for any admission, participation in any sport or refreshments, service or merchandise, on which a tax is levied under this article, shall be responsible for collecting the amount of tax imposed by this article from the person making the payment at the time of the payment or compensation for such admission, participation or purchase, and shall be responsible for the payment of such tax if he or she fails to collect same. If tickets or cards of admission are issued, the tax shall be collected at the time for the issuance of such tickets or cards. The taxes required to be collected under this section shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect the same until remitted as provided in this article. The operator of the "place of amusement" shall be ultimately responsibility for the collection of the tax required by this section and the commissioner of the revenue shall assess such persons or businesses accordingly. 
(Code 1965, § 33-61; Ord. No. 2556, 7-13-99; Ord. No. 2622, 3-13-01; Ord. No. 3288, § 1, 5-28-13)  
Sec. 35-186.1. - Requirement of bond or other form of security for restaurants and similar businesses that collect a cover charge; requirement of bond for event promoters. 
(a)  The commissioner shall require all restaurants, clubs, or any other similar businesses that desire to collect an admission charge commonly referred to as a "cover charge" to post annually a bond with corporate surety to insure faithful performance of the business's duties to the city as to admissions taxes collected and held in trust for the city. The bond, including the corporate surety thereon, shall be in a form deemed satisfactory to the city attorney. The bond shall be in an amount not less than the largest monthly admissions tax collection by the business during the previous tax year or, for a new business, an amount based upon the maximum occupancy of the place of amusement. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no such bond shall be issued or accepted in an amount less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(b)  The commissioner shall require any "event promoter" that desires to collect an admission charge commonly referred to as a "cover charge" to post a bond for each event with corporate surety to insure faithful performance of the event promoter's duties to the city as to admissions taxes collected and held in trust for the city. The bond, including the corporate surety thereon, shall be in a form deemed satisfactory to the city attorney. The bond shall be in an amount not less than the anticipated cover charge multiplied by the maximum occupancy of the location of the event utilizing a ten percent hourly turn-over multiplier. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no such bond shall be issued or accepted in an amount less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue may accept an irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of the bond required by this section, provided that the letter must be reviewed and approved by the city attorney. 
(d)  The commissioner of the revenue shall provide evidence of compliance with this section to the operator of a place of amusement or the event promoter. The operator of a place of amusement or event promoter shall produce the receipt or evidence of compliance with this section upon demand by an agent of the commissioner of the revenue or any law enforcement officer of the city during the operation of the place of amusement or the duration of an event where a cover charge is collected. The operator of the place of amusement or the event promoter shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor for the failure to produce the evidence of compliance when demand for same has been made by either an agent of the commissioner of the revenue or any law enforcement officer. 
(e)  Any person who accepts payment for an admission charge or "cover charge" shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor for the failure to produce the evidence of compliance referenced in subsection (d) when demand for the same has been made by either an agent of the commissioner of the revenue or any law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 3295, 6-25-13)  
Sec. 35-187. - Reports and remittances generally. 
(a)  The person collecting any tax as provided in section 35-186 shall make out a report, upon forms created by the treasurer that shall request all information that the commissioner of the revenue and the treasurer may require, and shall sign and deliver such report to the city treasurer with a remittance of such tax. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the twentieth day of each month, covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. 
(b)  Late filing penalty. 
(1)  If a report is not filed on or before the due date set forth in subsection (a) above, there shall be added a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the tax assessable on such return or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax assessable. Such penalty shall not be assessed until the day after the report is due. Any such penalty, when assessed, shall become part of the tax. 
(2)  No penalty for failing to file a report shall be assessed if such failure was not the fault of the taxpayer or was the fault of the commissioner of the revenue. The commissioner of the revenue shall make determinations of fault relating to failure to file a report. 
(c)  The treasurer shall provide the commissioner of the revenue by the fifteenth of each month with copies of all reports submitted in the preceding month by persons required to collect the tax levied by this article. 
(d)  If the remittance under this section is by check or money order, such check or money order shall be payable to the city treasurer. 
(Code 1965, § 33-62; Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03)  
Sec. 35-188. - Reports, remittances and deposits by temporary or transient places of amusement or entertainment. 
(a)  Whenever any place of amusement or entertainment of a temporary or transitory nature makes an admission charge which is subject to the tax levied by this article, or does not make such an admission charge but does sell refreshments, services or merchandise which is subject to the tax levied by this article, the treasurer may require the report and remittance of the requisite tax to be made on the day following its collection, or on the day following the conclusion of a series of performances or exhibitions, or at such other reasonable time or times as he shall determine. Failure to comply with any such requirement of the treasurer as to the report and remittance of the tax so required shall be unlawful. 
(b)  Before any temporary or transient place of amusement or entertainment mentioned in subsection (a) above shall begin operation and before any license shall be issued therefor, if a license is required, the person operating the same may be required by the treasurer to deposit a sum of money, to be estimated by the commissioner of the revenue sufficient to cover the tax required to be collected by such person under the provisions of this article, as security for the collection and payment to the city of such tax. At the conclusion of such temporary or transient operation in the city, such person shall file with the treasurer the report required by this article and pay such tax collected to the city. Upon the filing of such report and the making of such payment, the city treasurer shall refund such deposit. Should any such person fail to file such report and pay such amount of tax collected within five (5) days from the termination of the operation of such amusement or entertainment, the commissioner of revenue may thereupon assess such person with such tax at the amount of such deposit and the city treasurer shall retain such deposit in full payment of the tax collected by and due the city by such person. 
(Code 1965, § 33-68; Ord. No. 2622, 3-13-01; Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03)  
Sec. 35-189. - Collector's records. 
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and to preserve, for a period of five (5) years, such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax he may have been responsible for collecting and paying to the city. The commissioner of revenue may inspect such records at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1965, § 33-65; Ord. No. 2966, 1-9-07)  
Sec. 35-190. - Duty of collector going out or disposing of business. 
Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall quit business or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under this article to the city shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Code 1965, § 33-66)  
Sec. 35-191. - Penalty for late remittance or false return. 
(a)  If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to remit to the city treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid under this article, there shall be assessed a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount due or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall not exceed the amount due. 
(b)  A penalty for failure to pay the tax due under this article shall not be imposed if it was not the fault of the taxpayer or was the fault of the treasurer. 
(Code 1965, § 33-63; Ord. No. 2800, 3-9-04)  
Sec. 35-192. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report, etc., taxes. 
(a)  If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail to make, within the time provided in this article, any report required by this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information necessary to create an estimate of the tax due. Within ten (10) days from the date the tax was due, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and the late filing penalty established at section 35-187(b) and shall notify such person, by hand-delivery, facsimile or certified mail, of the total amount of such tax and penalties, and a copy of the assessment shall be delivered simultaneously to the treasurer. The total amount thereof shall be payable immediately, and the treasurer shall proceed to collect same as authorized by law. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to ascertain the name of every person operating a place of amusement or entertainment in the city, liable for the collection of the tax levied by this article, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect the tax or to make, within the time provided by this article, the reports or remittances required in this article. The treasurer may apply for the issuance of a warrant or summons for such person in the manner provided by law. 
(c)  Any person issued an estimated assessment as described in subsection (a), who is aggrieved by the assessment, may apply to the commissioner of the revenue for correction as provided by Code of Virginia § 58.1-3980. 
(Code 1965, §§ 33-64, 33-72; Ord. No. 2441, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03)  
Sec. 35-193. - Violations of article. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each such violation or failure to pay shall constitute a separate offense, but conviction thereof shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the taxes provided for in this article. 
(Code 1965, § 33-74)  
Sec. 35-194. - Duties of commissioner of the revenue and city treasurer. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue shall be charged with auditing the reports required by this article, ensuring that persons charging for admissions to events are registered to collect the tax levied by this article, and responding to all inquiries that may be made by taxpayers or persons charging for admissions to events. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall be charged with the receipt and collection of the taxes imposed and levied by this article, and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03)  
Secs. 35-195—35-205. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - CIGARETTE TAX[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to levy cigarette tax and permitted provisions of ordinance providing for administrative and enforcement of such tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 58-757.27, 58-757.29. 
 
Sec. 35-206. - Definitions. 
Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Commissioner of revenue. "Commissioner of the revenue" means the commissioner of revenue of the city and any of his duly authorized deputies and agents. 
Dealer. "Dealer" means any manufacturer, jobber, wholesale dealer or other person who supplies a seller with cigarettes. 
Package. "Package" means any package, box, can or other container of any cigarettes, irrespective of the material from which such container is made, to which the internal revenue stamp of the United States government is required to be affixed by and under federal statues and regulations and in which retail sales of such cigarettes are normally made or intended to be made. 
Person. "Person" means any individual, partnership, society, association, joint stock company, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee or any other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination of individuals. 
Purchaser. "Purchaser" means any person to whom title to any cigarettes is transferred by a seller within the corporate limits of the city. 
Sale. "Sale" means any act or transaction, irrespective of the method or means employed, including the use of vending machines and other mechanical devices, whereby title to any cigarettes shall be transferred from the seller, as defined in this section, to any other person within the corporate limits of the city. 
Seller. "Seller" means any person who transfers title to any cigarettes, other than by gift, or in whose place of business title to any cigarettes is transferred, within the corporate limits of the city, for any purpose other than resale. 
Stamp. "Stamp" means a small gummed piece of paper or decalcomania to be sold by the commissioner of revenue and to be affixed to every package of cigarettes sold at retail in the city, and also any insignia or symbols printed by a meter machine upon any such package under the authorization of the commissioner of revenue. 
(Code 1965, § 33-23; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 3406, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15)  
Sec. 35-207. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby levied and imposed by the City, upon each sale of cigarettes, a tax equivalent to thirty-seven and fifty (37.50) mills per cigarette sold within the City, the amount of such tax to be paid by the seller, if not previously paid, in the manner and at the time provided for in this article. The tax shall be reduced by two and one-half (2.5) mills per cigarette on June 30, 2027. There shall be a penalty for late payment of the tax imposed herein in the amount of ten (10) per centum per month, and interest in the amount of three-quarters of-one (0.75) per centum per month, upon any tax found to be overdue and unpaid. 
(Code 1965, § 33-24; Ord. No. 1179, 5-15-81; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 1454, 5-14-84; Ord. No. 1779, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 2239, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 2638, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2732, 1-7-03; Ord. No. 3011, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3127, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 3271, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3409, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15)  
Sec. 35-208. - Method of payment. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall be paid by affixing or causing to be affixed a stamp or stamps, of proper denominational or face value, to every package of cigarettes sold within the city, in the manner and at the time or times provided for in this article. Every dealer and every seller in the city shall have the right to buy such stamps from the commissioner of revenue and to affix the same to packages of cigarettes as provided in this article. 
(b)  The commissioner of revenue may permit the payment in advance of the tax levied and imposed by this article by the method of placing imprints of the stamps upon original packages by the use of meter machines, in lieu of the method of paying such tax by the purchase and affixing of gummed stamps, and may prescribe and enforce the necessary regulations setting forth the method to be employed and the conditions to be observed in the use of such meter machines. 
(Code 1965, §§ 33-26, 33-30; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 3406, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15)  
Sec. 35-209. - Preparation and sale of stamps generally. 
For the purpose of making stamps available for use, the commissioner of revenue shall prepare and sell stamps of such denominations and in such quantities as may be necessary for the payment of the taxes imposed by this article. In the sale of such stamps, the commissioner of revenue shall allow a discount of eight (8) percent of the denominational or face value thereof to cover the costs which will be incurred in affixing the stamps to packages of cigarettes. In the event the printing by an authorized meter machine is used in lieu of gummed stamps, there shall be allowed a discount of ten (10) percent of the denominational or face value of the imprints of such stamps so printed by such meter machine to cover the costs incurred in printing such imprints. 
(Code 1965, § 33-28; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 3406, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15)  
Sec. 35-210. - General duties of dealers and sellers with respect to stamps. 
(a)  Every local dealer in cigarettes shall purchase such stamps, at the office of the commissioner of revenue as shall be necessary to pay the tax levied and imposed by this article and shall affix, or cause to be affixed a stamp or stamps of the monetary value prescribed by this article to each package of cigarettes prior to delivery or furnishing of such cigarettes to any seller. Nothing herein contained shall preclude any dealer from using a stamp meter machine in lieu of gummed stamps to effectuate the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Every seller shall examine each package of cigarettes prior to exposing the same for sale, for the purpose of ascertaining whether such package has the proper stamps affixed thereto or imprinted thereon, as provided by this article. If, upon such examination, unstamped or improperly stamped packages of cigarettes are discovered, the seller, where such cigarettes were obtained from a local dealer, shall immediately notify such dealer, and upon such notification, such dealer shall forthwith either affix to, or imprint upon, such unstamped or improperly stamped packages the proper amount of stamps or shall replace such packages with others to which stamps have been properly affixed or imprinted thereon. 
(c)  Should a seller obtain or acquire possession from any person other than a local dealer, of any unstamped or improperly stamped cigarettes, such seller shall forthwith, before selling, offering or exposing such cigarettes for sale in the city, purchase and affix or cause to be affixed to such packages of cigarettes the proper stamps, covering the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1965, § 33-27; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 3406, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15)  
Sec. 35-211. - Visibility of stamps or meter markings. 
Stamps or the printed markings of a meter machine shall be placed upon each package of cigarettes in such manner as to be readily visible to the purchaser. 
(Code 1965, § 33-27; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81)  
Sec. 35-212. - Altering design of stamps. 
The commissioner of revenue may, from time to time, and as often as he may deem advisable, provide for the issuance and exclusive use of stamps of a new design and forbid the use of stamps of any other design. 
(Code 1965, § 33-29; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81)  
Sec. 35-213. - Use by wholesaler of dual die to evidence payment. 
The commissioner of revenue may enter into an arrangement with the state department of taxation under which any tobacco wholesaler who so desires may use a dual die to evidence the payment of both the tax levied by this article and the state tax on cigarettes. 
(Code 1965, § 33-31; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81)  
Sec. 35-214. - Refund for unused stamps or meter imprints. 
Should any person, after acquiring from the commissioner of revenue any stamps provided for in this article, cease to be engaged in a business necessitating the use thereof, or should any such stamps become mutilated and unfit for use, other than by cancellation as provided in this article, such person shall be entitled to a refund of the denominational or face amount of stamps so acquired and not used by him, less eight (8) percent of the denominational or face amount thereof, upon presenting such stamps to the commissioner of revenue and furnishing the commissioner of revenue with an affidavit showing, to his satisfaction, that such stamps were acquired by such person and have not in any manner been used and the reason for requesting such refund. In the case of any authorized meter machine, should any imprints of such machine theretofore paid for not be used, such person shall, upon furnishing the commissioner of revenue with a similar affidavit, be entitled to a refund of the denominational or face amount thereof, less ten (10) percent of the denominational or face amount of such imprints of such machine not so used. 
(Code 1965, § 33-32; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 3406, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15)  
Sec. 35-215. - Seizure and sale of unstamped cigarettes. 
(a)  Whenever the commissioner of revenue shall discover cigarettes in quantities more than six (6) cartons within the city which are subject to the tax imposed by this article and upon which the tax has not been paid or upon which stamps have not been affixed or evidence of such tax shown thereon by the printed markings of an authorized meter machine, as in this article required, such cigarettes shall be conclusively presumed for sale or use within the city and the commissioner of revenue may forthwith seize and confiscate such cigarettes, if: 
(1)  They are in transit, and are not accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating the true name and address of the cosigner or seller and of the cosignee or purchaser, and the brands and quantity of tobacco products so transported; or are in transit and accompanied by bill of lading or other document which is false or fraudulent in whole or in part; or 
(2)  They are in transit and are accompanied by a bill of lading or other documents indicating: 
a.  A cosignee or purchaser in another state or the District of Columbia who is not authorized by the law of such other jurisdiction to receive or possess such tobacco products on which the taxes imposed by such other jurisdiction have not been paid, and unless the tax of the state or district of destination has been paid and the said products bear the tax stamp of that state or district; or 
b.  A cosignee or purchaser in the Commonwealth of Virginia but outside the city who does not possess a Virginia sales and use tax certificate, a Virginia retail tobacco license and where applicable, both a business license and retail tobacco license issued by the local jurisdiction of destination; or 
(3)  They are not in transit and the tax has not been paid, nor have approved arrangements for payment been made, provided that this subparagraph shall not apply to cigarettes in the possession of distributors or public warehouses which have filed notice and appropriate proof with the commissioner of the revenue that those cigarettes are temporarily within the city and will be sent to cosignees or purchasers outside the city in the normal course of business. 
(b)  All cigarettes seized and confiscated according to paragraph (a) above shall thereupon be deemed to be forfeited to the city and may be sold within a reasonable time thereafter, after proper notice of such seizure is given to the known holders of property interests in the cigarettes. Such notice shall be given to known holders of property interests, if any, by certified mail and by written notice posted on the bulletin of the court house of the circuit court of Virginia Beach at least seven (7) days before the date of sale. Such notice shall contain the time and place at which the sale is to occur and procedures for administrative appeal as well as affirmative defenses which may be asserted by such holders. All monies collected under this section shall be paid to the commissioner of revenue and treated as other taxes collected under this article. No credit from any sale or other disposition shall be allowed toward any tax or penalties owed. 
(Code 1965, § 33-33; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 3406, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15)  
Sec. 35-215.1. - Seizure and sale of coin-operated vending machines and counterfeit stamp or impression devices. 
(a)  Any coin-operated vending machine, in which any cigarettes are found, stored or possessed bearing a counterfeit or bogus tobacco tax stamp or impression or any unstamped cigarettes, or any cigarettes upon which the tax has not been paid, may be declared contraband property and be subject to confiscation and sale as provided in section 35-215(b). When any such vending machine is found containing such cigarettes, it shall be presumed that such cigarettes were intended for distribution, sale or use therefrom. In lieu of immediate seizure and confiscation of any vending machine used in an illegal evasion of the tax, it may be sealed by appropriate enforcement authorities to prevent continued illegal sale or removal of any cigarettes, and may be left unmoved until other civil and criminal penalties are imposed or waived. Notice requirements shall be the same as if the machine had been seized. Such seal may be removed and the machine declared eligible for operation only by authorized enforcement authorities. Nothing in this section shall prevent seizure and confiscation of a vending machine at any time after it is sealed. 
(b)  Any counterfeit stamps or counterfeit impression devices found may also be seized and confiscated and sold as provided in section 35-215(b). 
(Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81) 
Cross reference— Coin-operated vending machine's license tax § 18-73.  
Sec. 35-216. - Dealers' and sellers' records generally. 
Every local dealer and seller shall maintain and keep, for a period of two (2) years, such records of cigarettes sold and delivered by him as may be required by the commissioner of revenue and shall make all such records available for examination by the commissioner of revenue, upon demand, at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1965, § 33-35; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81)  
Sec. 35-217. - Rules and regulations for enforcement and administration of article; examination of books, records, etc. 
(a)  The commissioner of revenue may prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the method and means to be used in the cancellation of stamps and to all other matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such rules and regulations. 
(b)  The commissioner of revenue may examine books, records, invoices, papers and all cigarettes in and upon any premises where the same are placed, stored, sold, offered for sale or displayed for sale by a seller. 
(Code 1965, §§ 33-36, 33-37; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81)  
Sec. 35-218. - Tax is in addition to other taxes. 
The tax levied and imposed by this article shall be construed to be in addition to all other taxes of every kind levied and imposed by any other ordinance or law. 
(Code 1965, § 33-25; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81)  
Sec. 35-219. - Violations of article—Generally. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. In addition, any person who shall perform any fraudulent act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this article shall be required to pay a penalty in the amount of fifty (50) per centum and interest not to exceed three quarters (.75) of one per centum per month upon any tax found to be overdue and unpaid. Conviction and payment of a fine for such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment of any tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Each violation of, or noncompliance with, any of the provisions of this article shall be and constitute a separate offense and shall subject every person convicted thereof to the penalties prescribed. 
(Code 1965, § 33-39; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81)  
Sec. 35-220. - Same—Prohibited acts enumerated. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person: 
(1)  To perform any act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this article or of any part thereof; or for any dealer or seller, with intent to violate any provision of this article, to fail or refuse to perform any of the duties imposed upon him under the provisions of this article or to fail or refuse to obey any lawful order which the commissioner of revenue may issue under this article. 
(2)  To falsely or fraudulently make, forge, alter or counterfeit any stamp or the printed markings of any meter machine, or to procure or cause to be made, forged, altered or counterfeited any such stamp or printed markings of a meter machine, or knowingly and willfully to alter, publish, pass or tender as true any false, altered, forged or counterfeited stamp or stamps or printed markings of a meter machine. 
(3)  To sell any cigarettes upon which the tax imposed by this article has not been paid and upon which evidence of payment thereof is not shown on each package of cigarettes. 
(4)  To reuse or refill with cigarettes any package from which cigarettes, for which the tax imposed has been theretofore paid, have been removed. 
(5)  To remove from any package any stamp or the printed markings of a meter machine with intent to use or cause the same to be used after the same have already been used, or to buy, sell or offer for sale or give away any used, removed, altered or restored stamps or printed markings of a meter machine, to any person, or to reuse any stamp or printed markings of a meter machine which have theretofore been used for evidence of the payment of any tax prescribed by this article, or, except as to the commissioner of revenue, to sell, or offer to sell, any stamp or printed markings of a meter machine provided for this article. 
(Code 1965, § 33-38; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 3406, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15)  
Sec. 35-221. - Same—Presumption of violation by seller. 
In the event any package of cigarettes is found in the possession of a seller without the proper stamps being affixed thereto or without authorized printed markings of a meter machine thereon, and the seller shall be unable to submit evidence establishing that he received such package within the immediately preceding forty-eight (48) hours, and that he has not offered the same for sale, the presumption shall be that such package is being kept by such seller in violation of the provisions of this article and shall subject him to the penalties provided for such violation. 
(Code 1965, § 33-34; Ord. No. 1218, 8-24-81)  
Secs. 35-222—35-235. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - RECORDATION TAX 
 
Sec. 35-236. - Imposed. 
Pursuant to section 58-65.1 of the Code of Virginia, there is hereby imposed a city recordation tax, in an amount equal to one-third of the amount of the state recordation tax collectible for the state, on the first recordation of each taxable instrument in this city; provided, however, that, except in a case in which the state recordation tax is fifty cents ($0.50) specifically, where a deed or other instrument conveys, covers or relates to property located in this city and also to property located in another city or county or in other counties or cities, the tax imposed under the authority of this section shall be computed only with respect to the property located in this city. 
(Code 1965, § 33-90)  
Secs. 35-237—35-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - TAX ON PROBATE OF WILLS OR GRANT OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 35-251. - Imposed. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 58.1-3805 there is hereby imposed, on the probate of every will or grant of administration not exempt by law, a city tax in the amount of one-third of the state tax on such probate of a will or grant of administration, as set forth in Code of Virginia § 58.1-1712. 
(b)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia §§ 58.1-1718 and 58.1-3805 a twenty-five dollars ($25.00) fee shall be charged on the recordation of a list of heirs pursuant to Code of Virginia § 64.1-134 or an affidavit pursuant to Code of Virginia § 64.1-135 unless a will has been probated for the decedent or there has been a grant of administration on the decedent's estate. 
(Code 1965, § 33-90.1; Ord. No. 3143, 7-6-10)  
ARTICLE XII. - SHORT-TERM RENTAL TAX 
 
Sec. 35-252. - Short-term rental tax. 
(a)  Levied; amount. Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 58.1-3510.6, there is hereby assessed and imposed on every person engaged in the short-term rental business a tax of one (1) percent on the gross proceeds of such business defined in subsection (c)(1) and one and one-half (1½) percent of such business defined in subsection (c)(2). Such tax shall be in addition to the tax levied pursuant to Code of Virginia § 58.1-605. For purposes of this section, "gross proceeds" means the total amount charged to each person for the rental of short-term rental property, excluding any state and local sales tax paid pursuant to the Virginia Retail Sales and Use Tax Act. 
(b)  Short-term rental property defined. For purposes of this section, "short-term rental property" means all tangible personal property held for rental and owned by a person engaged in the short-term rental business, except trailers, as defined in Code of Virginia § 46.2-100 and other tangible personal property required to be licensed or registered with the department of motor vehicles, department of game and inland fisheries, or the department of aviation. 
(c)  Short-term rental business defined. A person is engaged in the short-term rental business if: 
(1)  Not less than eighty (80) percent of the gross rental receipts of such business during the preceding year arose from transactions involving the rental of short-term rental property, other than heavy equipment property as defined in subdivision (2), for periods of ninety-two (92) consecutive days or less, including all extensions and renewals to the same person or a person affiliated with the lessee; or 
(2)  Not less than sixty (60) percent of the gross rental receipts of such business during the preceding year arose from transactions involving the rental of heavy equipment property for periods of two hundred seventy (270) consecutive days or less, including all extensions and renewals to the same person or a person affiliated with the lessee. For purposes of this subdivision, "heavy equipment property" means rental property of an industry that is described under code 532412 or 532490 of the 2002 North American Industry Classification System as published by the United States Census Bureau, excluding office furniture, office equipment, and programmable computer equipment and peripherals as defined in Code of Virginia § 58.1-3503(A)(16). 
For purposes of determining whether a person is engaged in the short-term rental business as defined in subdivisions (1) and (2), a person is "affiliated" with the lessee of rental property if such person is an officer, director, partner, member, shareholder, parent or subsidiary of the lessee, or if such person and the lessee have any common ownership interest in excess of five (5) percent; any rental to a person affiliated with the lessee shall be treated as rental receipts but shall not qualify for purposes of the eighty (80) percent requirement of subdivision (1) or the sixty (60) percent requirement of subdivision (2); and any rental of personal property which also involves the provision of personal services for the operation of the personal property rented shall not be treated as gross receipts from rental, provided however that the delivery and installation of tangible personal property shall not mean operation for the purposes of this subdivision. 
A person who has not previously been engaged in the short-term rental business who applies for a certificate of registration pursuant to subsection (j) shall be eligible for registration upon his certification that he anticipates meeting the requirements of subdivision (1) or (2), designated by the applicant, during the year for which registration is sought. 
In the event that the commissioner of the revenue makes a written determination that a rental business previously certified as short-term rental business pursuant to subsection (j) has failed to meet either of the tests set forth in subdivision (1) or (2) during a preceding tax year, such business shall lose its certification as a short-term rental business and shall be subject to the business personal property tax with respect to all rental property for the tax year in which such certification is lost and any subsequent tax years until such time as the rental business obtains recertification pursuant to subsection (j). In the event that a rental business loses its certification as a short-term rental business pursuant to this subsection, such business shall not be required to refund to customers daily rental property taxes previously collected in good faith and shall not be subject to the assessment for business personal property taxes with respect to rental property for tax years preceding the year in which the certification is lost unless the commissioner makes a written determination that the business obtained its certification by knowingly making materially false statements in its application, in which case the commissioner may assess the taxpayer the amount of the difference between the short-term rental property taxes remitted by such business during the period in which the taxpayer wrongfully held certification and the business personal property taxes that would have been due during such period but for the certification obtained by the making of the materially false statements. Any such assessment, and any determination not to certify or to decertify a rental business as a short-term rental business as defined in this subsection, may be appealed pursuant to the procedures and requirements set forth in Code of Virginia § 58.1-3983.1 for appeals of local business taxes, which shall apply mutatis mutandis to such assessment and certification decisions. 
A rental business that has been decertified pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall be eligible for recertification for a subsequent tax year upon a showing that it has met one of the test provided in subdivisions (1) and (2) for at least ten (10) months of operations during the present tax year. 
(d)  Taxation of rental property that is not short term rental property. Except for short-term rental passenger cars, rental property that is not short-term rental property shall be classified for taxation pursuant to Code of Virginia § 58.1-3503. 
(e)  Collection, return and remittance of tax. Any person engaged in the short-term rental business, as defined by subsection (c), shall collect such tax from each lessee of rental property at the time of the rental. The lessor of the short-term rental property shall transmit a quarterly return, not later than the fifteenth day following the end of each calendar quarter, to the treasurer, reporting the gross rental proceeds derived from the short-term rental business. The commissioner of the revenue shall assess the tax due, and the short-term rental business shall pay the tax so assessed to the treasurer not later than the last day of the month following the end of the calendar quarter. The calendar quarters end on March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31. The return shall be upon such forms, approved by the commissioner of the revenue and the treasurer, setting forth such information as the commissioner of revenue may require, showing the amount of gross receipts and the tax required to be collected. The taxes required to be collected under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect such taxes until remitted as required in this article. 
(f)  Procedure upon failure to collect, report or remit taxes. If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, the returns and remittances required in this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall obtain facts and information necessary to create an estimate of the tax due. Within ten (10) days from the date the tax was due, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and the late filing penalty established in subsection (g) below, and shall notify such person, by hand-delivery, facsimile or certified mail, of the total amount of such tax and penalty; a copy of the assessment shall be delivered simultaneously to the treasurer. The total amount thereof shall be payable immediately, and the treasurer shall proceed to collect same as authorized by law. 
(g)  Failure or refusal to remit tax; penalty. If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to remit the tax required to be collected and paid under this article within the time specified in the article, there shall be added to such tax a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the tax past due or the sum of ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is the greater. The assessment of such penalty shall not be deemed a defense to any criminal prosecution for failing to make any return or remittance as required in this article. Penalty for failure to pay the tax assessed pursuant to this article shall be assessed on the first day following the day such quarterly installment payment is due. 
(h)  Late filing penalty. 
(1)  If a report is not filed on or before the due date set forth in subsection (a) above, there shall be added a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the tax assessable on such return or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax assessable. Such penalty shall not be assessed until the day after the report is due. Any such penalty, when assessed, shall become part of the tax. 
(2)  No penalty for failing to file a report shall be assessed if such failure was not the fault of the taxpayer or was the fault of the commissioner of the revenue. The commissioner of the revenue shall make determinations of fault relating to failure to file a report. 
(i)  Exclusions and exemptions. No tax shall be collected or assessed on (i) rentals by the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth or the United States, or (ii) any rental of durable medical equipment as defined in Code of Virginia § 58.1-608(22). Additionally, all exemptions applicable in the Code of Virginia Title 58.1, Ch. 6 (section 58.1-600 et seq.) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the short-term rental property tax. 
(j)  Renter's certificate of registration. Every person engaging in the business of short-term rental of tangible personal property shall file an application for a certificate of registration with the commissioner of the revenue. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the commissioner of revenue and shall set forth the name under which the applicant intends to operate the rental business, the subdivision of subsection (c) under which the business asserts that it is qualified for classification as a short-term rental business, the location and such other information as the commissioner may require. 
Each applicant shall sign the application as owner of the rental business. If the rental business is owned by an association, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation, the application shall be signed by a member, partner, executive officer or other person specifically authorized by the association, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation to sign. 
Upon approval of the application by the commissioner of the revenue, a certificate of registration shall be issued. The certificate shall be conspicuously displayed at all times at the place of business for which it is issued. 
The certificate is not assignable and shall be valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and the place of business designated. 
(k)  Criminal penalties for violation of article. Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Provided however, if the amount of tax due and unpaid for any quarterly installment exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), any person failing to remit payment when due shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. The treasurer may apply for the issuance of a warrant or summons for such person in the manner provided by law. 
(l)  Copies of reports; appeal of estimated assessment. (i) The treasurer shall provide the commissioner of the revenue by the fifteenth of each month with copies of all reports submitted in the preceding month by persons required to collect the tax levied by this article, and (ii) any person issued an estimated assessment as described in subsection (f), who is aggrieved by the assessment, may apply to the commissioner of the revenue for correction as provided by Code of Virginia § 58.1-3980. 
(m)  Duties of the commissioner of the revenue. The commissioner of the revenue shall be charged with auditing the reports required by this article, ensuring that short-term rental businesses are registered to collect the tax levied by this article, and responding to all inquiries that may be made by taxpayers or rental businesses. 
(n)  Duties of the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall be charged with the receipt and collection of the taxes imposed and levied by this article, and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1876, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 3113, § 1, 1-12-10)  
ARTICLE XIII. - LOCAL TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE TAXES 
 
Sec. 35-253. - Definitions. 
Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, in this article definitions of words and phrases related to telecommunication or enhanced 911 service shall be provided by the provisions of sections 58.1-3812(J) and 58.1-3813.1(A) of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 2321, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2719, 9-3-02)  
Sec. 35-254. - Imposed. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 58.1-3812 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, there is hereby imposed and levied on every taxable purchase by a consumer of local telecommunication service, when such consumer's service address is located in the city, a tax at a rate equal to twenty (20) percent of the monthly gross charge to the consumer of such service; provided, however, that this tax shall not be applicable to any amount so charged in excess of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month for each residential consumer. 
(b)  Pursuant to section 58.1-3812 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, there is hereby imposed and levied on every taxable purchase by a consumer of mobile local telecommunication service, when such consumer's service address is located in the city, a tax at a rate equal to ten (10) percent of the monthly gross charge to the consumer of such service; provided, however, that this tax shall not be applicable to any amount so charged in excess of thirty dollars ($30.00) per month for each mobile service consumer. 
(c)  With respect to commercial consumers of local telecommunication service, the tax shall be twenty (20) percent on charges for local telecommunication service. The tax imposed by this section shall not be applied to any portion of a monthly charge for any single telecommunication service to a commercial or industrial consumer that exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)  Pursuant to section 58.1-3813.1 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, in addition to the taxes imposed by subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section, there is hereby imposed and levied on every consumer of telephone service or services provided by any corporation subject to the provisions of Title 58.1, Chapter 26 (section 58.1- 2600 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia), a tax for Enhanced 9-1-1 service in the amount of two dollars and twenty cents ($2.20) per month. The amount of this tax shall increase to two dollars and forty cents ($2.40) per month on July 1, 2004, and it shall increase to two dollars and sixty cents ($2.60) per month on July 1, 2005. The tax imposed by this subsection (d) shall not apply to any local telephone service where a periodic bill is not rendered. 
(Ord. No. 2321, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2443, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 2529, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2719, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 2749, 5-13-03)  
Sec. 35-255. - Applicability to local telephone service. 
The taxes imposed by this article on consumers of local telephone service shall apply to all charges made for local telephone service except local messages which are paid for by inserting a coin or coins in coin-operated telephones. 
(Ord. No. 2321, 5-9-95)  
Sec. 35-256. - Exemptions. 
The United States of America and the Commonwealth of Virginia, together with all agencies thereof, are hereby exempt from the payment of the taxes imposed by this article with respect to the purchase of services used by such governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2321, 5-9-95)  
Sec. 35-257. - Computation when service provider collects charges periodically. 
In all cases where a service provider collects charges for services periodically, the taxes imposed by this article may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during such period; provided, that the amount of the taxes to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Ord. No. 2321, 5-9-95)  
Sec. 35-258. - Duty of service provider to collect, report and remit; penalty and interest. 
(a)  Before engaging in business in the city, every service provider shall register with the commissioner of the revenue and provide, on a form prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue, sufficient information about the service provider and its manner of doing business to ensure that the taxes imposed and levied by this article will be properly assessed. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every service provider, in acting as the tax collection medium or agency for the city, to collect from each consumer, for the use of the city, the taxes imposed and levied by this article at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for the service. The taxes so collected during each calendar month shall be reported and remitted by each service provider to the treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the second calendar month thereafter. The required report shall be created by the treasurer and request all information that may be required by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(c)  Failure to report or remit the taxes so collected on or before the due date set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall result in a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount due or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater, which shall be added to the amount due; provided, however, that the penalty shall not exceed the amount due. 
(d)  The treasurer shall provide the commissioner of the revenue by the fifteenth of each month with copies of all reports submitted in the preceding month by persons required to collect the tax levied by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2321, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2719, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03)  
Sec. 35-258.1. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report, etc. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to ascertain the name of every service provider liable for the collection of the tax imposed and levied by this article, as well as the name of every service provider that fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make, within the time provided by this article, the reports and remittances required by this article. 
(b)  If any service provider, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail, refuse or neglect to collect the tax imposed and levied under this article or to make, within the time provided in this article, the reports and remittances required by this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall obtain the facts and information necessary to make an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of the revenue has procured such facts and information, he shall proceed to determine and assess the tax imposed and levied by this article and shall notify such service provider, by certified mail, sent to its last known place of business, of the total amount of such tax, penalties and interest; at the same time, a copy of this notice shall be provided to the city treasurer. The total amount of this assessment shall be payable within ten (10) days from the date of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 2719, 9-3-02)  
Sec. 35-259. - Service provider's records. 
Each service provider shall keep complete records showing all purchases of local telecommunication service in the city, which records shall show the date of each bill, the price each consumer is charged with respect to each purchase, and the amount of taxes imposed by this article. Such records shall be made maintained for a period of five (5) years and shall be made available for inspection by the commissioner of the revenue or his duly authorized agents at reasonable times during normal business hours. The commissioner of the revenue or his duly authorized agents shall have the authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may deem necessary and appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2321, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2719, 9-3-02)  
Sec. 35-260. - Duties of commissioner of the revenue and city treasurer. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue shall be charged with auditing the reports required by this article, ensuring that service providers are registered to collect the tax levied by this article, and responding to all inquiries that may be made by taxpayers or service providers. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall be charged with the receipt and collection of the taxes levied by this article, and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2321, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2719, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03)  
Sec. 35-261. - Refund. 
Any consumer shall be entitled to a refund from the city equal to the amount of any local telecommunication service tax the consumer paid to a jurisdiction outside of the commonwealth if such tax was legally imposed in such other jurisdiction; however, the amount of credit or refund shall not exceed the tax paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2321, 5-9-95)  
Sec. 35-262. - Failure of consumer to pay; violations of article by service provider. 
Any consumer failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed by this article and any service provider violating the provisions of this article, and any officer, agent or employee of any service provider violating the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction for such violation shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this article, and any penalty and interest associated therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2321, 5-9-95)  
Sec. 35-263. - Compensation for collection of E-911 tax. 
Pursuant to section 58.1-3813.1 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, whenever the tax imposed by section 35-254(d) of this article is collected by the service provider acting as the tax collection medium or agency for the city, such service provider shall be allowed as compensation for the collection and remittance of the tax three (3) percent of the amount of tax due and accounted for. The service provider shall deduct this compensation from the payments reported and remitted to the treasurer in accordance with section 35-258(b). 
(Ord. No. 2321, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2719, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 2791, 12-9-03)  
Sec. 35-264. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2529, adopted May 11, 1999, deleted § 35-264, which pertained to a reduction of E-911 tax and which derived from Ord. No. 2321, adopted May 9, 1995.  
ARTICLE XIV. - VIDEO PROGRAMMING EXCISE TAX 
 
Sec. 35-265. - Definitions. 
Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for purposes of this article, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Cable operator means any person or group of persons (i) that provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns an interest in such cable system or (ii) that otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system. 
End-user subscriber means the ultimate consumer of the video programming provided by video programmers over any means of transmission. End-user subscriber does not include a video programmer that purchases a common carrier's video dialtone transport service to provide video programming over the common carrier's video dialtone system. 
Gross receipts means the amount charged for or received by (i) video programmers from sales of video programming and (ii) persons from sales of access to video programming, by any means of transmission, directly to end-user subscribers with service addresses in the city. Gross receipts shall not include: (i) amounts charged for or received by persons from sales of telephone access or service that entitles the subscriber to the privilege of interactive telephonic quality telecommunications with substantially all persons having telephone or radio telephone stations constituting a part of a particular system or in a specified area; (ii) the excise tax imposed pursuant to this section if the tax is shown as a separate line charge to end-user subscribers; (iii) any other taxes, fees or surcharges on services furnished by common carriers or video programmers which are imposed on subscribers by the commonwealth, counties, cities or towns pursuant to statute, ordinance, resolution or regulation and which are collected on behalf of said governmental unit by the provider of the services; or (iv) any portion of a debt related to the sale of video programming or the sale of access to a video network, the gross charges for which are not otherwise deductible or excludable, that have become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards. If the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the video programmer or person shall report and pay the excise tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made. 
Local jurisdiction means a county, city or town located in Virginia. 
Person means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, governmental entity, limited liability company, or any other entity. 
Video dialtone service means a common carrier service for the transport of video programming to end-user subscribers. 
Video programmer means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, governmental entity, limited liability company, or any other entity that sells video programming to end-user subscribers. 
Video programming means video and/or information programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a cable operator. Video programming does not include online, interactive, information services to the extent access to such services is accomplished via a dial-up or private telephone line. 
(Ord. No. 2320, 5-9-95)  
Sec. 35-266. - Imposed. 
Pursuant to section 58.1-3818.3 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, there is hereby imposed and levied on any person that sells video programming to end-user subscribers located within the city by any means of transmission, or provides such end-user subscribers with access to video programming by any means of transmission, with or without the use of wires, an excise tax of five (5) percent on the gross receipts received from the provision of cable service or video programming services to customers in the city, and that is not otherwise subject to local fees or taxes (other than generally applicable taxes) on the gross receipts received from the provision of cable service or video programming services to customers in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2320, 5-9-95)  
Sec. 35-267. - Payment; pass-through; penalty and interest. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall be paid to the city treasurer by each person quarterly on or before March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31 and shall be calculated based on the gross receipts of each person during the three (3) months prior to the month of payment. Any payment of tax shall be considered as timely made if the payment which has been received by the city treasurer is postmarked by the United States Postal Service on or prior to the final day on which payment is to be received. 
(b)  Any person subject to tax imposed pursuant to this article may elect at any time to pass through to end-user subscribers, as a separate, itemized line charge on the end-user subscriber's bill, the excise tax imposed hereunder. If this tax is passed through to and collected from end-user subscribers, the taxes collected shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city until remitted. 
(c)  Failure to pay the taxes to the city treasurer on or before the due date set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall result in a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount due or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is lesser, which shall be added to the amount due. In addition, interest at the rate of ten (10) percent annually from the first day following the last day the taxes are due to be paid may be added to the overdue principal and penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2320, 5-9-95)  
Sec. 35-268. - Records. 
Each person subject to the tax imposed pursuant to this article shall maintain records of its gross receipts, and any other records associated with such person's payment of the tax. Such records shall be maintained for a period of three (3) years and shall be made available for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times during normal business hours. The duly authorized agents of the city shall have the authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may deem necessary and appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2320, 5-9-95)  
Sec. 35-269. - Duties of city treasurer. 
The city treasurer shall be charged with the collection of the taxes imposed by this article and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2320, 5-9-95)  
Sec. 35-270. - Credit. 
Any person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall be entitled to a credit against such taxes equal in amount to any communications industry or similar taxes imposed on gross receipts from interstate video programming activity (other than sales or use tax or a generally applicable corporate income tax) that such person has paid to another state or political subdivision thereof under a lawful requirement of such state or political subdivision on sales by such person of the same video programming or sales of access to such video programming to end-user subscribers located within the city. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax imposed by this article on such sales of video programming or sales of access to video programming for which the tax is claimed. If the tax imposed by this article is passed through to and collected from end-user subscribers, any tax credit permitted hereunder shall also be passed through to and credited against taxes collected from end-user subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 2320, 5-9-95)  
Sec. 35-271. - Violations of article by service provider. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article, and any officer, agent or employee of any person violating the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction for such violation shall not relieve any such person from the payment of the tax as provided in this article, and any penalty and interest associated therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2320, 5-9-95)  
Sec. 35-272. - Effective date. 
Pursuant to section 58.1-3818.3.B. of the Code of Virginia, as amended, this article shall become effective on September 1, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 2320, 5-9-95)  
Secs. 35-273, 35-274. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - LOCAL VEHICLE LICENSE 
 
Sec. 35-275. - Local vehicle license term; definition. 
(a)  After the transition period described in this Article, the term for the license for motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers required by this Article shall be one (1) year, which shall correspond to the identical period for the state vehicle registration for that vehicle, trailer or semitrailer. Every local vehicle license term shall begin at the time when the vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is registered by the State Department of Motor Vehicles, and shall expire at the same time the state registration expires, which is the last day of the twelfth month next succeeding the date of registration, as provided by Code of Virginia § 46.2-646. Every local vehicle license, unless otherwise provided, shall be renewed annually on application by the owner and by payment of the fees required by law, with the renewal to take effect on the first day of the month succeeding the date of expiration. If the State Department of Motor Vehicles offers a quarterly or multi-year registration option and if the vehicle owner chooses this option, then the local vehicle license term shall match the term chosen by the owner for the state vehicle registration, with the annual fee prorated as necessary. 
(b)  As used in this Article, "local vehicle license" shall mean the license authorized by Code of Virginia § 46.2-752 to be required for motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), if the State Department of Motor Vehicles offers a permanent registration option and if the vehicle owner chooses this option, then the term of the local vehicle license for this vehicle shall correspond to the period for which the state registration is valid, subject to payment of the fee established in Section 35-280 of this Article. No further fee shall be required as long as the title for the vehicle remains vested in the owner. Furthermore, no fee shall be charged for any vehicle permanently licensed by the state prior to January 1, 2003. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 35-276. - Applicability of Article. 
The requirements of this Article shall be applicable to any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer normally garaged, stored or parked in this City. If it cannot be determined where any vehicle is normally garaged, stored or parked, or if the owner of any vehicle is a student attending an institution of higher education, then the requirements of this Article shall be applicable if the owner of such vehicle is domiciled in this City. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 35-277. - General procedure. 
(a)  Pursuant to a contractual arrangement with the City, the State Department of Motor Vehicles shall collect the local vehicle license fees required by this article, or portions thereof, for the City, as authorized by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-756. Local vehicle license fees shall be collected at the same time state vehicle registration fees are remitted. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be subject to a local vehicle license tax or fee in more than one (1) jurisdiction for the same time period. 
(c)  The following shall govern situations in which a vehicle acquires situs in the City after a local vehicle license has been issued by a jurisdiction that does not participate in the department of motor vehicles' local vehicle registration program: 
(1)  If the state registration expires before the local vehicle license, then a prorated portion of the local license fee, giving credit for the months paid in the other non-participating jurisdiction, shall be due when the state registration is renewed; and 
(2)  If the state registration expires after the local vehicle license, no local vehicle license fee shall be charged for the time period between the expiration of the local vehicle license issued by the non-participating locality and the expiration of the state registration. 
(d)  Proration of the vehicle license fee shall not be required when a vehicle acquires situs in the City after a local vehicle license for this vehicle has been purchased through the Department of Motor Vehicles' local vehicle registration program. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 35-278. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No person shall be required to pay the local vehicle license fee prescribed by this Article on any vehicle for which a registration certificate and license is not required by Code of Virginia, Title 46.2, on any vehicle specifically exempt under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-755, or on any vehicle owned solely by a person in active military service, who is in the City solely by reason of military orders and who has a legal residence in a state other than Virginia. 
(b)  Upon presentation to the Commissioner of the Revenue of proof that the vehicle is exempted under this Section, the commissioner of the revenue shall notify the State Department of motor vehicles that no fee is required for such vehicle; provided, however, that military personnel exempt from this section who register a vehicle in Virginia for the first time must initially report this status to the Department of Motor Vehicles. The form of this proof shall be a military leave and earnings statement current within ninety (90) days. 
(c)  In the event that the status of the owner of the vehicle changes so as to no longer qualify the vehicle for the exemption provided herein, the owner shall notify the Commissioner of the Revenue within ten (10) days of the date of such change in status, and shall comply with all other provisions of this Article. The Commissioner of the Revenue shall notify the State Department of Motor Vehicles of each such change in status. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 35-279. - Application. 
The local vehicle license application shall be combined with the state vehicle registration application in a form satisfactory to the City Manager and the State Department of Motor Vehicles. Each local vehicle license fee shall be paid to the State Department of Motor Vehicles at the same time as the state vehicle registration fee is collected, as authorized by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-756. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 35-280. - License requirement; imposition of fee. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a requirement for a local vehicle license, for the terms as established by this Article, on motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers, regularly kept in the City and used upon public roadways of the City. The amount of the fee for this license shall be as set forth in the following subsections of this Section, and shall be due annually at the same time the state registration is obtained, unless specifically provided for otherwise. A valid vehicle registration, issued by the State Department of Motor Vehicles after April 21, 2003, shall, as necessary, document compliance with the local vehicle license requirements imposed by this ordinance and serve as a license. 
(b)  The license fee on a motor vehicle, designed and used for the transportation of passengers, which is self-propelled or designed for self-propulsion, shall be, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Section, imposed in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Motor vehicles weighing four thousand (4,000) pounds or less, and pickup trucks with a gross weight of four thousand (4,000) pounds or less .....$30.00 
(2)  Motor vehicles weighing more than four thousand (4,000) pounds, and pickup trucks with a gross weight from four thousand and one (4,001) pounds to seven thousand five hundred (7,500) pounds .....35.00 
(3)  Motorcycle .....23.00 
(4)  Antique motor vehicles licensed permanently pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-730 (motorcycles or cars) .....13.50 
(5)  Any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer upon which well-drilling machinery is attached and which is permanently used solely for transporting such machinery and any specialized mobile equipment as defined by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-700 .....15.00 
(c)  (1)  Unless otherwise specified in this Article, the license fees for trailers and semitrailers not designed and used for the transportation of passengers on the highways in the commonwealth shall be as follows: 
Registered Gross Weight 	Annual Fee 	Permanent Fee 
0—1,500 lbs. 	$7.50 	$52.00 
1,501—4,000 	18.00 	 52.00 
4,001 lbs. and above 	25.50 	 52.00 
 
(2)  The license fee for each trailer or semitrailer designed for use as living quarters for human beings shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(3)  The license fee for all trailers designed exclusively to transport boats or horses shall be seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50). 
(d)  There is hereby imposed a license fee, to be paid by the owner, upon each motor vehicle not designed and used for the transportation of passengers, whether operated under lease or not. The amount of the license fee shall be determined by the gross weight of the vehicle or combination of vehicles of which it is a part, when loaded to the maximum capacity for which it is registered and licensed by the state, according to the following schedule: 
Pounds     Fee 
4,000 or less .....$24.00 
4,001—16,000 .....29.00 
16,001—17,000 .....30.80 
17,001—18,000 .....32.10 
18,001—19,000 .....33.40 
19,001—20,000 .....34.70 
20,001—21,000 .....36.00 
21,001—22,000 .....37.30 
22,001—23,000 .....38.60 
23,001—24,000 .....39.90 
24,001—25,000 .....41.20 
25,001—26,000 .....42.50 
26,001—27,000 .....43.80 
27,001—28,000 .....45.10 
28,001—29,000 .....46.40 
29,001—30,000 .....47.70 
30,001—31,000 .....49.00 
31,001—32,000 .....50.30 
32,001—33,000 .....51.60 
33,001—34,000 .....52.90 
34,001—35,000 .....54.20 
35,001—36,000 .....55.50 
36,001—37,000 .....56.80 
37,001—38,000 .....58.10 
38,001—39,000 .....59.40 
39,001—40,000 .....60.70 
40,001—41,000 .....62.00 
41,001—42,000 .....63.30 
42,001—43,000 .....64.60 
43,001—44,000 .....65.90 
44,001—45,000 .....67.20 
45,001—46,000 .....68.50 
46,001—47,000 .....69.80 
47,001—48,000 .....71.10 
48,001—49,000 .....72.40 
49,001—50,000 .....73.70 
50,001—51,000 .....75.00 
51,001—52,000 .....76.30 
52,001—53,000 .....77.60 
53,001—54,000 .....78.90 
54,001—55,000 .....80.20 
55,001—56,000 .....81.50 
56,001—56,800 .....82.80 
56,801 and over .....85.00 
(e)  In the case of a combination of a truck or tractor truck and a trailer or semitrailer, each vehicle constituting a part of such combination shall be registered as a separate vehicle, and a separate local vehicle license fee shall be imposed thereon, but, for the purpose of determining the gross weight group into which any such vehicle falls pursuant to subsection (d) of this Section, the combination of vehicles of which such vehicle constitutes a part shall be considered a unit, and the aggregate gross weight of the entire combination shall determine such gross weight group. In determining the fee to be paid for the local license for a truck or tractor truck constituting a part of such combination, the fee shall be assessed on the total gross weight of the combination when loaded to the maximum capacity for which it is registered and licensed. However, there shall be no deduction from this fee for the local vehicle license fee of the trailer or semitrailer in the combination. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2939, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 3285, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3405, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15)  
Sec. 35-281. - Transition period, billing and schedule. 
(a)  A transition period, with prorated license fees, as authorized by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752, will be necessary to adjust to a system in which the term of each local vehicle license conforms to state registration renewal periods. The transition period shall cover the time from January 1, 2003, through June 30, 2005; the transition billing shall be administered by the Department of Motor Vehicles during 2003. 
(b)  The transition billing shall modify the local vehicle license term from the twelve-month period to correspond to the date that the state registration period for that vehicle expires. During this period, the local vehicle license fee amount shall equal one-twelfth of the annual fee required for that vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, multiplied by the number of months from January 1, 2003 until the state registration for the vehicle must be renewed; this determination shall be made on the day preceding the implementation of local vehicle licensing through the department of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 35-282. - Proration of fee. 
If proration is necessary in any case, a license fee equal to one-twelfth of all fees required for that vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, multiplied by the number of months for which a local registration fee is owed within the state registration period, shall be collected. The fee shall be computed to the nearest cent. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 35-283. - Payment of personal property taxes and local vehicle license fees prerequisite to state licensing; duties of City Treasurer. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752(J), the Commissioner of the State Department of Motor Vehicles shall not issue or renew any state vehicle registration of any applicant therefor who owes the City any local vehicle license fees or delinquent personal property tax. Before being issued any state vehicle registration or renewal of such license or registration by the Commissioner of the State Department of Motor Vehicles, the applicant must first pay all such local vehicle license fees and delinquent personal property taxes and present satisfactory evidence that all such local vehicle license fees and delinquent personal property taxes have been paid in full. 
(b)  The Treasurer shall have the duty of transmitting all necessary information about unpaid delinquent personal property taxes to the State Department of Motor Vehicles required to ensure that no license is issued to any person with delinquent personal property taxes. If a license is denied by the Department of Motor Vehicles due to unpaid personal property taxes, the Treasurer shall update records of the Department of Motor Vehicles after such taxes have been paid or exonerated by the Commissioner of the Revenue. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 35-284. - Vehicle license at no charge for members of volunteer fire companies or emergency medical services agencies, auxiliary police officers, volunteer police chaplains, auxiliary deputy sheriffs, disabled veterans and surviving spouses of disabled veterans. 
For members of the various volunteer fire companies and emergency medical services agencies in the City, auxiliary police officers serving the City, volunteer police chaplains of the City, auxiliary deputy sheriffs serving the City, disabled veterans as exempted by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-756(B) there shall be no charge for local vehicle licenses, in accord with the following provisions: 
(1)  No license fee shall be charged for one (1) vehicle owned by each active member of the various volunteer fire companies and emergency medical services agencies, each active auxiliary police officer, each active volunteer police chaplain, and each active auxiliary deputy sheriff, and each such volunteer who, although presently inactive, has completed ten (10) or more years of active service in the City. Such persons shall submit a letter to the Commissioner of the Revenue from the Chief of his fire company or emergency medical services agency or, in the case of auxiliary police officers and volunteer police chaplains, from the Chief of Police, or in the case of auxiliary deputy sheriffs, from the Sheriff, stating that he is an active member of the company or squad or is an active auxiliary police officer, volunteer police chaplain or auxiliary deputy sheriff, or that, if inactive, he has completed ten (10) or more years of active service. The preceding exemption from the license fee shall apply to active members of volunteer fire companies and emergency medical services agencies, and each active auxiliary police officer, volunteer police chaplain and auxiliary deputy sheriff, regardless of whether the volunteer owns or leases the vehicle for which the exemption is requested. 
(2)  Each such volunteer fire company or emergency medical services agency member, auxiliary police officer, volunteer police chaplain and auxiliary deputy sheriff shall, at the time the license fee is exempted, agree to notify the Commissioner of the Revenue, if and when such volunteer becomes inactive prior to completing ten (10) or more years of active service. 
(3)  The Chief of each volunteer fire company and emergency medical services agency, the Chief of Police, and the Sheriff shall submit to the Commissioner of the Revenue the names and length of active volunteer service of members, auxiliary police officers and police chaplains and auxiliary deputy sheriffs who become inactive. 
(4)  No local vehicle license fee shall be charged for one (1) motor vehicle owned and personally used by any disabled veteran and each surviving spouse of a disabled veteran exempted from paying an annual registration fee by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-739(B). 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3432, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 35-285. - Disposition of taxes generally. 
All local vehicle license fees collected under this Article by the State Department of Motor Vehicles shall be deposited into a fiduciary account and held in trust for the City. Each month, such fees shall be delivered to the City Treasurer, who shall credit such fees to the general fund of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 35-286. - Refund for unused portion of license fee. 
Any person who has paid a current license fee, and who moved out of state, or who disposes of the vehicle for which it was paid or otherwise surrenders its registration, may inform the State Department of Motor Vehicles, and request a refund for the unused portion of the license fee paid under this Article. The State Department of Motor Vehicles shall refund to the applicant a prorated portion, in six-month increments, of the local vehicle license fee, if application for the refund is made when six (6) or more months are remaining in the license period, in the same manner as provided by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-688. 
(Ord. No. 2903, 12-13-05)  
Secs. 35-287—35-299. - Reserved.  
Chapter 35.1 - SANDBRIDGE SPECIAL SERVICE DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 35.1-1. - Creation of the Sandbridge Special Service District. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Code of Virginia, section 15.1-18.3, there is hereby created a Special Service District at Sandbridge for the purposes set forth in Code of Virginia, section 15.1-18.2(c)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2297, 11-1-94)  
Sec. 35.1-2. - Name of district. 
The service district shall be known as the Sandbridge Special Service District. 
(Ord. No. 2297, 11-1-94)  
Sec. 35.1-3. - Boundaries of the Sandbridge Special Service District. 
The Sandbridge Special Service District shall be known and described as follows: 
That property located in Sandbridge and bounded on the north by the USN Fleet Combat Training Center Atlantic; on the south by the Little Island Park; on the east by the Atlantic Ocean; and on the west, north of Sandbridge Road, by the western boundary of the subdivision known as "Sandbridge North Area," and south of Sandbridge Road, by the property of the United States of America and the Back Bay National Wildlife Refuge, as depicted on the map entitled "Sandbridge" dated June 17, 1994, prepared by the department of public works and recorded in Map Book 240, Pgs. 81—84. 
(Ord. No. 2297, 11-1-94)  
Sec. 35.1-4. - Facilities and services to be provided within the Sandbridge Special Service District. 
The Sandbridge Special Service District is created for the purpose of providing financing for the local share of any beach and shoreline management and restoration project for the construction, maintenance, replenishment and restoration of the beach and shoreline on the Atlantic Ocean within the service district. This purpose shall include maintenance of the recreational amenity that is the Sandbridge beach including services required to provide beautification, access, and upkeep of the beach. Toward that end, there shall be provided within the Sandbridge Special Service District those facilities and services necessary or desirable to accomplish the purpose of the service district, including, without limitation, administrative, engineering and other professional services, sand dredging, pumping, grading and hauling facilities and equipment and such other equipment and facilities as may, from time to time, be needed to accomplish the purpose of the service district. 
(Ord. No. 2297, 11-1-94; Ord. No. 3502, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 35.1-5. - Proposed plan for providing facilities and services within the Sandbridge Special Service District. 
The plan is to accumulate dedicated revenue generated for use within the Sandbridge Special Service District to fund the creation and maintenance of a beach berm having an elevation approximately six (6) feet above mean sea level and a width of approximately fifty (50) feet from the nourishment line with a slope of approximately twenty to one (20:1) to the Atlantic Ocean. Implementation of the plan is expected to produce a designed dry beach area of approximately one hundred and twenty (120) feet, which in combination with the fifty-foot berm will yield a dry beach of approximately one hundred and seventy (170) feet at mean tide level. Actual or planned elevations, slopes and beach area may vary from time to time as determined by the district engineer of the Army Corp of Engineers, Norfolk District, and the city's director of public works. In addition to nourishment activities, the Special Service District shall also provide services for the beautification, access, and upkeep of the beach berm. 
(Ord. No. 2297, 11-1-94; Ord. No. 3502, 5-9-17)  
Sec. 35.1-6. - Benefits expected to be realized from the provision of facilities and services within the Sandbridge Special Service District. 
Through the provision of the facilities and services described in section 35.1-4, an attempt will be made to stabilize, maintain and restore the sand beach on the Atlantic Ocean within the service district. Left unattended, the sand beach will suffer the effects of erosion occasioned by the forces of nature. The facilities and services to be provided are expected to benefit owners of property within the service district, as well as residents and visitors, through preservation and enlargement of the sand beach, protect and maintain public recreation areas and public infrastructure and, thereby, protecting life, property and property values within the Sandbridge Special Service District. 
(Ord. No. 2297, 11-1-94)  
Sec. 35.1-7. - Levy of additional taxes to pay, either in whole or part, the expenses and charges for providing additional governmental services with the Sandbridge Special Service District. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Code of Virginia, section 15.1-18.2(c), within the Sandbridge Special Service District, the city council may levy and provide for the collection of additional taxes to fund the city's obligations to pay, either in whole or part, the expenses and charges for providing and maintaining facilities and services incident to beach and shoreline management and restoration on the Atlantic Ocean within the service district. Such additional taxes may include an annual tax upon any property in the service district which is subject to local taxation. The additional taxes may also include a tax on the base transient room rentals, excluding hotels, motels, and travel campgrounds, within the service district at a rate of percentage not higher than five (5) percent which is in addition to any other transient room rental tax imposed city-wide. 
(Ord. No. 2297, 11-1-94)  
Sec. 35.1-8. - Limitation on purposes for which additional taxes levied and collected within the Sandbridge Special Service District may be used. 
All taxes levied and collected pursuant to this chapter within the Sandbridge Special District shall only be used to pay, either in whole or part, the expenses and charges for providing and maintaining facilities and services incident to beach and shoreline management and restoration within the special service district. No additional tax shall be levied for or used to pay for schools, police or general government services not authorized by Code of Virginia, section 15.1-18.2. The proceeds from all such additional taxes as may be levied and collected shall be a special fund and shall be so segregated as to enable the same to be expended within the service district. 
(Ord. No. 2297, 11-1-94)  
Chapter 35.2 - TECHNOLOGY ZONES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 35.2-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The city council of the City of Virginia Beach finds that the development of its commercial and industrial tax base requires incentives, and determines that an appropriate method of offering incentives for the areas described below is to create technology zones as guided and authorized by section 58.1-3850 of the Code of Virginia. The city council finds that the establishment of technology zones will foster development of commercial and industrial businesses engaged in technological research, design and manufacturing to the benefit of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience through the enhancement of public revenues and the creation of employment opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 2682, 1-22-02)  
Sec. 35.2-2. - Administration. 
This article shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or his designee. The city manager, together with the department of economic development will review the criteria and incentives for the technology zone program annually to assure alignment with the city strategy and economic development strategy. 
(Ord. No. 2682, 1-22-02)  
Sec. 35.2-3. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings below, unless otherwise expressly indicated to the contrary: 
(a)  Qualified technology business means a business which derives its gross receipts from the design, development or manufacturing of technology-based products, processes or related services for lease, sale or license. Technology-based products, processes or related services means engaging in the activity of research, development, or manufacture of commodities used in factory automation, biotechnology, biomedical research, chemicals, electronics, computer hardware, computer software, defense, energy, environmental, manufacturing equipment, advanced materials, medical applications, pharmaceuticals, photonics, electronic based subassemblies and components, testing and measurements, telecommunications, systems integration, multi-media, e-commerce, Internet services, and transportation, including training in the aforementioned areas. 
In no case shall the use of computers or telecommunications services by a business in its internal operations qualify or be considered in qualifying the business as a technology business. 
A qualified technology business shall provide a minimum capital investment of tweny million dollars ($20,000,000.00) in personalty and/or improved real estate (exclusive of raw land cost) or provide for the creation of three hundred (300) new full time employees. Additionally, such business must pay its employees average salaries, including benefits, of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) annually. All businesses, whether newly located or existing within the boundaries of a technology zone, which qualify under the criteria set out above may be considered for qualified technology business status. Qualification shall be granted and certified in writing by the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  Qualified zone resident means an owner or tenant of real property located in a technology zone who expands or rehabilitates such property to locate the operation of a qualified technology business within the technology zone. The term property means a parcel, lot or unit for which a site plan or building permit application has been submitted for approval. Qualification of a zone resident shall be granted and certified in writing by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2682, 1-22-02)  
Sec. 35.2-4. - Boundaries of technology zones. 
(a)  The technology zones shall be established by city council by ordinance upon findings that the incentives provided herein will enhance the establishment and growth of technology businesses within the area under consideration. 
As technology zones are established by city council, they shall be further identified by reference to the map entitled "Virginia Beach Technology Zones" which shall be incorporated into and made a part of this chapter and all future ordinances establishing a technology zone. 
(b)  Qualified technology businesses, and, where applicable, qualified zone residents located in a designated technology zone shall be entitled to the incentives offered in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2682, 1-22-02)  
Sec. 35.2-5. - Business tax rebate. 
(a)  All qualified technology businesses shall be entitled to a rebate of business, professional and occupational license taxes imposed by Chapter 18 of the Virginia Beach City Code as follows: 
(1)  One hundred (100) percent rebate in year one (1); 
(2)  Eighty (80) percent rebate in year two (2); 
(3)  Sixty (60) percent rebate in year three (3); 
(4)  Forty (40) percent rebate in year four (4); and 
(5)  Twenty (20) percent rebate in year five (5). 
Year one (1) is the first full calendar year in which a business operates as a qualified technology business. However, if a business operates as a qualified technology business for a period of less than six (6) months in the calendar year, such qualified technology business may elect to designate the following calendar year as year one (1) for purposes of obtaining the business tax rebate. 
(b)  The rebate shall apply for a period of five (5) calendar years or until such time that the business no longer operates as a qualified technology business, whichever is the first to occur. If a business ceases to be a qualified technology business, ceases to meet the minimum criteria for a qualified technology business or removes its operation from the City of Virginia Beach during a year in which the rebate applies, supplemental prorated business license tax shall be prorated for the months the business was a qualified technology business. 
(c)  If more than one-half (½) of the gross receipts of a qualified technology business are derived from a licensable activity that qualifies the business, the business license tax assessed on all gross receipts of such licensable activity shall be subject to the graduated rebates described above. If one-half (½) or less of the gross receipts of a particular licensable activity of a qualified technology business is derived from qualifying operations, the graduated rebates shall be applied only to the amount of tax attributable to the gross receipts earned from the qualifying business activity. 
(d)  In order to qualify for a business license tax rebate under this article, during the first twelve (12) months of operation within the technology zone, a qualified technology business must apply to the department of economic development who will investigate and forward the application to the city manager or his designee to determine if the business is a qualified technology business. The qualified technology business shall have the burden of demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the city manager, that it meets the definition of a qualified technology business and that it meets all applicable criteria for a business license tax rebate. The qualified technology business shall also file an annual business license application with the commissioner of the revenue and shall provide the commissioner with certification from the city manager that the business is a qualified technology business. The amount of gross receipts to be earned shall be set out in the license application and shall be subject to verification by the commissioner of the revenue by audit or inspection of documents. The qualified technology business shall also provide the commissioner with proof that no local taxes or fees are outstanding at the time of application for the business license tax rebate. 
(e)  Failure of a qualified technology business to pay in full by the due date any taxes imposed by the city shall result in the denial or revocation of the tax rebate for the remainder of the current calendar year. 
(f)  All business license tax rebates are subject to adjustment by the commissioner of the revenue based on actual gross receipts earned from qualifying technology business activities. Any additional business license tax assessed due to such adjustments, or due to revocation of the tax rebate, shall be subject to collection and delinquency provisions set out in Chapter 18 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2682, 1-22-02)  
Sec. 35.2-6. - Fee reimbursements under city ordinances. 
The fee reimbursements provided below shall apply to qualified technology businesses and, where applicable, qualified zone residents, for new construction, alterations and rehabilitation, provided (i) that at least one hundred (100) percent of the total cost of the construction is expended on facilities which will house or directly accommodate a qualified technology business; and (ii) that the application for fee reimbursements is submitted to the director of economic development within eighteen (18) months from the date a certificate of occupancy is issued . Fees reimbursed pursuant to this article shall be paid out by the city. 
(a)  Fees imposed under the building code. Applications for reimbursement of all fees imposed under Chapter 8 of the City Code entitled "Buildings and Building Regulations" shall be made to the director of economic development along with a certification from the city manager that the applicant is a qualified technology business or a qualified zone resident and evidence that the proposed construction will meet the criteria set out above for fee reimbursement. All building code fees must be paid by the qualified technology business or qualified zone resident prior to receiving reimbursement from the department of economic development. 
(b)  Fees imposed under the zoning ordinance. Applications for reimbursement for fees imposed for rezonings and conditional rezonings under section 107 of the city zoning ordinance (Appendix A) and for fees imposed for conditional use permits under section 221(b) of the city zoning ordinance (Appendix A) shall be made to the director of economic development. Such application shall include certification from the city manager that the applicant is a qualified technology business or a qualified zone resident and evidence that the proposed land use and/or construction activities will meet the criteria set out above for fee reimbursement. All land use application fees must be paid by the qualified technology business or qualified zone resident prior to receiving reimbursement from the department of economic development. 
(c)  Fees imposed under subdivision regulations and site plan ordinance. Application for reimbursement of fees imposed for subdivision and site plan review under the city's subdivision regulations (Appendix B) and the city's site plan ordinance (Appendix C) shall be made to the director of economic development. Such application shall include certification from the city manager that the applicant is a qualified technology business or a qualified zone resident and evidence that the proposed land use and /or construction activities will meet the criteria set out above for fee reimbursement. All subdivision and/or site plan review fees must be paid by the qualified technology business or qualified zone resident prior to receiving reimbursement from the department of economic development. 
(d)  Water and sewer connection fees. Application for reimbursement of water and sewer connection fees imposed under Chapter 37 of the City Code shall be made to the director of economic development. Applications shall include certification from the city manager that the applicant is a qualified technology business or a qualified zone resident and evidence that the utility connections and related construction will meet the criteria set out above for fee reimbursement. All water and sewer connection fees must be paid by the qualified technology business or qualified zone resident prior to receiving reimbursement from the department of economic development. 
(Ord. No. 2682, 1-22-02)  
Sec. 35.2-7. - Non-waiver. 
Unless expressly stated herein, this article shall not be construed to waive the requirement of any ordinance, regulation or policy of the City of Virginia Beach, including, but not limited to, those ordinances, regulations and policies which require permits and approvals for land use and construction. Additionally, unless stated otherwise herein, nothing in this article shall be construed as waiving the right of the City of Virginia Beach to enforce its ordinances, regulations or policies to collect any taxes, fees, fines, penalties, or interest imposed by law on a qualified technology business or qualified zone resident or upon real or personal property owned or leased by a qualified technology business or qualified zone resident. The City of Virginia Beach reserves the right to remove qualified technology business or qualified zone resident status for any business that is not compliant with any city ordinance, regulation, policy or other legal requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2682, 1-22-02)  
Sec. 35.2-8. - Education and promotion. 
The city manager or his designee shall develop programs to educate the public and potential businesses of the benefits of technology zones. 
(Ord. No. 2682, 1-22-02)  
Sec. 35.2-9. - Restrictions. 
No qualified technology business or qualified zone resident may apply for or receive a tax or fee rebate or reimbursement under this article on the basis of a building permit issued on construction commenced prior to the establishment of the technology zone in which the property lies. 
(Ord. No. 2682, 1-22-02)  
ARTICLE II. - APZ-1 TECHNOLOGY/BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY ZONE. 
 
Sec. 35.2-10. - Intent; findings. 
(a)  It is the intent of the City Council in establishing the Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1) Technology/Business Opportunity Zone to: 
(1)  Facilitate the establishment and growth of businesses that are compatible with flight operations at Naval Air Station Oceana, as determined pursuant to Section 1804 of the City Zoning Ordinance, in areas within Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1); and 
(2)  Preserve and protect the health, safety and quality of life of persons who work or reside in APZ-1 and not adversely affect established residential neighborhoods. 
(b)  The City Council hereby finds that: 
(1)  The establishment of a technology/business opportunity zone in APZ-1 will foster the development of businesses in APZ-1 that are compatible with aircraft operations at Naval Air Station Oceana and other uses in APZ-1, to the benefit of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience through the enhancement of public revenues and the creation of employment opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 2931, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 35.2-11. - Establishment of APZ-1 Technology/Business Opportunity Zone. 
(a)  The APZ-1 Technology/Business Opportunity Zone is hereby established. The zone shall consist of all areas within APZ-1, as shown on the official zoning map of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the other provisions in this chapter, all qualifying businesses located in APZ-1 shall be entitled to a rebate of ninety (90) percent of business, professional and occupational license taxes imposed by Chapter 18 of the City Code. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the other provisions in this chapter, fee reimbursements for fees imposed under the building code, fees imposed under the zoning ordinance, fees imposed under subdivision regulations and the site plan ordinance, and water and sewer connection fees, shall be provided to all qualifying businesses for new construction, alterations, and rehabilitation in APZ-1. 
(d)  A "qualifying business" for purposes of this section is defined as any business that conforms to the requirements of Section 1804, Table 2, of the City Zoning Ordinance that is located or locates in the APZ-1 Technology/Business Opportunity Zone and complies with and continuously maintains such compliance with the development standards set forth in Section 1810 of the City Zoning Ordinance. Qualifying businesses may include businesses currently located in APZ-1, businesses relocating to APZ-1 and new businesses locating in APZ-1. 
(e)  The tax rebate provided under this section shall be available to any qualifying business for a period of fifteen (15) years from the date of the approval of its application pursuant to Section 1810 of the City Zoning Ordinance, so long as the business remains in compliance with the development standards set forth in Section 1810 of the City Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2931, 3-28-06)  
Chapter 35.3 - NEIGHBORHOOD DREDGING SPECIAL SERVICE DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 35.3-1. - Creation of Neighborhood Dredging Special Service Districts. 
This chapter shall provide for the establishment of Neighborhood Dredging Special Service Districts, hereinafter "Neighborhood Dredging SSD" or "Service District," pursuant to the authority contained in the Code of Virginia, section 15.2-2400, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 3199, § 1, 9-13-11)  
Sec. 35.3-2. - Facilities and services to be provided within Neighborhood Dredging Special Service Districts. 
Each Neighborhood Dredging SSD is created for the purpose of providing financing for any dredging of creeks and rivers to maintain existing uses within the Service District. Toward that end, there shall be provided within the Service District financing for all expenses for those facilities and services necessary or desirable to accomplish the purpose of the Service District, including, without limitation, administrative, engineering, legal, permitting, and any other professional services, dredging, grading and hauling facilities and equipment and such other equipment, mitigation costs, if any, and facilities, including real property acquisition, as may, from time to time, be needed to accomplish the purpose of the service districts. 
(Ord. No. 3199, § 1, 9-13-11)  
Sec. 35.3-3. - Proposed plan for providing funding for facilities and services within the Neighborhood Dredging Special Service Districts. 
(a)  Each Neighborhood Dredging SSD project shall have three types or levels of dredging: city spur channel dredging; neighborhood channel dredging; and property access channel dredging. 
(b)  The city spur channel dredging is supported by city funds. 
(c)  The neighborhood channel dredging is supported by revenue generated by the Service District taxes as provided herein. 
(d)  The property access channel dredging is supported by individual contributions paid from Service District property owners for purposes of funding those services set forth in section 35.3-2. 
(Ord. No. 3199, § 1, 9-13-11)  
Sec. 35.3-4. - Benefits expected to be realized from the provision of facilities and services within the Neighborhood Dredging Special Service Districts. 
Through the provision of the facilities and services described in section 35.3-2, an attempt will be made to dredge certain creeks and rivers to maintain existing uses. The facilities and services to be provided are expected to benefit owners of property within the service districts, as well as residents and visitors, through preservation and enlargement of the navigable waters of the city, enhance and improve storm water capacity and water quality, protect and maintain public recreation areas and public infrastructure and, thereby, protecting life, property and property values within the special service districts. 
(Ord. No. 3199, § 1, 9-13-11)  
Sec. 35.3-5. - Levy of additional taxes to pay, either in whole or part, the expenses and charges for providing additional services with the Neighborhood Dredging Special Service Districts. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Code of Virginia, section 15.2-2403(6), within each Neighborhood Dredging SSD, the city council may levy and provide for the collection of additional taxes to fund the city's obligations to pay, either in whole or part, the expenses and charges for providing and maintaining facilities and services within the Service Districts. Such additional taxes may include an annual tax upon any property in the service district which is subject to local taxation. 
(Ord. No. 3199, § 1, 9-13-11)  
Sec. 35.3-5.1. - Deferral of dredging special services district taxes for qualifying senior and disabled persons. 
(a)  For those special service districts established in this chapter 35.3 of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach, the council finds that the additional levies may be a burden that certain qualifying senior and disabled persons are unable to bear. 
(b)  Any owner of property subject to additional levy of Neighborhood Dredging Special Service District Taxes may, by the application procedure set forth in section 35-66, apply for a deferral of such additional levies. 
(c)  The deferral of such taxes requires the applicant meet the age or disability criteria and net worth qualifications for the deferral of general real estate taxes as authorized by section 35-61, et seq. The applicant may defer the same percentage of SSD levies that the applicant would be eligible for exemption pursuant to the income requirements in section 35-67. 
(d)  The accumulated amount of such taxes deferred shall be paid, to the treasurer of the city or the clerk of the circuit court, as the case may be, by the vendor upon the sale of the dwelling, or from the estate of the decedent within one year from the death of the last owner thereof who qualifies for tax deferral by the provision of this section. Such deferred special service district taxes shall be paid without penalty and without interest. The deferred special service district taxes shall constitute a lien upon the real estate as if they had been assessed without regard to the deferral permitted by this section; provided, however, that such lien shall, to the extent that they exceed the aggregate ten (10) percent of the price for which such real estate may be sold, be inferior to all other liens of record. 
(e)  No later than the first day of August on the third anniversary of the original due date had such special service district taxes not been deferred as provided herein, the treasurer shall certify to the clerk of the circuit court a list of all real estate against which deferred special service district taxes are still outstanding, and the clerk shall cause such deferred taxes to be recorded as a lien against the respective real estate as liens are customarily recorded and to be marked as deferred. 
(f)  Any deferred amounts outstanding after the dissolution of any special service district established by this chapter shall be paid notwithstanding such dissolution and such amounts shall be directed to the city's general fund. 
(Ord. No. 3304, § 1, 9-10-13)  
Sec. 35.3-6. - Limitation on purposes for which additional taxes levied and collected within the Neighborhood Dredging Special Service Districts may be used. 
All taxes levied and collected, and any property access channel contribution, pursuant to this chapter within a Neighborhood Dredging SSD shall only be used to pay, either in whole or part, the expenses and charges for providing and maintaining facilities and services within the Service District. No additional tax shall be levied for or used to pay for schools, police or general government services not authorized by Code of Virginia, section 15.2-2403. The proceeds from all such additional taxes as may be levied and collected shall be a special fund and shall be so segregated as to enable the same to be expended within the service districts. Any property access channel contribution shall be separately accounted within the Service District Fund or Capital Improvement Program, whichever applies. 
(Ord. No. 3199, § 1, 9-13-11)  
Sec. 35.3-7. - Creation of the Old Donation Creek Area Dredging Special Services District. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Old Donation Creek Area Dredging Special Service District for the purposes set forth in this chapter and those set forth in Code of Virginia, section 15.2-2403. 
(b)  The boundaries of the Old Donation Creek Area Dredging Special Service District shall be described in detail by the map attached to this ordinance. [A copy can be found in the city offices.] 
(c)  The Old Donation Creek Area Dredging Special Service District shall dissolve on July 1, 2028, if not sooner. 
(Ord. No. 3199, § 1, 9-13-11)  
Sec. 35.3-8. - Creation of the Bayville Creek Area Dredging Special Services District. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Bayville Creek Area Dredging Special Service District for the purposes set forth in this chapter and those set forth in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2403. 
(b)  The boundaries of the Bayville Creek Area Dredging Special Service District shall be described in detail by the map attached to this ordinance. 
(c)  The Bayville Creek Area Dredging Special Service District shall dissolve on July 1, 2028, if not sooner. 
(Ord. No. 3226, § 1, 3-27-12) 
Note— Ordinance No. 3226, § 2, effective July 1, 2012, states there shall be levied and collected beginning in fiscal year 2013, taxes for the special purpose of providing neighborhood dredging on all real estate within and pursuant to the Bayville Creek Area Dredging Special Service District at the rate of 36.3 cents ($0.363) on each one hundred dollars ($100) of assessed value thereof. This real estate tax rate shall be in addition to the real estate tax rate set forth by the General Real Estate Tax Levy adopted by City Council. This tax rate shall apply without reduction to any properties subject to ad valorem taxes including those properties enrolled in the Exemption, Deferral or Freeze for Elderly and Disabled Persons, City Code §§ 35-61, et seq. As set forth in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2403(6), written consent is required to apply this tax rate to the full assessed value of properties subject to special use value assessment. The real estate tax rate imposed herein shall be applied on the basis of one hundred percentum (100%) of the fair market value of such real property except for public service real property, which shall be on the basis as provided in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2604. 
Note— Ordinance No. 3226, § 3, effective March 27, 2012, states the City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to enter into contracts and to perform other actions consistent with this ordinance.  
Sec. 35.3-9. - Creation of the Shadowlawn Area Dredging Special Services District. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Shadowlawn Area Dredging Special Service District for the purposes set forth in this chapter and those set forth in Code of Virginia, section 15.2-2403. 
(b)  The boundaries of the Shadowlawn Area Dredging Special Service District shall be described in detail by the map attached to this ordinance [Ord. No. 3267]. 
(c)  The Shadowlawn Area Dredging Special Service District shall dissolve on July 1, 2029, if not sooner. 
(Ord. No. 3267, 3-12-13, eff. immediately) 
Note— There shall be levied and collected beginning in fiscal year 2014, taxes for the special purpose of providing neighborhood dredging on all real estate within and pursuant to the Shadowlawn Area Dredging Special Service District at the rate of 15.94 cents ($0.1594) on each one hundred dollars ($100) of assessed value thereof. This real estate tax rate shall be in addition to the real estate tax rate set forth by the General Real Estate Tax Levy adopted by City Council. Except as provided explicitly in Chapter 35.3 of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach, this tax rate shall apply without reduction to any properties subject to ad valorem taxes including those properties enrolled in the Exemption, Deferral or Freeze for Elderly and Disabled Persons, City Code §§ 35-61, et seq. As set forth in Code of Virginia, section 15.2-2403(6), written consent is required to apply this tax rate to the full assessed value of properties subject to special use value assessment. The real estate tax rate imposed herein shall be applied on the basis of one hundred percentum (100%) of the fair market value of such real property except for public service real property, which shall be on the basis as provided in Section 58.1-2604 of the Code of Virginia. This paragraph is effective July 1, 2013. 
The City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to enter into contracts and to perform other actions consistent with this ordinance. This paragraph is effective immediately.  
Sec. 35.3-10. - Creation of the Chesopeian Colony Area Dredging Special Services District. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Chesopeian Colony Area Dredging Special Service District for the purposes set forth in this chapter and those set forth in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2403. 
(b)  The boundaries of the Chesopeian Colony Area Dredging Special Service District shall be described in detail by the map attached to this ordinance [Ord. No. 3300]. 
(c)  The Chesopeian Colony Area Dredging Special Service District shall dissolve on July 1, 2030, if not sooner. 
(Ord. No. 3300, § 1, 8-13-13) 
Note— Ordinance No. 3300, § 2, effective January 1, 2014, states there shall be levied and collected taxes for the special purpose of providing neighborhood dredging on all real estate within and pursuant to the Chesopeian Colony Area Dredging Special Service District at the rate of 29.13 cents ($0.2913) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed value thereof. This real estate tax rate shall be in addition to the real estate tax rate set forth by the General Real Estate Tax Levy adopted by City Council. Except as provided explicitly in Chapter 35.3 of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach, this tax rate shall apply without reduction to any properties subject to ad valorem taxes including those properties enrolled in the Exemption, Deferral or Freeze for Elderly and Disabled Persons, City Code §§ 35-61, et seq. As set forth in Code of Virginia, section 15.2-2403(6), written consent is required to apply this tax rate to the full assessed value of properties subject to special use value assessment. The real estate tax rate imposed herein shall be applied on the basis of one hundred percentum (100%) of the fair market value of such real property except for public service real property, which shall be on the basis as provided in Section 58.1-2604 of the Code of Virginia. 
Note— Ordinance No. 3300, § 3, effective August 13, 2013 states the City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to enter into contracts and to perform other actions consistent with this ordinance.  
Sec. 35.3-11. - Creation of the Harbour Point Area Dredging Special Services District. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Harbour Point Area Dredging Special Service District for the purposes set forth in this chapter and those set forth in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2403. 
(b)  The boundaries of the Harbour Point Area Dredging Special Service District shall be described in detail by the map attached to this section. 
(c)  The Harbour Point Area Dredging Special Service District shall dissolve on July 1, 2030, if not sooner. 
(Ord. No. 3321, 1-14-14) 
Note— Ordinance No. 3321, § 2, effective July 1, 2014, states there shall be levied and collected taxes for the special purpose of providing neighborhood dredging on all real estate within and pursuant to the Harbour Point Area Dredging Special Service District at the rate of 7.9 cents ($0.079) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed value thereof. This real estate tax rate shall be in addition to the real estate tax rate set forth by the General Real Estate Tax Levy adopted by City Council. Any deferral of such levies for elderly or disabled persons shall be subject to § 35.3-5.1. As set forth in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2403(6), written consent is required to apply this tax rate to the full assessed value of properties subject to special use value assessment. The real estate tax rate imposed herein shall be applied on the basis of one hundred percentum (100%) of the fair market value of such real property except for public service real property, which shall be on the basis as provided in Code of Virginia § 58.1-2604. 
Note— Ordinance No. 3321, § 3, effective January 14, 2014 states the City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to enter into contracts and to perform other actions consistent with this ordinance.  
Sec. 35.3-12. - Creation of the Gills Cove Area Dredging Special Services District. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Gills Cove Area Dredging Special Service District for the purposes set forth in this chapter and those set forth in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2403. 
(b)  The boundaries of the Gills Cove Area Dredging Special Service District shall be described in detail by the map attached to this Ord. No. 3335. [A copy can be found in the city offices.] 
(c)  The Gills Cove Area Dredging Special Service District shall dissolve on July 1, 2030, if not sooner. 
(Ord. No. 3335, § 1, 3-25-14) 
Note— Ordinance No. 3335, § 2, effective July 1, 2014, states, "There shall be levied and collected taxes for the special purpose of providing neighborhood dredging on all real estate within and pursuant to the Gills Cove Area Dredging Special Service District at the rate of 6.3 cents ($0.063) on each one hundred dollars ($100) of assessed value thereof. This real estate tax rate shall be in addition to the real estate tax rate set forth by the General Real Estate Tax Levy adopted by City Council. Any deferral of such levies for elderly or disabled persons shall be subject to § 35.3-5.1. As set forth in Code of Virginia § 15.2-2403(6), written consent is required to apply this tax rate to the full assessed value of properties subject to special use value assessment. The real estate tax rate imposed herein shall be applied on the basis of one hundred percentum (100%) of the fair market value of such real property except for public service real property, which shall be on the basis as provided in Code of Virginia § 58.1-2604." 
Note— Ordinance No. 3335, § 3, effective March 25, 2014 states, "The City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to enter into contracts and to perform other actions consistent with this ordinance."  
Sec. 35.3-13. - Creation of the Hurd's Cove Area Dredging Special Services District. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Hurd's Cove Area Dredging Special Service District for the purposes set forth in this chapter and those set forth in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2403. 
(b)  The boundaries of the Gills Cove Area Dredging Special Service District shall be described in detail by the map attached to this Ordinance No. 3394. [A copy can be found in the city offices.] 
(c)  The Hurd's Cove Area Dredging Special Service District shall dissolve on July 1, 2031, if not sooner. 
(Ord. No. 3394, § 1, 1-20-15) 
Note— Ordinance No. 3394, § 2, adopted January 20, 2015, states, "There shall be levied and collected taxes for the special purpose of providing neighborhood dredging on all real estate within and pursuant to the Hurd's Cove Area Dredging Special Service District at the rate of 43.8 cents ($0.438) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed value thereof. This real estate tax rate shall be in addition to the real estate tax rate set forth by the General Real Estate Tax Levy adopted by City Council. Any deferral of such levies for elderly or disabled persons shall be subject to § 35.3-5.1. As set forth in Code of Virginia § 15.2-2403(6), written consent is required to apply this tax rate to the full assessed value of properties subject to special use value assessment. The real estate tax rate imposed herein shall be applied on the basis of one hundred percentum (100%) of the fair market value of such real property except for public service real property, which shall be on the basis as provided in Code of Virginia § 58.1-2604." 
Note— Ordinance No. 3394, § 3, adopted January 20, 2015 states, "The City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to enter into contracts and to perform other actions consistent with this ordinance."  
Sec. 35.3-14. - Creation of the Schilling Point Area Dredging Special Services District. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Schilling Point Area Dredging Special Service District for the purposes set forth in this chapter and those set forth in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2403. 
(b)  The boundaries of the Schilling Point Area Dredging Special Service District shall be described in detail by the map attached to Ordinance No. 3595. 
(c)  The Schilling Point Area Dredging Special Service District shall dissolve on July 1, 2035, if not sooner. 
(Ord. No. 3595, § 1, 6-18-19)  
Chapter 35.4 - TOURISM ZONES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 35.4-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The city council of the City of Virginia Beach finds that the development of its tourism related tax base requires the establishment of tourism zones as guided and authorized by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3851. The city council finds that the establishment of tourism zones will foster the development of tourism related businesses, which will increase capital investment and create jobs. 
(Ord. No. 3220, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 35.4-2. - Administration. 
This article shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or his designee. Any application required by this chapter shall be on forms approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 3220, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 35.4-3. - Burden. 
Any business applying for the benefits afforded by this chapter shall have the burden of proving qualification. 
(Ord. No. 3220, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 35.4-4. - Boundaries of tourism zones. 
The tourism zones shall be established by city council by ordinance upon findings that the incentives provided therein will enhance the establishment and growth of tourism related businesses within the area under consideration. As tourism zones are established by city council, they shall be further identified by reference to the map entitled "Virginia Beach Tourism Zones" which shall be incorporated into and made a part of this chapter and all future ordinances establishing a tourism zone. 
(Ord. No. 3220, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 35.4-5. - Incentives. 
(a)  Any ordinance establishing a tourism zone may provide incentives authorized by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3851 and qualification for such incentives by tourism businesses. Any incentive provided within a tourism zone shall be for a period not to exceed ten years from the date of application. 
(b)  The entitlement to any incentive authorized by this chapter shall be conditioned upon the applicant paying any tax imposed by the city including but not limited to business license taxes, business personal property, meals, transient occupancy and admissions taxes by the date upon which the tax is due. In the event a business is 30 or more days delinquent on any local tax, such business forfeits any entitlement to any incentive authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3220, 3-13-12)  
Secs. 35-4.-6—35.4-9. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESORT AREA TOURISM ZONE 
 
Sec. 35.4-10. - Intent; findings. 
(a)  It is the intent of the city council in establishing the Resort Area Tourism Zone to: 
(1)  Facilitate the establishment and growth of businesses that increase capital investment and create jobs; and 
(2)  Increase the inventory of tourism related businesses, with the goal of extending the length of stay of visitors to the city. 
(b)  The city council finds that: 
(1)  The establishment of a tourism zone in the Resort Area will foster the development of business and benefit the public health, safety, welfare and convenience through the enhancement of public revenues and the creation of employment opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 3220, 3-13-12)  
Sec. 35.4-11. - Establishment of the resort area tourism zone. 
The Resort Area Tourism Zone is hereby established. The zone shall consist of the area described in detail by the map attached to this ordinance [Ord. No. 3220]. 
(Ord. No. 3220, 3-13-12)  
Chapter 36 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency medical vehicles, Ch. 10.5; motor vehicle and traffic code, Ch. 21; use of tow truck service to enforce parking restrictions on private property, § 21-419 et seq.; disorderly conduct in public conveyances, § 23-14; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 33. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 36-1. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor.  
Secs. 36-2—36-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIXED-ROUTE BUSES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— In order to facilitate the codification of provisions relative to charter buses, the editor, with the permission of the city, has retitled Art. II from "Buses" to read as set out above. Art. II was, in essence, re-enacted by Ord. No. 1187, adopted June 8, 1981, with no substantive changes, in view of incorporating the material on charter buses as Art. II of Ch. 9 of the 1965 Code. The editor has also renumbered former Art. III, concerning taxicabs, as Art. IV, and has corrected references to this article where they appear throughout this chapter. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 36-16. - Authority for article; article does not grant franchise or vested rights. 
(a)  This article is adopted under the general police power granted to the city by its Charter. It is not intended hereby to grant or offer any franchise. 
(b)  No person operating buses under this article shall acquire any vested right thereunder in the streets of the city or any vested right to use the same. 
(Code 1965, §§ 9-14, 9-26)  
Sec. 36-17. - Application of article. 
The operation of motor bus passenger transportation for hire within the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article and regulations made pursuant thereto; provided, however, that this article shall not apply to school buses, interurban buses, rental vehicles, including charter buses, or taxicabs and for-hire cars regulated by article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 9-26)  
Sec. 36-18. - Compliance with article. 
All of the provisions of this article imposing obligations or requirements on any person operating under this article shall be deemed to be mandatory and any violation of any such obligation or requirement shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1965, § 9-25)  
Sec. 36-19. - Gross receipts tax on operator. 
Any person operating buses under this article shall pay into the treasury of the city two (2) percent on the first one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per annum of gross receipts from intracity bus operations and one percent on all such gross receipts in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per annum. Such sum so paid shall be in lieu of all city license taxes in connection with bus operations of any person operating under this article within the city. Payments of the amounts due under this section shall be made by the operator on or before July tenth and January tenth of each calendar year for the preceding six (6) month period. Any sums due to the city under this section may be collected by legal procedure. 
(Code 1965, § 9-10) 
Cross reference— License code, Ch. 18.  
Sec. 36-20. - Books and records of operator. 
A standard book of accounts and system of bookkeeping, in accordance with general accepted bookkeeping practice, shall be kept and maintained by each person operating buses under this article, insofar as the system of accounts and bookkeeping applies to bus transportation. The director of finance or some accountant duly authorized by the council may, at any time, examine the books of such operator in order to verify or, if need be, to correct the same or any returns and reports made by the operator therefrom. 
(Code 1965, § 9-11)  
Sec. 36-21. - Operator's quarterly reports. 
Complete quarterly reports, in a form approved by the director of finance, shall be made to the city manager by persons operating buses under this article. Such report, for each quarter, shall be delivered to the city manager not later than the twenty-fifth day of the month after the end of the quarter. 
(Code 1965, § 9-12)  
Sec. 36-22. - Indemnity for injuries or damages; liability insurance. 
Any person operating buses under this article shall, by acceptance in writing of the terms and conditions of this article, agree and bind himself to indemnify and save harmless the city or any person from any and all claims, demands or judgments on account of injuries or damages occasioned by the negligence of such person, growing out of the construction of the operator's works or out of the operation of his vehicles under this article. Such person shall carry public liability insurance to provide insurance coverage in amounts of at least twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for personal injury to one person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for personal injuries in one accident and ten thousand dollars ($10, 000.00) for property damage. 
(Code 1965, § 9-19)  
Sec. 36-23. - General standards of operation. 
Any person operating buses under this article shall maintain an adequate and efficient public service at the rates specified. Such person shall maintain and operate his transportation system in accordance with the most approved methods and by the use of the most approved means of surface transportation, without and otherwise than by, the construction or use of railway tracks or the erection of poles and wires. Such person shall maintain all of the physical property used and operated by him at the highest practical standard of efficiency. 
(Code 1965, § 9-16)  
Sec. 36-24. - Operating schedules. 
Any person operating buses under this chapter shall operate and maintain regular schedules so as to render reasonable service on each route served by him. 
(Code 1965, § 9-7)  
Sec. 36-25. - Suspension of operations. 
Any person operating buses under this article shall operate his vehicles regularly over the authorized routes, unless prevented from so doing by act of God or other causes not reasonably preventable. Should it be necessary, in the prosecution of any public work, to stop temporarily the operation of such buses, the city shall not be liable and such person shall be held free from all claims of the city for damages or penalties by reason of the delay or suspension of such business or traffic. 
(Code 1965, § 9-6)  
Sec. 36-26. - Maintenance and safety standards of vehicles. 
All vehicles and the equipment used in connection therewith operated under this article shall, at all times, be kept clean and in proper physical condition and shall conform to the safety standards established by the interstate commerce commission or the state, so as to render safe, adequate and proper public service and so as not to be a menace to the safety of the occupants or of the general public. 
(Code 1965, §§ 9-17, 9-18)  
Sec. 36-27. - Minimum seating capacity. 
No bus of a seating capacity of less than twenty-five (25) passengers shall be operated on the streets of the city in service under this article. 
(Code 1965, § 9-2)  
Sec. 36-28. - Ventilation and heating. 
Any person operating buses under this article shall, at all times, keep all buses operated by him sufficiently ventilated and adequately heated with safe and convenient appliances whenever the weather is such that heating is essential to the comfort of the passengers. 
(Code 1965, § 9-18)  
Sec. 36-29. - Interior lighting. 
No bus operated under this article shall be operated between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, except in case of emergency, unless sufficient light is provided to adequately light the interior of such vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 9-23)  
Sec. 36-30. - Routes—Generally. 
(a)  The routes over which buses shall be operated under this article shall be the routes described in the certificate issued pursuant to division 2 of this article or such routes as may be authorized by the council pursuant to section 36-34. Not more than one operator of buses shall operate over any one authorized route. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in section 36-31, no deviation from an authorized route shall be practiced or permitted, except in the following instances: 
(1)  In case any authorized routes are obstructed on any block, drivers may make a detour by the nearest streets around the block on which such obstruction exists, returning to the prescribed route as soon as the obstruction has been passed. 
(2)  Where buses are operated over other streets in order to get from the garage to the regular routes by the most convenient streets. 
(Code 1965, §§ 9-3—9-5)  
Sec. 36-31. - Same—Modification by city manager. 
(a)  The city manager may, in all cases of fires, accidents, parades, obstructions, breaks in or repairs to streets or any other emergency requiring such action, temporarily modify the routes authorized in certificates issued under division 2 of this article until the emergency calling for such action has terminated. 
(b)  The city manager may issue, at the request of any person operating under a certificate issued pursuant to this article, a temporary permit to operate on routes in addition to those authorized by such certificate, for a length of time not exceeding sixty (60) days, which permit may be renewed by the city manager from time to time for additional sixty (60) day periods, for the purpose of gathering data by actual operation as to whether public convenience requires such additional routes and whether such routes may be profitably operated. 
(Code 1965, § 9-8)  
Sec. 36-32. - Passenger stops. 
All buses operated under this article shall stop for the purpose of taking on or letting off passengers at such points or places as may be designated by schedules filed with the city manager. 
(Code 1965, § 9-20) 
Cross reference— Designation of bus stops, § 21-63; manner of using bus stops, § 21-374; establishment of bus stops in parking meter zones, § 21-400.  
Sec. 36-33. - Fares generally. 
Fares to be charged by any person operating buses under this article shall be as set forth in a tariff filed with the city manager. A tariff shall be filed with the application provided for in section 36-47. The operator may change any fares by filing a new tariff with the city manager and the fares prescribed in such new tariff shall become effective at the expiration of sixty (60) days after such new tariff is filed, unless the city council, proceeding under section 36-34, proposes to consider changing the fares prescribed in the new tariff. 
(Code 1965, § 9-9)  
Sec. 36-34. - Reservation of council's rights; changing fares, routes, etc. 
(a)  The city council expressly reserves the right to pass at any time, in addition to the provisions of this article, any amendments thereto and any and all ordinances deemed necessary by it in the reasonable exercise of its police power, for the safety, welfare and convenience of the public and for the regulation and control of bus transportation within the city. 
(b)  The city council reserves its right to determine the adequacy of fares charged by persons operating buses under this article and to regulate the service rendered by such persons, but recognizes that in its action on any of such matters the ability of the person operating under this article to earn a reasonable return on the operation should be respected, using the operating ratio method of determining the adequacy of earnings. 
(c)  Whenever the city council proposes to consider the question of changing any schedule or fare of the holder of a certificate issued under this article, it shall adopt a resolution so stating and give at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place when such change will be considered to such certificate holder and an opportunity to be heard at such hearing shall be granted such certificate holder. 
(d)  Whenever any holder of a certificate issued under this article wishes to appear before the city council to obtain permission to make any change in his routes or service, he shall notify the city manager of the changes he seeks, at least ten (10) days prior to the time when application will be made to the council for such changes. A like notice shall also be served upon any and all other certificate holders operating under this article. 
(e)  The notice required in subsections (c) and (d) of this section may be waived by mutual consent of the council and the certificate holder. 
(Code 1965, §§ 9-13, 9-15)  
Sec. 36-35. - Discontinuance of operations because of dissatisfaction with established fares. 
In the event any person operating buses under this article is unwilling to continue to operate at the fares established by the council, such person may surrender his certificate and cease operating only upon giving to the city manager ninety (90) days' notice of his intention to do so. 
(Code 1965, § 9-24)  
Sec. 36-36. - Disposition of property left on bus. 
The driver or other person in charge of any bus operated under this article shall carefully preserve any money or other property left in such bus by any passenger and the same shall be promptly deposited with the person owning or operating such bus and shall be kept by him at some convenient point where the same may be called for by the owner. When such money or property has been identified and ownership established, the same shall be promptly delivered to such owner. Any such money or other property which is not called for within three (3) months shall be disposed of according to law. 
(Code 1965, § 9-22)  
Secs. 36-37—36-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OPERATING CERTIFICATE 
 
Sec. 36-46. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any bus within the city, unless he has a valid certificate issued pursuant to this division authorizing such operation. 
(Code 1965, § 9-1)  
Sec. 36-47. - Application generally. 
Application for a certificate required by this division shall be filed with the city manager on forms provided for that purpose. Such application shall specify the route or routes over which the applicant proposed to operate. 
(Code 1965, § 9-1)  
Sec. 36-48. - Applicant's agreement to comply with article. 
Each application for a certificate under this division shall have attached thereto a written agreement, in form approved by the city attorney, that the applicant will conform to and comply with, all provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 9-1)  
Sec. 36-49. - Council action on application. 
(a)  The city manager shall notify the city council when he receives an application for a certificate under this division. Within a reasonable time thereafter, the council shall fix a time and place for a hearing on such application. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given to the public, by publication in a newspaper published in the city once a week for two (2) successive weeks, the last publication to appear at least three (3) days before the day of such hearing. Notice shall also be given to all existing certificate holders, which notice may be served on, or acknowledged by, any resident official or attorney of such certificate holders. 
(b)  After the hearing provided for in subsection (a) above, the council shall either approve or disapprove the application. The council shall not approve the application, unless it finds that the public convenience and necessity require and justify the operation for which the certificate is sought and unless it is satisfied as to the applicant's financial responsibility and ability to conform to, and comply with, the conditions and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 9-1)  
Sec. 36-50. - Issuance; form. 
Upon approval, by the city council, of an application for a certificate under this division, the city manager shall issue the certificate, in form approved by the city attorney, authorizing the applicant to operate buses under this article. 
(Code 1965, § 9-1)  
Sec. 36-51. - Term. 
Certificates issued under this division shall be effective from the date specified therein and shall remain in effect until terminated as provided in section 36-52. 
(Code 1965, § 9-1)  
Sec. 36-52. - Suspension, revocation, alteration or amendment. 
(a)  The city council may, upon its own motion or upon complaint of any person, hold a hearing to determine whether or not a certificate issued under this division should be suspended, revoked, altered or amended. The holder of such certificate shall be given at least thirty (30) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing and shall be granted an opportunity to be heard at such hearing. 
(b)  After the hearing provided for in subsection (a) above, the council may suspend, revoke, alter or amend the certificate, if it has been shown, to the satisfaction of the council, that the holder of the certificate has wilfully made any misrepresentation of material facts in obtaining the certificate or has repeatedly violated or refused to observe the provisions of this article or any terms of the certificate or any of the council's proper orders, rules or regulations imposed under authority of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 9-1)  
Secs. 36-53—36-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CHARTER BUSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1172, adopted May 11, 1981, added an Art. II to Ch. 9 of the 1965 Code. At the editor's discretion, it has been included as Art. III, §§ 36-56—36-62 hereof. See also the editor's note to Art. IV of this chapter. 
 
Sec. 36-56. - Definitions. 
The following term, when used in this article, shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meaning ascribed to it in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charter bus: Any motor vehicle having a seating capacity in excess of six (6) passengers which undertakes to transport people for compensation; provided, however, that such a motor vehicle operated by a public service company or the city on regular schedule and regular route and which charges individual or separate fares for such transportation shall not be included in this definition. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 5-11-81)  
Sec. 36-57. - Parking or stopping of charter buses. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the parking of any charter bus or stopping of any charter bus for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers shall be prohibited between the Friday immediately preceding Memorial Day and the Tuesday immediately following Labor Day, inclusive, of every calendar year on all municipal parking lots and all public streets in the following areas: 
(1)  An area bounded on the west by Birdneck Road, on the south by Rudee Inlet and Lake Rudee, and on the east and north by the boundaries of the Beach District, except that charter buses may stop for no more than fifteen (15) minutes to pick up or discharge passengers on 19th Street at Arctic Avenue in a zone designated "15 Minute Charter Bus Loading and Unloading." Furthermore, the 4th Street Public Parking Lot located by Rudee Inlet Loop has been designated as a pickup and discharge zone with fee parking for charter buses on a first-come, first-served basis. 
(2)  An area bounded on the south by Bay Colony Drive, on the west by the Linkhorn Bay and Seashore State Park, on the north by 89th Street, and on the east by the Atlantic Ocean; including but not limited to those communities denoted as North Virginia Beach, Princess Anne Hills, Bay Colony and Cavalier Park. 
(3)  An area bounded on the south by Camp Pendleton, on the west by Lake Rudee, on the north by Rudee Inlet, and on the east by the Atlantic Ocean; including but not limited to those communities denoted as Southside, Harbor Point and Croatan Beach. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee may authorize the parking or stopping of charter buses in locations and at times otherwise prohibited by subsection (a). Such authorization, if granted, shall be in writing, a copy of which shall be in the possession of the charter bus driver. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 5-11-81; Ord. No. 1475, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 1719, 7-13-87; Ord. No. 1729, 8-24-87; Ord. No. 1838, 3-20-89; Ord. No. 2500, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 2765, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 2878, 5-10-05)  
Sec. 36-58. - Parking and discharge of passengers at Virginia Beach Convention Center. 
All charter buses may park in the designated bus parking spaces at the east end of the parking lot of the Virginia Beach Convention Center by first obtaining a permit from the security office of the Virginia Beach Convention Center. All charter buses parking at the Virginia Beach Convention Center must have such permit prominently displayed on the left side of the windshield at all times while parked within the parking lot of the Virginia Beach Convention Center. 
The number of permits issued shall be determined by the number of available spaces for buses at the Virginia Beach Convention Center, and shall be allotted on a first-come, first-served basis. 
All charter buses may pick up or discharge passengers in the parking lot of the Virginia Beach Convention Center without obtaining a permit provided that such charter bus does not remain parked in the parking lot in excess of fifteen (15) minutes. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 5-11-81; Ord. No. 1547, 7-8-85; Ord. No. 2878, 5-10-050)  
Sec. 36-59. - Enforcement. 
The police department shall be empowered to carry out the provisions of this article and it shall be the responsibility of the police department to take all reasonable steps to prevent the parking of charter buses and the stopping of charter buses for the purpose of picking up and discharging passengers in the prohibited areas denoted in section 36-57. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 5-11-81)  
Sec. 36-60. - Buses transporting parade participants. 
Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting buses transporting participants in a parade from discharging and picking up said participants in designated areas, provided a permit has been issued for the respective parade. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 5-11-81)  
Sec. 36-61. - Exemptions. 
Charter buses that provide transportation to and from convention hotels to the Convention Center are exempt. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 5-11-81; Ord. No. 2878, 5-10-05)  
Sec. 36-62. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, persons, firm, corporation or unincorporated association violating any of the terms or provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of at least fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each reoccurrence of a prohibited act and each day a prohibited act continues shall be construed as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 5-11-81)  
Secs. 36-63—36-66. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TAXICABS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— License tax for taxicabs and for-hire cars, § 18-105. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate taxicabs and similar for-hire vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.1-353. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 36-67. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings set forth in this section: 
City manager means the city manager or his or her duly authorized designee. 
Chief of police means the chief of police or his or her duly authorized designee. 
Certificate means a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued under this article. 
Owner includes the purchaser of any taxicab under a reserve title contract and the lessee of any taxicab. 
Taxicab means any motor-driven vehicle used for the transportation for hire of passengers and equipped with a taximeter. 
Taximeter means any mechanical or electronic instrument or device by which taxicab fares are computed and plainly indicated. 
(Code 1965, § 34-1; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-2000)  
Sec. 36-68. - Application of and compliance with article. 
The operation of taxicabs upon the streets of the city shall be subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth in this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, within the city, any taxicab, unless the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth and prescribed in this article have been and are complied with by the owner and driver thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 34-5; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-2000)  
Sec. 36-69. - Liability insurance. 
No taxicab shall be operated within the city unless the owner and driver thereof are protected by liability insurance, issued by a company authorized to do business in this state, in the sum of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to or death of any one person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to or death of more than one person in any one accident, and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for property damage. Satisfactory evidence shall be filed with the commissioner of the revenue establishing that such insurance is in effect. 
(Code 1965, § 34-4; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-2000)  
Sec. 36-70. - Business telephone required. 
Every holder of a certificate issued under this article shall provide and maintain at all times a listed telephone, in the name under which the certificate holder is doing business in the city, to which calls may be made for service. 
(Code 1965, § 34-2)  
Sec. 36-71. - False, etc., calls for or in regard to service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make improper, false or unauthorized calls for, or in regard to, the services of any taxicab. 
(Code 1965, § 34-2.1; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-2000)  
Sec. 36-72. - Maintenance and inspection. 
(a)  Every taxicab operated in the city shall be kept in good, clean, neat and safe condition and appearance. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make inspections of taxicabs operated in the city and to maintain records of his or her findings. 
(c)  To defray the cost of performing such inspections, the owner of each vehicle shall pay an annual inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per vehicle. 
(Code 1965, §§ 34-47, 34-48; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-2000; Ord. No. 3132, 5-11-10) 
Note— The effective date of this section shall be July 1, 2010.  
Sec. 36-73. - Domelights for taxicabs. 
All taxicabs operated under this article shall be equipped with a properly approved domelight on the top of the vehicle, which shall designate the vehicle as a taxicab. 
(Code 1965, § 34-49)  
Sec. 36-74. - Reserved.  
Sec. 36-75. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2576, adopted Apr. 25, 2000, deleted § 36-75, which provided authority for the chief of police to prescribe the wearing of caps, uniforms and emblems for drivers and derived from Code 1965, § 34-20.  
Sec. 36-76. - Reserved.  
Sec. 36-77. - Taxicabs to use most direct route; use of toll facilities. 
Every driver of a taxicab shall transport each passenger from the place the passenger is received in the taxicab to the destination of the passenger by the most direct route. When such route requires the use of a toll facility, the driver shall transport the passenger by way of the toll facility when the passenger agrees to pay the toll charge incurred with respect to the trip. 
(Code 1965, § 34-50.2)  
Sec. 36-78. - Taxicab stands generally. 
The chief of police shall recommend to the city manager, with the approval of the city council, public and private stands or parking places for taxicabs. Public taxicab stands or taxicab stands situated on city property shall be open for use by all taxicabs duly licensed in the city. Approved private taxicab stands shall be occupied only by the taxicab company obtaining the stand and it shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to park in or use any such stand other than that assigned to him. 
(Code 1965, § 34-3)  
Sec. 36-79. - Driver to be near taxicab while awaiting passengers at stand. 
Drivers of taxicabs awaiting passengers at a taxicab stand shall at all times be within three (3) feet of the front door of their taxicabs. 
(Code 1965, § 34-29; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-2000)  
Sec. 36-80. - Parking or stopping on public property while awaiting employment. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to park or stop such taxicab on any public street for the purpose of picking up or discharging a passenger(s) if doing so would create a potential safety hazard for other motorists, pedestrians or the taxicab's passenger(s), or would otherwise violate state or local traffic laws. 
(Code 1965, § 34-28; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-81. - Limitation on carrying passengers. 
No more than one passenger shall be transported in a taxicab at one time, without the consent of the person first engaging the taxicab, and nonpaying passengers shall not be transported with paying passengers. 
(Code 1965, § 34-27; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-82. - Refusal of passengers. 
Drivers of taxicabs shall not refuse to carry an orderly person anywhere within the city, unless previously engaged or unable to do so and except as provided in section 36-176. 
(Code 1965, § 34-24; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-83. - Reserved.  
Sec. 36-84. - Permitting passengers to enter or leave on traffic side of taxicab. 
No driver of a taxicab shall willfully permit any passenger to enter or leave the taxicab on a public way on the left side of the taxicab, except on one-way streets when the taxicab is lawfully stopped on the left side of the street for the purpose of taking on or discharging a passenger, nor shall such driver willfully permit any passenger to enter or leave the taxicab on a public way on the right side of the taxicab, except when the taxicab is lawfully stopped on the right side of the street for the purpose of taking on or discharging a passenger. 
(Code 1965, § 34-26; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-85. - Driver's trip records. 
Each driver of a taxicab shall keep a clear, neat record of the origin and destination of all trips or calls, the time thereof and the fare paid therefor, which records shall be open at all times to any law-enforcement officer and shall be kept for a period of one year. A record required by this section may be kept or maintained in a written or electronic format. 
(Code 1965, § 34-23; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 3584, 3-5-19)  
Sec. 36-86. - Central dispatch records or manifests. 
Every certificate holder operating a taxicab or taxicabs under this article shall keep and maintain in the city, at the place of his or her registered office location, a manifest or permanent record, written or printed in ink, in a form prescribed by the chief of police, or in a comparable electronic format, showing for each day the number of taxicabs operated, the driver of each taxicab, the origin and destination of each trip made by each taxicab, the time of each such trip and the amount charged for each such trip. The manifests or records shall be delivered to the police department, upon demand of the chief of police, for inspection by the chief of police or any member of the police department. All such manifests and records shall be maintained for at least twelve (12) months and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times by the chief of police or any member of the police department. 
(Code 1965, § 34-23.1; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 2897, 10-4-05; Ord. No. 3584, 3-5-19)  
Secs. 36-87—36-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 
 
Sec. 36-96. - Required; reciprocity. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated, within the city, any taxicab, unless a certificate thereof has been issued to the owner thereof in accordance with the provisions of this division. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a taxicab duly licensed in another city or county from delivering a passenger to some location in this city, provided the passenger was picked up outside the limits of this city and the taximeter is in operation while any such taxicab is in operation in this city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of the prior subsection, any taxicab that is duly licensed in one of the reciprocity-providing localities listed below may, after delivering a passenger to a location within the city, pick up a passenger in the city and deliver the passenger to the locality in which the taxicab is licensed. The reciprocity-providing localities are: 
Newport News 
Portsmouth 
Suffolk 
(Code 1965, § 34-7; Ord. No. 1188, 6-8-81; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 2951, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 2977, 5-8-07)  
Sec. 36-97. - Application generally. 
Any person desiring a certificate shall make written application therefor to the chief of police upon a form approved by the chief of police, giving the name, age, business address and residence of the applicant and such additional information as may be required concerning the make, description and condition of the taxicab proposed to be operated and the character and responsibility of the applicant. 
(Code 1965, § 34-8; Ord. No. 1046, 6-9-80; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-98. - Applicant's qualifications. 
No certificate required by this division shall be granted to a person who is under eighteen (18) years of age, who has been a repeated and persistent violator of the traffic and safety provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city, or who has been determined by the chief of police to be morally or mentally unfit to receive a certificate. To assist the chief of police in making the determination required herein, each applicant for a certificate shall authorize the chief of police, in writing, to obtain information concerning the applicant's criminal history and driving record. 
(Code 1965, § 34-6; Ord. No. 1046, 6-9-80; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-99. - Financial information to be submitted for rate increases. 
For use in considering requested increases in taxi rates or charges, the city manager or his designee may require any owner or operator to submit such supporting financial data as may be necessary, including federal or state income tax returns for the two (2) years preceding; provided, however, that income tax returns submitted shall be used only for consideration of such rates or charges and shall be kept confidential. 
(Code 1965, § 34-8.1; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 2801, 3-23-04)  
Sec. 36-100. - Issuance of certificate. 
(a)  The chief of police shall consider each application for a certificate. If the chief of police determines that the applicant meets the criteria set forth in this division and deems that the public convenience and necessity will be served by the proposed taxicab, he or she shall issue such certificate for a period not to exceed one (1) year. 
(b)  Any applicant who is denied a certificate by the chief of police may appeal such decision to the city manager. 
(c)  If the decision of the chief of police to deny a certificate is upheld by the city manager, an applicant may appeal the decision of the city manager to the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 34-9; Ord. No. 1110, 10-27-80; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-101. - Reserved.  
Sec. 36-102. - Transfer. 
Certificates shall be transferable, with the approval of the chief of police, provided that the person to whom a certificate is transferred and the taxicab(s) to which it applies shall, in all respects, be in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 34-11; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-103. - Revocation or suspension 
Any certificate may be revoked or suspended, at any time, by the chief of police for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Failure to operate the taxicab specified in the certificate. 
(2)  Failure to maintain taxicabs in good order and repair. 
(3)  Failure to pay the personal property tax or other taxes due to the city or the state. 
(4)  Failure to maintain insurance as required by section 36-69. 
(5)  Failure to report any accident as required by law. 
(6)  Repeated failure of the drivers of taxicabs covered by the certificate to be courteous or to stay neat in appearance. 
(7)  Repeated failure of the drivers of taxicabs covered by the certificate to respond to calls for service in a timely manner. 
(8)  Failure of drivers of taxicabs covered by the certificate to have and exhibit the taxicab driver's permit in the taxicab, as required by this article. 
(9)  Repeated violations, by drivers, of state and local laws relative to traffic and safety. 
(10)  Employing or leasing a taxicab to a driver who does not meet the qualifications set forth in section 36-98. 
(11)  Wilful or continued failure to comply with any provision of this article or any other law or ordinance regulating the operation of taxicabs within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 34-12; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Secs. 36-104—36-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - VEHICLE LICENSE 
 
Sec. 36-111. - Required. 
Except as provided in section 36-96, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated, within the city, any taxicab unless a current city license therefor has been issued to the owner thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 34-13; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-112. - Payment of tax. 
The owner of a taxicab shall pay a city license tax thereon as provided in section 18-105 of this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 34-14; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-113. - Prerequisites to issuance. 
No license for a taxicab shall be issued unless the applicant presents, to the commissioner of the revenue, his or her state motor vehicle registration card, a certificate issued pursuant to division 2 of this article and evidence of insurance meeting the requirements of section 36-69. 
(Code 1965, § 34-15; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-114. - Issuance and contents of decal. 
(a)  Upon the payment of the prescribed license tax and compliance with section 36-113, the commissioner of the revenue shall furnish the owner of the taxicab in question with a license decal for such taxicab. The license decal shall have displayed upon it the license number assigned to the particular taxicab, the name of the city, which may be abbreviated, and the year for which issued. 
(b)  Any person holding a current certificate may obtain licenses for additional or replacement taxicabs; provided, however, that prior to the issuance of any such license, the commissioner of the revenue shall require proof that each taxicab has been certified by the chief of police to be in good order and repair, and that each taximeter has been certified by the chief of police to be properly calibrated. 
(Code 1965, § 34-16; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-115. - Issuance, contents and exhibition of tax assessment slip. 
The commissioner of the revenue shall issue, with each license decal issued under this division, a tax assessment slip showing the name and address of the owner, the year, make, model and motor number of the taxicab for which it was issued, and the number of such license decal. Such slip shall be receipted by the city treasurer, when the tax is paid. 
(Code 1965, § 34-19; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 2897, 10-4-05)  
Sec. 36-116. - Display of decal. 
A license decal issued under this division shall be securely attached to the rear bumper of the taxicab for which it was issued. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly use any such license decal on any motor vehicle other than the taxicab for which it was issued or to which it has been transferred as provided in section 36-117. 
(Code 1965, §§ 34-16, 34-18; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-117. - Transfer of decal. 
A license decal issued under this division may be transferred by an owner from one vehicle owned by him to another vehicle owned by him, upon the payment of a one dollar ($1.00) transfer fee. 
(Code 1965, § 34-17; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-118. - Replacement of lost or destroyed decal. 
Any person whose original license decal is lost or destroyed may secure a new decal by making affidavit to the commissioner of the revenue that the original decal has been lost or destroyed and that the chief of police has been notified of such loss or destruction, and by paying a fee of one dollar ($1.00). 
(Code 1965, § 34-16; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Secs. 36-119—36-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TAXICAB DRIVER'S PERMIT 
 
Sec. 36-136. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any taxicab unless a current taxicab driver's permit has been issued to such person under the provisions of this division. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any taxicab to permit such taxicab to be driven by any person who does not have a valid and effective taxicab driver's permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1965, §§ 34-31, 34-46; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to license drivers of taxicabs and similar for-hire vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.1-353.  
Sec. 36-137. - Filing and contents of taxicab driver's permit application. 
Any person desiring a taxicab driver's permit required by this division shall make application therefor in writing to the chief of police, upon forms to be provided by the chief of police, giving the name, sex, date of birth and address of the applicant. 
(Code 1965, § 34-32; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-138. - Application fee. 
Each person filing an application pursuant to section 36-137 shall pay to the city treasurer an application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). The fee for processing such application is non-refundable. Upon completion of the application, an approved permitee is issued a printed permit card, and the cost of such printed card is five dollars ($5.00). 
(Code 1965, § 34-35; Ord. No. 2094, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 3132, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 3479, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 36-139. - Qualifications of applicant generally. 
A taxicab driver's permit required by this division shall not be granted to any person who does not meet the qualifications set forth in section 36-98. To assist the chief of police in making a determination whether the qualifications set forth in section 36-98 have been met, each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit shall authorize the chief of police, in writing, to obtain information concerning the applicant's criminal history and driving record. 
(Code 1965, § 34-37; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-140. - Information as to applicant's character and responsibility. 
Any person filing an application for a permit under this division shall furnish to the chief of police such information as may be required as to his character and responsibility. 
(Code 1965, § 34-34)  
Sec. 36-141. - Photographs of applicant. 
Before a taxicab driver's permit is issued under this division, two (2) photographs of the applicant therefor shall be furnished the chief of police, one of which shall be filed in the office of the chief of police and one of which shall be attached to the permit in such a manner that it cannot be removed and another photograph substituted without detection. 
(Code 1965, § 34-36; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-142. - Valid operator's license required. 
Any person filing an application for a permit under this division shall possess a valid operator's license issued by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(Code 1965, § 34-33; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-143. - Issuance or refusal. 
The chief of police shall issue a taxicab driver's permit to any applicant who is in compliance with the requirements set forth in sections 36-137 through 36-142 and shall refuse to issue a permit to any applicant who fails to meet all such requirements. 
(Code 1965, §§ 34-38, 34-39; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-144. - Form and contents. 
A taxicab driver's permit issued under this division shall be in such form as the chief of police may prescribe and shall contain the photograph and signature of the permittee in question. 
(Code 1965, § 34-41; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-145. - Posting and display. 
The driver of a taxicab shall keep the taxicab driver's permit issued to him or her under this division posted and displayed inside his or her taxicab so as to be plainly visible to all passengers in the taxicab. The printed permit card provides the name of the driver and the taxicab company. If a driver is employed by more than one taxicab company or operates a taxicab on behalf of more than one taxicab company, the driver is required to obtain a permit card for each company. If a driver terminates employment or his operational relationship with the listed taxicab company and obtains employment with a different taxicab company or operates a taxicab on behalf of a different taxicab company, the driver may obtain a replacement card from the police department with the current taxicab company. The cost to re-issue the printed card is five dollars ($5.00). 
(Code 1965, § 34-45; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 3479, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 36-146. - Term. 
A taxicab driver's initial permit issued under this division shall be effective for a period of one (1) year from the date of issue, unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1965, § 34-40; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 3479, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 36-147. - Renewal. 
After completion of the initial term, described in section 36-146, a taxicab driver's subsequent permit issued under this division may be renewed every two years by the chief of police, if the applicant for such renewal is, at the time thereof, qualified under the provisions of this division to have issued to him or her an original taxicab driver's permit. At the time of such renewal, two (2) recent photographs of the applicant shall be filed with the chief of police, to be used for the same purpose that photographs filed with an original application are used, along with a renewal fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) made payable to the city treasurer. Such renewal application shall include a review of the applicant's criminal history and driving record. The police department may undertake a review of the applicant's criminal history and driving record at the one year anniversary of the submission of the application or at other times in the discretion of the police department. 
(Code 1965, § 34-42; Ord. No. 2094, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 3132, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 3479, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 36-148. - Replacement when lost or destroyed. 
In the event a taxicab driver's permit issued under this division is lost or destroyed, the person entitled thereto may make application for and obtain a duplicate thereof, upon furnishing information of such fact, by affidavit or in a manner otherwise satisfactory to the chief of police, and upon paying to the city treasurer a fee of five dollars ($5.00). 
(Code 1965, § 34-43; Ord. No. 2094, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 3479, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 36-149. - Revocation or suspension. 
A taxicab driver's permit issued under this division may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Failure to report any accident as required by law. 
(2)  Repeated and persistent violations of state or local law relative to traffic. 
(3)  Conviction of driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, refusal to take a blood or breath test, reckless driving, racing, eluding police or leaving the scene of an accident. 
(4)  Conviction of any felony or misdemeanor crime of moral turpitude. 
(5)  Suspension or revocation of a driver's state operator's license. 
(6)  Falsification of the application for the permit. 
(7)  Failure to comply with any provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 34-44; Ord. No. 1046, 6-9-80; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 3479, 12-13-16)  
Secs. 36-150—36-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - TAXIMETERS 
 
Sec. 36-156. - Required. 
All taxicabs operated in this city shall be equipped with a taximeter which shall be in operation during the time when passengers are transported and which shall be used to compute fares. A taxicab operator may charge a flat rate for a fare provided the meter is running and the flat rate charged does not exceed the rates listed in section 36-172. 
(Code 1965, § 34-56; Ord. No. 2897, 10-4-05)  
Sec. 36-157. - Identification light. 
Whenever any taxicab is engaged, there shall be conspicuously displayed an identification light connected to the taximeter, which shall show light when the meter is in operation, such light to be so located and in such form, color and size as is prescribed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1965, § 34-49.1; Ord. No. 2897, 10-4-05)  
Sec. 36-158. - Maintenance, inspection, testing and sealing. 
(a)  Taximeters installed on taxicabs operated under this article shall all be maintained in good and accurate working order and shall be subject to inspection and testing, by police officers or other persons designated by the city manager, at the time of installation and periodically thereafter. The inspector shall seal each taximeter with a wire lead seal after each inspection and test. Such sealing shall not be required for taximeters that use only Global Positioning System (GPS) software to determine distance traveled. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or for any owner to permit any person to operate, any taxicab with a taximeter which has not been inspected and sealed in accord with the section. 
(Code 1965, § 34-57; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-2000; Ord. No. 3584, 3-5-19)  
Sec. 36-159. - Use when excessive fare is computed. 
No person shall accept payment of a fare after knowing use of a taximeter which computes a fare in excess of rates permitted by division 6 of this article. A violation of this section shall be deemed larceny and punishable as a class I misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 34-59; Ord. No. 2897, 10-4-05)  
Sec. 36-160. - Unlawful tampering with or manipulating. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or manipulate any taximeter or seal thereto for the purpose of falsifying its calculations or readings. 
(Code 1965, § 34-58)  
Secs. 36-161—36-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - FARES 
 
Sec. 36-171. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the term "waiting time" shall include the time consumed while a taxicab is stopped or moving at a speed less than twelve (12) miles per hour. "Waiting time" shall also include the time when a taxicab is not in motion, beginning with the time of arrival at the place to which it is called. There shall be excluded time consumed by the premature response to calls or the inefficiency of the taxicab or its operation. 
(Code 1965, § 34-50)  
Sec. 36-172. - Maximum rates for taxicabs. 
(a)  No person owning, operating, controlling or driving a taxicab within the city shall charge an amount to exceed the following rates of fare: 
(1)  For the first one-eighth of a mile or fraction thereof .....$3.25 
(2)  For each succeeding one-eighth of a mile or fraction thereof .....0.30 
(3)  Trunk charge .....0.50 
(4)  For each minute of waiting time .....0.30 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any person who, pursuant to section 36-96 of this Code, operates in the city a taxicab that is duly licensed in another locality while (i) transporting a fare from outside of the city into the city or (ii) transporting a fare from the city directly to a destination outside of the city shall charge the rates prescribed by the city or county in which they are licensed. 
(c)  Any application for a fare increase under this section shall include justification for such fare increase and such financial and operating information as may be requested by the city manager. The city council shall hold a public hearing before acting on any such application for a fare increase, after public notice for at least ten (10) days. 
(Code 1965, § 34-50; Ord. No. 975, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 1147, 2-9-81; Ord. No. 1497, 11-5-84; Ord. No. 1831, 2-27-89; Ord. No. 2212, 4-20-93; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 2733, 1-14-03; Ord. No. 2897, 10-4-05; Ord. No. 2902, 12-6-05; Ord. No. 2923, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2977, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 3045, 7-8-08; Ord. No. 3100, 8-25-09)  
Sec. 36-173. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2576, adopted Apr. 25, 2000, deleted § 36-173, which contained the maximum rates for for-hire cars and was derived from Code 1965, § 34-52.  
Sec. 36-174. - Receipts for payment. 
The driver in charge of a taxicab shall, upon request, deliver to the person paying the fare a receipt, in legible type or writing, showing the charges and the amount paid, the date of payment, the names of the owner and driver of the taxicab and the city license number thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 34-53; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-175. - Posting of information in vehicle. 
There shall be posted, in a conspicuous place in each taxicab operated in the city, a card, in legible type or print, showing the rates of fare prescribed to be charged for the use thereof and stating that, upon request of a passenger, a receipt will be given for the fare paid. Such cards shall be approved by the chief of police. 
(Code 1965, § 34-54; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-176. - Agreement to pay may be required. 
The driver of a taxicab may refuse to carry a passenger if, upon request, the passenger refuses to agree to pay the legal fare for the proposed trip. 
(Code 1965, § 34-24; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Sec. 36-177. - Failure to pay. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage or ride in a taxicab without paying the legal fare therefor. A violation of this section shall be deemed larceny and punishable as a class I misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 34-55; Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 2897, 10-4-05)  
Sec. 36-178. - Penalty for violation. 
Any owner or operator of a taxicab operated on any highway, street, road, lane or alley in this city who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefor shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent offense. 
(Ord. No. 2576, 4-25-00)  
Chapter 37 - WATER SUPPLY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building regulations, Ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; housing code, Ch. 16; license tax for water companies, § 18-115; water utilities to maintain employees on call for emergencies, § 23-52; sewers, Ch. 28; installation or repair of underground utilities prior to street improvements, § 33-86 et seq.; water supply at public swimming pools, § 34-24; tax on purchasers of water, § 35-114 et seq.; water supply in subdivisions, App. B, § 5.8. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, public water supply, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-45 et seq.; authority of city to acquire, establish, maintain and operate waterworks, §§ 15.1-292, 15.1-335, 15.1-875. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 37-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Consumer: Any person to whom water from the city water system is supplied directly, either as owner, agent or tenant of the premises to which water service is provided through a city meter, and who is responsible for the payment of charges for the consumption of water so supplied. 
Director: The director of public utilities or his designee. 
Water service: The delivery of city water to a building, lot or premises at the curb; provided, that when any lot contains more than one building, or any building is divided into separate functional units, such building or lot, as the case may be, shall not be an additional service if it is owned by one person and all water so used is paid for by one person; and further provided, that the director of public utilities may specify, for any lot or building, the number of separate water services which is deemed necessary to meet the requirements for water supply. 
Water usage: The use or the right to use city water delivered through a city meter into the building or dwelling to be serviced. 
(Code 1965, § 37-1; Ord. No. 3182, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 37-2. - Violations of chapter generally. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and each day's continuation of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. Any such person shall, furthermore, be liable for all damage, loss and expense suffered or incurred by the city as a result of such violation. 
(Code 1965, § 37-23)  
Sec. 37-3. - Application for consumer service. 
The director of public utilities is hereby authorized to furnish water service to consumers upon application of the owner, agent or tenant of the premises connected to city water. 
(Code 1965, § 37-2; Ord. No. 1140, 12-16-80)  
Sec. 37-3.1. - Wheeling contracts for military installations. 
The director of public utilities is hereby authorized to contract with the United States Government to wheel water from Norfolk to military installations located within Virginia Beach, subject to approval of the terms of such contract by the city manager and city council. 
(Ord. No. 1381, 6-27-83)  
Sec. 37-4. - Each meter considered separate service. 
If any consumer is supplied through more than one water meter, each meter shall be considered as a separate service both as to water usage charges and as to meter maintenance charges and as to all other provisions of this chapter, including application requirements and deposit fees. 
(Code 1965, § 37-3)  
Sec. 37-5. - Mandatory connections. 
(a)  The owner of any dwelling or other building in which human beings live or congregate shall, whenever a public water line is made available by the city, connect such building or dwelling with such water line within one year after such line becomes available. The date of availability shall be that on which notice is given by any publication or by mailing or delivering notice to the affected property. However, the director of public health may require connection within sixty (60) days if, in his opinion, a health hazard exists. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy, lease or rent any premises which is not connected to a water line as required by this section. Each day of occupancy or use of any premises in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(c)  The fees prescribed by this article shall be due from the date the water connection is required pursuant to this section, and no connection shall be made to the public water system until such fees have been paid. 
(Code 1965, § 37-28; Ord. No. 1342, 11-8-82) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to require water connections, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-875.  
Sec. 37-6. - Connections to be made by city. 
No person, except the properly authorized agents of the director of public utilities, shall tap or make any connection with the main or distributing pipes of the city waterworks system. 
(Code 1965, § 37-18)  
Sec. 37-7. - Water tap and meter installation fees. 
The following fees shall be paid for connections to a city water line and for the installation of water meters: 
(a)  Except as provided in City Code Section 37-7.01, actual cost to the City of installation. 
(b)  "Actual cost" shall mean the average installation cost determined by the Department of Public Utilities annually based upon contract unit bid prices and contract administration cost. 
(Code 1965, § 37-29; Ord. No. 1140, 12-16-80; Ord. No. 1161, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 1381, 6-27-83; Ord. No. 1575, 1-6-86; Ord. No. 2928, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 3052, 9-9-08) 
Cross reference— Plumbing permit fees. § 8-32.  
Sec. 37-7.01. - Same—Existing dwellings (mandatory connections). 
(a)  Installation fees for existing dwellings qualifying under Section 37-5, pertaining to mandatory connections to the public water system, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Tap and meter fees: 
(A)  5/8 -inch and ¾-inch tap: 
Tap and meter: $493.00 
Meter only: $363.00 
(B)  One inch tap: 
Tap and meter: $579.00 
Meter only: $449.00 
(C)  One and one-half inch or larger tap and/or meter, or where the installation requires a different size tap and meter than set forth above: actual cost to the City of installation. 
(b)  "Actual cost" shall mean the average installation cost determined by the Department of Public Utilities annually based upon contract unit bid prices and contract administration cost. 
(Ord. No. 2928, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 3411, § 1, 5-12-15, eff. 7-1-15)  
Sec. 37-7.1. - Water capital recovery fee generally. 
(a)  The fees prescribed by this section shall be paid as the property owner's share of the cost of water resource development and associated distribution facilities. Such fees shall be known as "water capital recovery fees" and shall be deemed system revenues, as defined in the Master Water and Sewer Revenue Bond Resolution adopted February 11, 1992. Such fees shall be applicable to a use or structure not presently connected to the water system when such use or structure connects and as otherwise provided in this article. If a property owner has paid water resource recovery fees in effect as of June 30, 2014, but has not obtained a building permit for the building or structure to which such fees apply, the property owner may, through December 31, 2014, elect to pay water capital recovery fees in the amount specified by this article, less a credit of any water resource recovery fees previously paid. Any property owner who pays such fees between July 1, 2014 and December 31, 2014 may choose to pay water capital recovery fees in the prescribed amount or the applicable amount of water resource recovery fees in effect as of June 30, 2014. 
(b)  The water capital recovery fee shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  For single-family and duplex dwellings and triplexes where the dwelling units are separately-metered (per dwelling unit) and for all non-residential uses: 
Meter Size 
(in inches) 	Water Capital 
Recovery Fee 
5/8	$  2,267.00 
1 	   5,667.00 
1.5 	  11,333.00 
2 	  18,133.00 
3 	  34,000.00 
4 	  56,667.00 
6 	 113,334.00 
8 	 181,334.00 
10 	 260,668.00 
 
(2)  For multiple-family dwellings, the fee shall be in an amount equal to seventy (70) percent of the applicable water capital recovery fee, per dwelling unit. 
(3)  For mixed-use and other buildings containing both residential and non-residential uses, separate meters shall be required to serve the residential and non-residential components of the property. Fees shall be payable for each meter serving the property in accordance with this section. 
(4)  Where a use or structure connected to the public water system is reconstructed, expanded or modified so as to result in an increase in water meter size, the water capital recovery fee shall in an amount equal to the difference between the fee corresponding to the size of new water meter installed to serve such use or structure and the fee corresponding to the size of the water meter replaced. 
(c)  In the event of a dispute as to the amount of fees owed, the property owner may appeal the department of public utilities' decision to the city manager or his designee and, thereafter, to city council. 
(d)  No building or plumbing permit shall be issued for any property unless the fees provided for in this section have been paid in full. 
(e)  Existing contractual agreements between property owners and the city regarding water capital recovery fees or their equivalent and waiver of such fees shall remain in effect. 
(Ord. No. 1575, 1-6-86; Ord. No. 1587, 2-10-86; Ord. No. 1665, 12-22-86; Ord. No. 1749, 11-23-87; Ord. No. 3020, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3346, 5-13-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 37-8. - Water capital recovery fee account. 
All moneys collected as water capital recovery fees shall be deposited into a special account to be known as the "water capital recovery fee account." Moneys shall be disbursed from this account to pay costs of projects designed to develop sources of water supply and distribution facilities for the city. 
(Ord. No. 1575, 1-6-86; Ord. No. 1587, 2-10-86; Ord. No. 3346, 5-13-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 37-9. - Installment, etc., payment of water capital recovery fees. 
(a)  The director of public utilities is hereby authorized to accept, on behalf of the city, notes for the payment of the fees due under section 37-7.1 for single-family residences and duplexes. The terms of such note shall be all tap and meter fees, given as a down payment, with the full remaining fees to be paid within four (4) years. Installment payments must be made at least annually in four (4) installments during the four-year period, but may be made more frequently if agreed to by the owner and the director of public utilities. Interest shall be charged at a rate equal to the Prime Rate for U.S. Banks, as published in the Wall Street Journal, when the installment contract is executed, plus three (3) percentage points, not to exceed twelve (12) percent per annum. 
(b)  When a hardship exists, the director of public utilities may allow the down payment prescribed in paragraph (a) above, to be paid by installments over a one-year period; or, if the property is being offered for sale, the director of public utilities may enter into an agreement on behalf of the city whereby all fees shall be paid from the proceeds of the sale or within ninety (90) days of the date of the agreement, whichever shall be the sooner. 
(Code 1965, § 37-29; Ord. No. 1015, 1-14-80; Ord. No. 1210, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 1575, 1-6-86; Ord. No. 1587, 2-10-86; Ord. No. 2185, 10-13-92; Ord. No 2486, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 3346, 5-13-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 37-10. - Water capital recovery fee exemptions—Certain elderly or disabled persons. 
(a)  Exemption or partial exemption from payment of the water capital recovery fees prescribed by section 37-7.1 is provided for owners of single-family dwellings and duplexes who qualify under this section. The exemption is to be administered by the city manager or his authorized designee, herein referred to as the administrator. The administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe such rules as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for exemption. The administrator may require the production of certified tax returns and appraisal reports to establish income and financial worth. 
(b)  Exemptions shall be granted under this section subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Title to the property for which the exemption is sought must be held or partially held by the applicant continuously for at least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the installation, or scheduled date of installation, whichever comes first, of the water line; 
(2)  The owner of the title or partial title must be sixty-five (65) years of age or older at least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the installation or scheduled installation date, whichever comes first, of the water line. If such person is under sixty-five (65) years of age, he or she shall have been determined by the social security administration, the veterans administration, or the railroad retirement board to be totally disabled, as defined in the regulations of the agency making such determination. Such determination shall be filed with the administrator at such time as the applicant files an application for exemption; 
(3)  The dwelling to be connected to the water line must be the sole dwelling of the applicant claiming exemption; 
(4)  The total combined income during the immediately preceding calendar year from all sources of the owners of the dwelling living therein and of the owner's relatives living in the dwelling does not exceed twenty-three thousand five hundred dollars ($23,500.00); provided that the first five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) of income of each relative, other than spouse or spouses of the owner or owners living in the dwelling, shall not be included in such total; and provided further that the first seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) or any portion thereof of income received by a permanently and totally disabled owner shall not be included in such total; and 
(5)  The net combined financial worth of the owners of the property shall not exceed eighty thousand dollars ($80,000.00), excluding the fair market value of the property to be connected to the water line. Net combined financial worth shall include the value of all assets, including equitable interests, of the owner and of the spouse of the owner. 
(c)  Persons applying for recovery fee exemption under this section must file with the administrator a recovery fee exemption affidavit, setting forth, in a manner prescribed by the administrator, the location and value of the property to be connected to the water line, the names of the persons related to the owner and occupying the dwelling, their gross combined income and their net combined financial worth. If such applicant is under sixty-five (65) years of age, a copy of the determination of disability, as set forth in subsection (b)(2) of this section, shall also be filed with the administrator. 
(d)  Where the person claiming an exemption conforms to the standards and does not exceed the limitations contained in this section, the exemption shall be as shown in the following schedule: 
Total income, all sources 	Exemption 
$    00.00—15,000.00 	100% 
 15,000.01—17,000.00 	80% 
 17,000.01—19,000.00 	60% 
 19,000.01—21,000.00 	40% 
 21,000.01—23,500.00 	20% 
 
(e)  If, within twelve (12) months after the fee exemption is obtained under this section, the financial position of the person receiving the exemption changes, such that he or she no longer meets the criteria for qualification under this section, the amount of the exemption shall become due and payable to the city. 
(f)  Any person falsely claiming an exemption or violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 37-30; Ord. No. 1210, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 1441, 3-5-84; Ord. No. 1575, 1-6-86; Ord. No. 1587, 2-10-86; Ord. No. 1694, 4-27-87; Ord. No. 1899, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 1940, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 2457, 8-26-97; Ord. No. 2493, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 3346, 5-13-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 37-11. - Same—Certain financially disadvantaged persons generally. 
(a)  Exemption from payment of the fees prescribed by section 37-7.1 is provided for financially disadvantaged owners of single-family or duplex dwellings who qualify under this section. The exemption is to be administered by the city manager or his authorized designee, herein referred to as the administrator. The administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe such rules as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for exemption. The administrator may require the production of certified tax returns and appraisal reports to establish income and financial worth. 
(b)  Exemptions shall be granted under this section subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Title to the property for which the recovery fee exemption is sought must be held or partially held by the applicant at least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the installation, or scheduled date of installation, whichever comes first, of the water line. 
(2)  The dwelling to be connected to the water line must be the sole dwelling of the applicant claiming the exemption. 
(3)  The total combined income of the owner and the owner's relatives living in the household during the year immediately preceding the installation shall not exceed the most recent federally established poverty thresholds. 
(4)  The net combined financial worth of the owner shall not exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), excluding the fair market value of the house to be connected to the water line. Net combined financial worth shall include the value of all assets, including equitable interests, of the owner and of the spouse of the owner. 
(c)  Persons applying for a recovery fee exemption under this section must file, with the administrator, a recovery fee exemption affidavit setting forth, in a manner prescribed by the administrator, the location and value of the property to be connected to the line, the names of the persons related to the owner and occupying the dwelling and their gross combined income and their net combined financial worth. 
(d)  Where the person claiming an exemption conforms to the standards and does not exceed the limitations contained in this section, the exemption shall be one hundred (100) percent of the water capital recovery fee. 
(e)  If, within twelve (12) months after the fee exemption is obtained under this section, the financial position of the person receiving the exemption changes, such that he or she no longer meets the criteria for qualification under this section, the amount of the exemption shall become due and payable to the city. 
(f)  Any person falsely claiming an exemption or violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 37-31; Ord. No. 1575, 1-6-86; Ord. No. 1587, 2-10-86; Ord. No. 1694, 4-27-87; Ord. No. 1899, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 3346, 5-13-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 37-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3346, adopted May 13, 2014, effective July 1, 2014, repealed § 37-12, which pertained to recovery fee exemptions—families in community development target areas. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 37-13. - Relocation of tap and meter. 
(a)  Whenever a city water main is constructed or extended into a street upon which an abutting parcel is being provided water service or usage by a service line to a nonabutting street, the department of public utilities may require the water meter and tap to be relocated from its previous location to a new connection with the abutting water main or extension thereof. Whenever the city effects such relocation, the consumer shall pay the cost of labor, material and equipment, plus twenty-five (25) percent for administration. 
(b)  In any case where a customer desires that an existing water tap or meter be moved, the cost of moving the tap or meter shall be based on the cost of labor, materials and equipment, plus twenty-five (25) percent for administration. A deposit shall be placed in escrow in advance of the estimated cost, as determined by the department of public utilities. 
(c)  No person, except employees of the department of public utilities, shall move any water meter or meter box from the location in which it is placed by the department of public utilities. 
(Code 1965, §§ 37-17, 37-29, 37-36; Ord. No. 1140, 12-16-80)  
Sec. 37-14. - Meters to remain property of city; repair and replacement of meters. 
All water meters installed by the department of public utilities or at the request of the department of public utilities shall be, at all times, the property of the city and shall be maintained and repaired, when rendered unserviceable through wear and tear, and renewed by the city; provided, that where replacement, repairs or adjustments of any meter are rendered necessary by causes other than ordinary wear and tear, the expense caused to the city thereby shall be paid by and collected from the consumer responsible for the meter at the premises. 
(Code 1965, § 37-8)  
Sec. 37-15. - Connection in or outside meter box where meter removed; changing service pipe from one tap or meter to another. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install a straight water connection in or outside of meter boxes where meters have been removed, or to change any service pipe from one tap or meter to another, without first obtaining permission in writing from the department of public utilities. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use water obtained by methods enumerated in this section and such consumption shall be billed to such unauthorized user by determining the estimated actual consumption and charging therefor at the regular water usage rates set forth in article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 37-20)  
Sec. 37-16. - Account initiation and reestablishment charges. 
(a)  For each new account established, there shall be a twenty dollar ($20.00) fee charged to cover administrative costs connected with establishing a water account with the city. 
(b)  When the account is discontinued or a service is inactivated for any reason, there shall be a twenty dollar ($20.00) charge for re-establishing the account or services. 
(c)  All owners or their authorized agents, after knowledge that their premises have been vacated, shall promptly notify the department of public utilities to shut off the supply of water thereto. Upon receipt of such notification, the department of public utilities shall effectually shut off the water to such premises and at the same time record the reading of the meter. When the service is so shut off, there shall be a twenty dollar ($20.00) charge for restoring such service. 
(d)  Any customer may keep his water service intact during the vacancy of any premises by paying the minimum meter maintenance charges and minimum water usage charges set forth in Article II of this chapter. 
(e)  Where it is necessary to remove a meter, or where the removal of a meter is requested by the owner of the premises or his authorized agent, the charge for reinstallation of the meter shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for all meters up to two (2) inches and, for all meters two (2) inches or greater, the charge shall include the cost in labor, materials and equipment, plus twenty-five (25) percent. 
(f)  Whenever water service is abandoned, the charges for reconnection of service shall be as provided for in section 37-7. 
(Code 1965, § 37-5; Ord. No. 1381, 6-27-83; Ord. No. 1711, 7-6-87; Ord. No. 2827, 6-8-04)  
Sec. 37-17. - Maximum flow rate or water usage for fixtures or trim. 
Maximum water consumption flow rates and quantities for all plumbing fixtures and fixture fittings for which a plumbing permit is issued after July 1, 1993, shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1965, §§ 8-15.1, 8-15.2; Ord. No. 2218, 5-11-93; Ord. No 2470, 2-10-98)  
Sec. 37-17.1. - Ultra low-flush toilets; rebates. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to reduce demand upon the public water supply by encouraging voluntary conservation through the use of ultra low-flush toilets, and to that end, to provide a program of incentives for the voluntary replacement of existing toilets by ultra low-flush toilets. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "ultra low-flush toilet" shall mean a toilet which is designed to use no more than one and six-tenth (1.6) gallons of water per flush. 
(c)  Any water service customer of the department of public utilities who meets the requirements set forth in subsection (d) shall receive a rebate from the city in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each toilet, other than an ultra low-flush toilet, which is replaced by such customer by an ultra low-flush toilet. 
(d)  The following requirements shall be met in order for any person to receive a rebate: 
(1)  A plumbing permit has been obtained from the permits and inspections division of the department of planning prior to the removal of the existing toilet and the installation of the ultra low-flush toilet; 
(2)  The permits and inspections division of the department of planning has verified that all applicable requirements of law pertaining to such installation have been met and that the replacement toilet is designed to use no more than one and six-tenth (1.6) gallons of water per flush; 
(3)  The person entitled to the rebate has agreed to respond to subsequent surveys conducted by the department of public utilities; 
(4)  The replacement has occurred at a property served by the city water supply system; and 
(5)  The permit authorizing the installation of the replacement toilet has been issued no earlier than July 1, 1993. 
(e)  Any person who is denied a rebate after making application therefor may appeal such denial by letter to the director of public utilities, stating the reasons for such appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2219, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 3182, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 37-18. - Recycling system required for certain installations. 
(a)  All car wash installations connected to the city's water system shall be equipped with an approved water recycling system. 
(b)  In all new construction and all repair or replacement of continuous flow devices, any water connector device or appliance requiring a continuous flow of five (5) gallons per minute or more and not covered by section 37-17 or subsection (a) of this section, shall be equipped with an approved water recycling system. 
(Code 1965, §§ 8-15.2, 8-15.4)  
Sec. 37-19. - Penalty for violation of section 37-17 or 37-18. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of section 37-17 or 37-18 shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Code 1965, § 8-15.5)  
Sec. 37-19.1. - Aquifer recharge system required for water-to-air heat pumps. 
(a)  Unless the owner is the holder of a properly issued national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit from the Virginia Water Control Board, all water-to-air heat pumps and/or other devices which utilize groundwater for purposes of heating and cooling shall be equipped and installed in such a manner as to return all such groundwater, after usage, in an unaltered biological and chemical condition to the aquifer from which it was originally withdrawn. 
No such water-to-air heat pump or other device which utilizes groundwater shall be approved for installation unless it is so designed or equipped. The site and design of all wells (intake or discharge) utilized by any such water-to-air heat pump or other device which utilizes groundwater shall be subject to approval of the local health department, where septic tank systems are involved. 
(b)  No property owner, lessee or other person who is in control of premises upon which any such water-to-air heat pump or other device which utilizes groundwater is located shall allow operation of any such pump or device in a manner inconsistent with the provisions of paragraph (a) above. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced by the department of permits and inspections. Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. Each day any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1257, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 1617, 8-4-86) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1257, adopted March 1, 1982, added § 37-18.1 to the Code. In order to keep related sections together, the editor has redesignated the section as § 37-19.1.  
Sec. 37-20. - Waste of water generally; repair of leaking pipes, etc. 
No person shall permit the water to run from any hydrant, meter, cock or fixture without proper care to prevent waste. If any pipe, hydrant, meter, cock or other fixture is found leaking, the owner of the premises shall have the necessary repairs made immediately upon notice from the department of public utilities so to do, and failure to repair shall require the discontinuance of the water supply until repairs are made. 
(Code 1965, § 37-10)  
Sec. 37-21. - Conservation of the public water supply. 
(a)  Whenever the city manager or director of public utilities finds that a water supply emergency arising out of a shortage of the public water supply may occur if water conservation measures are not taken, he shall, through appropriate means, call upon the general population of the city to employ prudent restraint in water usage and to conserve water voluntarily by whatever means available. 
(b)  Should the city council, declare there to be an emergency existing in the city arising, either wholly or substantially, out of a shortage of the public water supply, the city manager or the director of public utilities is hereby authorized to order the restriction or prohibition of any or all of the following uses of the water supply: 
(1)  Watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants or other vegetation, except from a watering can or other container not exceeding three (3) gallons in capacity. 
(2)  Washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers or any other type of mobile equipment, except in facilities operating with a water recycling system approved by the city, or except from a bucket or other container not exceeding three (3) gallons in capacity; provided, further, that any facility operating with an approved water recycling system must prominently display, in public view, a sign stating that such a recycling system is in operation. 
(3)  Washing of sidewalks, streets, driveways, parking areas, service station aprons, exteriors of homes, apartments, commercial or industrial buildings or any other outdoor surface, except from a bucket or other container not exceeding three (3) gallons in capacity. 
(4)  The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making a similar use of water. 
(5)  The filling of swimming or wading pools or the refilling of swimming or wading pools which were drained after the effective date of the order. 
(6)  The use of water from fire hydrants for any purpose other than necessary governmental operations. 
(7)  The serving of drinking water in restaurants, cafeterias or any other establishment, unless requested to do so by the individual being served. 
The above restrictions, or any of them, shall become effective upon their being printed in any newspaper of general circulation in the city, or broadcast upon any radio or television station serving the city. 
(c)  Should the implementation of all of the measures provided for in subsections (a) and (b) fail to preserve sufficient supplies of water for the citizens of the city, the city manager or director of public utilities is hereby authorized, in addition, to order the imposition of specific allotments of water supply to each customer, both residential and commercial, and to provide for a surcharge of up to twenty dollars ($20.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumed in excess of such allocation. Such allotment and surcharge shall be subject to ratification, within ten (10) days, by the city council and shall remain in effect until removed by like councilmanic action. 
(1)  Upon implementation of the measures set forth in subsections (b) or (c), the city manager shall appoint an appeals board consisting of three (3) representatives, of which one (1) shall be from the city manager's office, one (1) from the health department, and one (1) from the finance department. The city attorney or his designee shall serve as legal counsel to the board. 
(2)  The appeals board shall be empowered to review customer applications for exemptions from the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) on a case-by-case basis and, if warranted, to make equitable adjustments to such provisions. The board shall also be empowered to establish regulations governing the granting of temporary exemptions applicable to all or some of the uses of the water supply set forth in subsection (b). The board shall, in deciding applications, balance economic and other hardships to the applicant resulting from the imposition of water use restrictions or allocations against the individual and cumulative impacts to the water supply resulting from the granting of exemptions. Individual applications shall be decided by the board within two (2) weeks of receipt of an application in proper form and containing all necessary information. 
(d)  Should all of the measures taken pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) fail to preserve sufficient supplies of water for the general population of the city, the city manager or the director of public utilities is hereby further authorized to restrict or discontinue the supply of water to any industrial or commercial activity which uses water beyond the sanitary and drinking needs of its employees and invitees. 
(e)  Any person violating any provision of this section or any order of the city manager or director of public utilities issued pursuant to the authority granted hereunder shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. In addition, the city manager or director of public utilities is hereby authorized to terminate the water service, for the duration of the emergency, to any person convicted of such violation. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the city manager or the director of public utilities from rescinding any orders issued hereunder when the conditions creating the need for such orders have abated. 
(Code 1965, § 37-11; Ord. No. 947, 6-18-79; Ord. No. 1105, 10-13-80; Ord. No. 1293, 6-28-92; Ord. No. 2113, 3-3-92; Ord. No. 3091, 6-23-09)  
Sec. 37-22. - Use of fire hydrants generally. 
(a)  Fire hydrants are provided for the primary purpose of extinguishing fires, and all persons, except authorized employees or agents of the fire department and the department of public utilities or such persons as may be specifically authorized by the director of public utilities, are hereby prohibited from opening or using such hydrants. 
(b)  Any person authorized to open fire hydrants shall use only an appropriate spanner wrench and shall replace the caps on the outlets when not in use from the same. 
(Code 1965, § 37-13; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12.  
Sec. 37-22.1. - Diverting or wasting water from fire hydrant. 
Any person who shall willfully and maliciously divert or waste any public water supply by tampering with any fire hydrant shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1082, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 3433, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 37-23. - Use of water for private fire protection systems. 
(a)  No city water shall be used for private fire protection systems, unless the customer installs, at his cost, a detector check valve and by-pass meter of a type and at a location approved by the department of public utilities. 
(b)  The customer shall pay the cost of all labor, materials and equipment for any facility installed by the department of public utilities in order to accommodate a private fire protection system, plus twenty-five (25) percent. 
(c)  No person shall use water from a private fire protection system, other than for extinguishing a fire, without the written consent of the director of public utilities. If water from a private fire protection system is used in a manner not authorized herein, all water usage shall be cut off unless such unauthorized use is terminated immediately upon notice from the department of public utilities and payment is made for all water so used. 
(d)  No charge shall be made for water used to extinguish fires, but a three dollar and forty cent ($3.40) monthly service fee is hereby imposed for reading and maintaining meters and inspecting the systems. 
(Code 1965, § 37-14; Ord. No. 1381, 6-27-83; Ord. No. 1711, 7-6-87; Ord. No. 1998, 8-14-90) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12.  
Sec. 37-24. - Access to premises supplied with water. 
The director of public utilities and his agents shall have free access at all reasonable hours to all parts of any premises to which water is supplied, to make necessary examinations, repairs or alterations. 
(Code 1965, § 37-15)  
Sec. 37-25. - Obstructing valves, manholes, meters, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally place, upon or about any gate valve, manhole, fire hydrant, stop cock, meter or meter box connected with the water pipes of the city's system of waterworks, any vehicle, trailer or object, material, debris or structure of any kind which will prevent free access to such facilities at all times. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of all premises upon which such facilities are placed to maintain a one-foot clearance around all such facilities; provided, that there shall be a three-foot clearance surrounding any fire hydrant. 
(b)  Upon finding that access to a meter for purposes of disconnection of service on the basis of account delinquency is prevented by a motor vehicle or trailer parked on or over such meter, the director of public utilities or his designee shall contact the customer served by the meter and request such customer to move the motor vehicle or trailer so as to allow access to the meter. If the customer cannot be contacted or refuses to cooperate, a written notice stating that the motor vehicle or trailer, or any other motor vehicle or trailer parked in such manner as to prevent access to the meter, will be removed after five (5) days at the vehicle owner's expense shall be posted on the door of the home or business and on the item obstructing the meter. If after five (5) days access to the meter is still prevented by a motor vehicle or trailer, such motor vehicle or trailer may be towed, at the vehicle owner's expense, by or at the direction of the police department in accordance with applicable provisions of the City Code; provided, however, that the permission of the owner or occupant of the property from which the motor vehicle or trailer is towed shall not be required. Prior to the actual towing of the motor vehicle or trailer, the owner or occupant, if present, shall be given the opportunity to move the motor vehicle or trailer. 
(Code 1965, § 37-16; Ord. No. 2969, 1-23-07)  
Sec. 37-26. - Unauthorized turning of water on or off generally; tampering with appliances. 
No person, except employees of the department of public utilities, shall cut off or turn on water at any city curb cock or meter, nor remove, disconnect or tamper in any way with any water meter, water connection, fire hydrant, lock, curb cock or curb box, or any part thereof, or any other equipment installed by the department of public utilities in connection with the water system, without previous permission, in writing, from the department of public utilities so to do; provided, that in case of necessary emergency repair work to be done on any premises, the person doing such repair work shall be permitted temporarily to turn the water on or off and, upon completion of the work, shall leave the water on or off as before. In such cases, notice of such turning on or off of water shall be given to the department of public utilities as soon as possible. 
(Code 1965, § 37-17)  
Sec. 37-27. - Repair of damage to system generally. 
Whenever any person shall cause damage to any part of the water distribution system, including, but not limited to, all mains, connectors, laterals, lines, meters and any and all appurtenances attached thereto or thereon, the department of public utilities shall be notified immediately of such damage and the department of public utilities shall repair same as quickly as is possible. The cost for the repair shall include all actual costs for labor, material and equipment, plus a charge of twenty-five (25) percent of actual cost for administrative expense and overhead. Such costs shall be borne by the party causing any damage or responsible therefor. Invoices showing all costs incurred shall be rendered to the party or parties liable therefor and shall be payable upon receipt thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 37-18.1)  
Sec. 37-28. - Turning off water for purpose of repairs. 
In case of breaks in the mains, services, pumping machinery, reservoirs or other waterworks equipment making it necessary to shut off the water, or when it is necessary to shut off the water for the purpose of repairing, extending or cleaning the mains, previous notice will, if practicable, be given, but in no case will any claim for damages due to water being shut off be allowed. 
(Code 1965, § 37-12)  
Sec. 37-29. - City not liable for damage caused by defective plumbing, open outlets, bursting of lines, etc. 
(a)  The city will not be responsible for any damage caused by defective plumbing or open outlets when water is turned on by order of the director of public utilities or by request of any property owner, lessee or agent. 
(b)  The city shall not be liable for any damage resulting from the bursting of any water main, service pipe or cock or fire hydrant, or from the shutting off of water for repairs, extensions or connections, or from the accidental failure of the water supply from any cause whatsoever. 
(Code 1965, §§ 37-19, 37-22)  
Sec. 37-30. - Cutting off water from contaminating source. 
The director of public utilities is hereby authorized to cut off the supply of water from any source within the water distribution system of the city after the director of public health or the director of public utilities, or his duly authorized agent, certifies that such source may be a contaminant and a potential public health hazard. 
(Code 1965, § 37-21)  
Sec. 37-31. - Termination of service for failure to pay sewage disposal charges to private utility. 
(a)  Any water customer of the city who has not paid the applicable rates and charges to any private sewage disposal system company within the city for service rendered, and who has been notified pursuant to state statute to cease disposal of sewage into the system within two (2) months, may have his water service terminated upon request of the private utility involved. 
(b)  After the statutory period for the customer to cease disposal of sewage into the private system has elapsed, the private utility company shall notify the customer, in writing, that water service shall be discontinued by the city if payment for the delinquent sewerage bill is not received by the utility within ten (10) days. After the ten (10) days has expired, the private utility company may turn off water service to the respective property. A copy of such notification shall be sent to the customer. 
(c)  Within five (5) days after receipt of the notice from the private utility company, the department of public utilities shall turn off water service and hang a notice of turn-off on the front door of the premises, explaining the reason for discontinuation of service. 
(d)  Upon notification from the private utility company that service discontinued under this section is to be restored, the city will restore such service within one business day. 
(e)  A charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid for each request from a private utility to discontinue service pursuant to this section. This charge shall be billed directly to the private utility company. The department of public utilities will not make any monetary collection for private utility companies. 
(f)  The department of public utilities will not be liable for any damage resulting from the discontinuance of water service when requested to do so under this section. 
(Code 1965, §§ 37-37, 37-38; Ord. No. 1711, 7-6-87)  
Sec. 37-32. - Turning water on after cutoff by city. 
Should the water be cut off from any premises by the department of public utilities for the nonpayment of a bill or for any other cause, and afterwards be found turned on without authorization of the department of public utilities, the service may be discontinued and shall not be restored until the unauthorized user shall pay all delinquent bills and, in addition thereto, the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for reinstitution of water service. It shall be unlawful for any person to use water obtained through any water service which has been discontinued. 
(Code 1965, 37-27)  
Sec. 37-33. - Payment of charges prescribed by chapter by check or other instrument which is returned. 
In any case where fees or charges required by this chapter are paid by check, draft or other instrument, and the instrument is returned for any reason, no tap shall be installed or, if already installed, the water service or water usage shall be discontinued until full payment is received. 
(Code 1965, § 37-34)  
Secs. 37-34—37-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - USAGE AND AVAILABILITY CHARGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to charge and collect compensation for water furnished, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-875. See also, § 15.1-175. 
 
Sec. 37-46. - Minimum service availability charges prescribed. 
Each consumer shall pay a monthly minimum service availability charge as follows for each meter connecting his premises with the city water system: 
Meter Size 	Monthly Charge: Effective July 1, 2010 
5/8 inch 	$4.41 
¾ inch 	5.56 
1 inch 	7.91 
1½ inch 	13.56 
2 inch 	20.41 
3 inch 	36.31 
4 inch 	59.01 
6 inch 	116.31 
8 inch 	184.31 
10 inch 	264.31 
12 inch 	491.31 
Fire hydrant meter 	36.31 
 
(Code 1965, § 37-32; Ord. No. 1140, 12-16-80; Ord. No. 1381, 6-27-83; Ord. No. 1711, 7-6-87; Ord. No. 1998, 8-14-90; Ord. No. 2872, 5-10-05; Ord. No. 3128, 5-11-10)  
Sec. 37-47. - Water usage rates prescribed. 
In addition to the charges provided for in section 37-46, each consumer shall pay for water usage the rate of four dollars and ninety cents ($4.90) per one thousand (1,000) gallons, as of July 1, 2019. 
(Code 1965, § 37-33; Ord. No. 952, 6-25-79; Ord. No. 1056, 6-23-80; Ord. No. 1140, 12-16-80; Ord. No. 1186, 6-1-81; Ord. No. 1381, 6-27-83; Ord. No. 1711, 7-6-87; Ord. No. 1740, 9-21-87; Ord. No. 1879, 6-5-89; Ord. No. 1998, 8-14-90; Ord. No. 2069, 6-4-91; Ord. No. 2241, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 2564, 11-2-99; Ord. No. 2872, 5-10-05; Ord. No. 3128, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 3589, 5-14-19, eff. 7-1-19)  
Sec. 37-48. - Usage charge when meter fails to register. 
Whenever a water meter is out of order and fails to register, the consumer shall be charged with an average daily consumption as shown by the meter when in good working order and registering correctly. 
(Code 1965, § 37-35)  
Sec. 37-49. - Deposit to assure payment. 
(a)  After any consumer has become delinquent in his bill, the department of public utilities may require a deposit in an amount based on an estimated monthly bill in order to continue service. 
(b)  Deposits made pursuant to this section may be refunded, upon written request to the department of public utilities, after six (6) consecutive billing periods of maintaining payments on time. 
(c)  No interest will be paid on deposits made pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1965, § 37-4; Ord. No. 1140, 12-16-80)  
Sec. 37-50. - Regular rates apply to water used for construction purposes; responsibility of contractor for payment. 
Contractors applying for water usage for buildings for construction purposes shall pay for such usage at the regularly scheduled water usage rates and meter maintenance rates and shall be held responsible for all charges so billed until such time as the contractor shall notify the department of public utilities, in writing, to cut off the supply. 
(Code 1965, § 37-6)  
Sec. 37-51. - Meters and charges for public buildings. 
All public buildings (including school buildings), state, federal and municipal, in the city, as may be designated by the director of public utilities, shall have meters attached to the supply pipes connecting such buildings with the water mains of the city for measuring the water supply furnished such buildings, as may be selected by the director of public utilities as being suitable. The water so supplied to such consumers shall be charged to them, through the proper department or to others having control of such consumption, at regularly scheduled prevailing rates. 
(Code 1965, § 37-7)  
Sec. 37-52. - Division of city into zones for meter reading and billing. 
The director of public utilities is authorized to divide the city into as many zones as may be expedient, in order to expedite the reading of water meters and the collection of water bills. 
(Code 1965, § 37-24)  
Sec. 37-53. - Frequency of billing; sewer, waste collection and stormwater charges may be included. 
(a)  The director of public utilities shall bill all customers in accordance with their location in the city, for water service rendered. 
(b)  The director of public utilities is authorized to send one (1) bill for water usage and meter maintenance charges, along with charges for sewer system maintenance, to those customers who are provided with both services, along with waste collection and stormwater management charges levied pursuant to Chapter 32.5; provided, however, that all charges shall be separately stated. The combined bill shall be issued for one (1) total amount. The director of public utilities is hereby authorized and directed to create policies and procedures for the efficient billing and collection of the combined bill, including a policy for allocating payments to the separate charges stated on the combined bill. 
(Code 1965, § 37-25; Ord. No. 2827, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 3517, 9-5-17)  
Sec. 37-54. - When due and payable; delinquency. 
(a)  All bills for charges prescribed by this article shall be due and payable within twenty-one (21) days from the date of the bill, and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid in full within such time. A late fee of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) will be charged to accounts for a bill that is not paid on or before the due date. The department of public utilities shall notify the customer, in writing, of such delinquency, and shall direct the customer to show cause, within fifteen (15) days, why his water service should not be discontinued. 
(b)  Failure to receive a bill for charges prescribed by this article shall not prevent the discontinuance of service in accord with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  If, within ninety (90) days past the date of the bill, all charges and interest provided for in this article are not paid, a twenty dollar ($20.00) delinquent service fee shall be applied to the account and the water supply to the premises shall be disconnected. 
(d)  When water service is discontinued pursuant to this section, water shall not again be turned on until all arrearages and charges have been paid, including the late fee and the delinquent service fee of twenty dollars ($20.00), and other penalties and fees, if the premises are occupied by the same customer who incurred the bill; provided, that any customer delinquent or in arrears shall settle all past indebtedness, wherever incurred, before again being served city water. 
(Code 1965, §§ 37-25, 37-26; Ord. No. 1711, 7-6-87; Ord. No. 2827, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 3019, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 3517, 9-5-17)  
Sec. 37-55. - Adjustment of abnormal bills due to leakage. 
The director of public utilities is hereby authorized to adjust and settle such claims against the department of public utilities for abnormal bills, due to leakage, as will, in the judgment of the director, work an injustice to the consumer unless corrected. 
(Code 1965, § 37-9)  
Sec. 37-56. - Testing meter; correcting bill when meter overregisters. 
(a)  Any consumer shall have the right to demand that the meter through which water is being furnished be examined and tested by the department of public utilities, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is registering correctly the amount of water which is being delivered through it by such department to such consumer. When any consumer desires to have such meter so examined and tested, he shall make application therefor in writing to the department of public utilities and, at the same time, pay a fee as follows, based upon the meter size: 
Meter 
Size 	Fee 
  5/8 ? 	$ 60.00 
 ¾? 	60.00 
1? 	60.00 
1½? 	80.00 
2? 	80.00 
3? 	80.00 
4? 	80.00 
 
If the meter is in excess of four (4) inches, the amount required shall be the estimated actual cost of labor, materials and equipment, plus twenty-five (25) percent as an administrative cost. 
(b)  If, upon such examination and test, the meter is found to register three (3) percent or more water consumption than actually passes through it, the meter shall be corrected and the fee paid pursuant to this section shall be refunded and the water bill shall be correspondingly corrected. 
(Code 1965, §37-35; Ord. No. 7111, 7-6-87)  
Sec. 37-57. - Developer fire hydrant fee. 
Developers installing fire hydrants, as required incident to subdivision development, shall pay the sum of three hundred ten dollars ($310.00) 
(Ord. No. 1381, 6-27-83; Ord. No. 7111, 7-6-87)  
Secs. 37-58—37-67. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 37-68. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Air gap: The unobstructed vertical distance through a free atmosphere between the lowest perimeter of a water outlet and the flood-level rim of any receptacle. This distance will be a minimum of two (2) times the diameter of the outlet. In case of near-walls, this distance will be three (3) times the diameter of the outlet. 
Auxiliary supply: Any water source or system other than the public water supply that may be available in the building or premises. 
Backflow: The reversal of flow from its intended direction as a result of backsiphonage or backpressure. 
Bureau: The bureau of sanitary engineering of the state department of health. 
Contamination: Any introduction into pure water of microorganisms, wastes, wastewater, undesirable chemicals or gases. 
Cross-connection: Any physical connection between a potable water supply and any waste pipe, soil pipe, sewer, drain or any unapproved source or system; also, any potable water supply outlet which is submerged or can be submerged in waste or other source of contamination. 
Director: The director of public utilities or his designee. 
Double-check valve assembly: An assembly of two (2) internally loaded, specially designed and independently operating check valves with a tightly closing shut-off valve on the upstream and the downstream side of the check valves, equipped with properly placed female threaded test cocks. 
Existing ground level: The level above which surface water will not accumulate under normal conditions. 
Flood-level rim: The top edge of the receptacle over which water could overflow. 
Hazard: Any condition, device or practice in the water usage system and its operation which creates or, in the judgment of the director, may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. 
Owner: The person in charge, care and control of the property and the tenant or customer who signed the water service agreement. 
Pollution: The presence of any foreign substance (chemical, physical, radiological or biological) in water, which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute an unnecessary risk or impair the usefulness of the water. 
Reduced pressure principle back flow preventer: An assembly of differential valves and check valves, including an automatically opened spillage port to the atmosphere, designed to prevent backflow, incorporated with a tightly closing shut-off valve on the upstream and the downstream side of the check valves, equipped with properly placed female threaded test cocks. 
RP device: A "reduced pressure principle backflow preventer," as defined above. 
Service connection: The terminal end of a service line from the waterworks. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter. 
Service line: That portion of the water line from the consumer's side of the water meter to the first water outlet. 
Toxic: Any substance of solids or liquids harmful for human consumption. 
Vacuum breaker, atmospheric: A vacuum breaker designed so as not to be subjected to continuous static line pressure. 
Vacuum breaker, pressure type: A vacuum breaker designed to operate under conditions of static line pressure. 
(Code 1965, § 37-39; Ord. No. 2150, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 3182, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 37-69. - Objectives of article. 
The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare through a cross-connection control and backflow prevention program intended to prevent the potential or actual occurrence where a backflow, backpressure condition, or cross connection within piping or other portions of consumers' potable water systems could allow the entry of contaminants or pollutants into the public water system; 
(2)  Eliminate or control existing cross-connections, actual or potential, at each water outlet from the consumer's service line; 
(3)  Provide a continuing inspection program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively control all actual or potential cross-connections which may be installed in the future; and 
(4)  Comply with all applicable regulations of the Commonwealth of Virginia pertaining to cross-connection control and backflow prevention. 
(Code 1965, § 37-40; Ord. No. 3182, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 37-70. - Prohibited connections. 
(a)  No person shall install or maintain a water service connection to any premises where cross-connections to a waterworks or a consumer's water system may exist, unless such cross-connections are in compliance with this article and approved by the director in accordance with the written policies of the department of public utilities. 
(b)  No person shall install or maintain any connection that may allow water from an auxiliary water system to enter a waterworks or consumer's water system, unless the auxiliary water system, the method of connection and the use of such system are in compliance with this article and approved by the director in accordance with the written policies of the department of public utilities. 
(Ord. No. 3182, 5-24-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3182, adopted May 24, 2011, repealed the former § 37-70, and enacted a new § 37-70 as set out herein. The former § 37-70 pertained to violations of article and derived from § 37-49 of the 1965 Code.  
Sec. 37-71. - Maintenance and inspection of backflow prevention devices. 
The consumer, at his own expense, shall install, operate, test and maintain approved backflow prevention devices, as directed by the department of public utilities. It shall be the duty of the consumer to have such devices inspected at least annually or at such greater frequency as the director may deem necessary. Such inspections shall be performed by a certified backflow prevention device worker or other qualified person approved by the director. The consumer shall maintain accurate records of tests and repairs made to backflow prevention devices and provide the director with copies of such records. The records shall be on forms approved or provided by the director. In the event of accidental pollution or contamination of the public or consumer's potable water system, due to backflow on or from the consumer's premises, the owner shall promptly take steps to confine further spread of the pollution of contamination within the consumer's premises, and shall immediately notify the director of the hazardous condition. 
(Ord. No. 3182, 5-24-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3182, adopted May 24, 2011, repealed the former § 37-71, and enacted a new § 37-71 as set out herein. The former § 37-71 pertained to general responsibilities of city and consumers as to protection of water supply and derived from § 37-42, 37-48 of the 1965 Code; Ord. No. 2150, 6-23-92.  
Sec. 37-72. - Inspections; notice to correct defects. 
(a)  The director shall have the right of entry into any building, during reasonable hours, for the purpose of making inspections of the water distribution system installed in such building or premise. The owner or occupant may accompany the inspector while this inspection is being made. 
(b)  All new construction plans and specifications for commercial buildings shall be made available to the director and building codes administrator to determine the degree of hazard of possible cross-connections. 
(c)  An on-site inspection of all existing buildings will be made to determine the degree of hazard to the public water system. If an unauthorized cross-connection is found, either actual or potential, the director shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of Section 37-72.1. 
(Code 1965, § 37-43; Ord. No. 3182, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 37-72.1. - Violations. 
(a)  Whenever the director determines that a violation of this article exists, he shall cause a notice of violation to be provided to the consumer at the premises at which the violation exists. Such notice may be mailed to the address of the consumer shown on the records of the department of public utilities or personally served upon the consumer. The notice shall be signed by the director, and may require any or all of the following actions to be completed by a date certain, which date shall, except in circumstances deemed by the director to constitute an imminent and substantial endangerment to public health, be not less than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date the notice was issued: (i) the cessation or correction of the violation; (ii) the acquisition and installation of additional material, equipment, supplies or personnel to ensure that the violation does not recur; (iii) the submission of a certified plan to prevent future violations, which plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Virginia; or (iv) any other corrective action deemed necessary for compliance with this article. 
(b)  In the event the owner or occupant fails to comply with the terms of a notice of violation, the director may cause water service to the premises to be terminated. Where a violation constitutes an imminent and substantial endangerment to public health, the director shall terminate water service. The cost of disconnection and reconnection shall be paid by the consumer prior to restoration of water service to the premises. 
(c)  In addition to disconnection of water service as set forth in this section, and not in lieu thereof, a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not exceeding Two Thousand, Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) or may be enjoined by a court of competent jurisdiction upon application of the director, either or both. 
(Ord. No. 3182, 5-24-11)  
Sec. 37-73. - General design, installation and maintenance standards for potable water supply system; cross-connection control and backflow prevention policy. 
Potable water supply systems shall conform to the standards and specifications of the Department of Public Utilities Cross-Connection Control and Backflow Prevention Policy (May 2011), which policy, including any future amendments thereto, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into this article. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of such policy and applicable provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code or Virginia Waterworks Regulations, the provisions of the building code or waterworks regulations, as the case may be, shall apply. 
(Code 1965, § 37-44[a]; Ord. No. 3182, 5-24-11)  
Secs. 37-74—37-86. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3182, adopted May 24, 2011, repealed §§ 37-74—37-86, which pertained to required hazard and backflow prevention devices; cross connections; protective devices for fire systems; vacuum breakers; double-check valve assemblies and RP devices and derived from §§ 37-41, 37-44[table], [b]—[h], 37-45—37-47 of the 1965 Code.  
Chapter 38 - WEAPONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— License tax for shooting gallery, § 18-104. 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Carrying concealed weapons. 
(a)  If any person carries about his person, hidden from common observation, (i) any pistol, revolver, or other weapon designed or intended to propel a missile of any kind by action of an explosion of any combustible material, (ii) any dirk, bowie knife, switchblade knife, ballistic knife, machete, razor, sling bow, spring stick, metal knucks, or blackjack, (iii) any flailing instrument consisting of two (2) or more rigid parts connected in such a manner as to allow them to swing freely, which instrument may also be known as a nun chahka, nun chuck, nunchaku, shuriken or fighting chain, (iv) any disc, of whatever configuration, having at least two (2) points or pointed blades which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart, or (v) any weapon of like kind as those enumerated in this section, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, and such weapon shall be forfeited to the city and may be seized by an officer as forfeited, and such as may be needed for police officers and conservators of the peace shall be devoted to that purpose, and the remainder shall be destroyed by the officer having them in charge. For the purposes of this section, a weapon shall be deemed to be hidden from common observation when it is observable but is of such deceptive appearance as to disguise the weapon's true nature. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to (i) any person carrying a concealed weapon in accord with permission granted by a circuit court pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308; or (ii) any person otherwise authorized to carry a concealed weapon pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308. 
(c)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Spring stick means a spring-loaded metal stick activated by pushing a button which rapidly and forcefully telescopes the weapon several times its original length. 
(2)  Ballistic knife means any knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a spring-operated mechanism. 
(Code 1965, § 38-1; Ord. No. 945, 5-14-79; Ord. No. 1279, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 1466, 7-2-84; Ord. No. 1558, 9-30-85; Ord. No. 1704, 6-8-87; Ord. No. 2233, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 2343, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 2451, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 2830, 6-22-04; Ord. No. 2882, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 3036, 6-24-08; Ord. No 3632, 7-21-20) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308.  
Secs. 38-2, 38-2.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3240, adopted June 26, 2012, effective July 1, 2012, repealed §§ 38-2, 38-2.1, which pertained to processing fee to be paid by applicant for permit to carry concealed weapon and fingerprints required; exception and derived from § 38-1 of the 1965 Code; Ord. No. 945, 5-14-79; Ord. No. 2991, 6-26-07.  
Sec. 38-3. - Discharge of firearms, air guns, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, spring-propelled rifle or pistol, from or across any land or water north or west of the trace of the line beginning at the intersection of North Landing Road and the Chesapeake-Virginia Beach city boundary line; thence northwardly along North Landing Road to Indian River Road; thence eastwardly along Indian River Road to New Bridge Road; thence northeastwardly along New Bridge Road to Sandbridge Road, thence eastwardly along Sandbridge Road to its intersection with the Atlantic Ocean, or across any land north of False Cape State Park and east of Shipps Bay and Point Creek. This prohibition shall not apply to shotguns discharging pellets under the following conditions: 
(1)  On land that is fifty (50) acres or more of contiguous area, or less than fifty (50) acres of contiguous area south of the trace of the line beginning at the intersection of Elbow Road and the Chesapeake-Virginia Beach city boundary line; thence northeastwardly along Elbow Road to Salem Road; thence southeastwardly along Salem Road to North Landstown Road; thence northeastwardly along Landstown Road to Princess Anne Road; thence southeastwardly along Princess Anne Road to Sandbridge Road; thence eastwardly along Sandbridge Road to its intersection with the Atlantic Ocean; and 
(2)  Under one (1) ownership; and 
(3)  Used primarily for agricultural purposes; and 
(4)  The landowner has applied for an annual permit from the city manager to use his property for this purpose, which permit shall be granted by the city manager if the applicant meets the requirements of this section; and 
(5)  The person discharging a shotgun as herein set forth shall, at all times while engaged in such activity, have in his possession written permission from the landowner to discharge such weapon on the premises; and 
(6)  All permits shall expire on the next June 30 after the date of issuance. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a)(4) above, no permit shall be issued to a landowner if it is determined by the city manager or his duly authorized agent that the issuance of such permit would be detrimental to the public safety, and any permit that has been issued and is in effect may be revoked by the city manager if it is determined by the city manager or his duly authorized agent that conditions have changed since the date of issuance of the permit that cause the continued use of the land for the permitted purpose to be detrimental to the public safety. 
(c)  It shall be lawful to discharge firearms of .22-caliber or less south of the trace line enumerated in subsection (a) subject to the provisions of this section. It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms greater than .22-caliber any place within the city; provided, however, that muzzleloading rifles using a charge of black powder or black powder equivalent may be used to hunt deer during the open season prescribed therefor by the Department of Game and Inland Fisheries south of the trace of the line described in subsection (a)(1). For purposes of this section, a muzzleloading rifle shall mean a single-shot flintlock or percussion rifle, .45 caliber or larger, firing a single lead projectile or sabot with a .38 caliber or larger nonjacketed lead projectile of the same caliber loaded from the muzzle of the weapon and propelled by at least fifty (50) grains of black powder or black powder equivalent. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, spring-propelled rifle or pistol, from, on, across or within one hundred fifty (150) yards of any building, dwelling, street, sidewalk, alley, roadway or public land or public place within the city limits. 
(e)  The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the operation of a shooting event that is sponsored by an organized group, provided, the written approval of the chief of police as to the safety and location of the event is obtained prior to the event. 
(f)  No person shall use a pneumatic gun in the area of the city described in (a) above except (i) at approved shooting ranges or (ii) on or within private property with permission of the owner or legal possessor thereof when conducted with reasonable care to prevent a projectile from crossing the bounds of the property. For purposes of this subsection, "pneumatic gun" means any implement designed as a gun that will expel a BB or a pellet by action of pneumatic pressure, including but not limited to paintball guns. Further, for the purpose of this subsection "reasonable care" means that the pneumatic gun is discharged in a manner so the projectile is contained on the property by a backstop, earthen embankment or fence. The discharge of projectiles across or over the bounds of the property shall create the rebuttable presumption that the use of the pneumatic gun was not conducted with reasonable care and shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the discharge of firearms and other weapons by (1) law enforcement officers; (2) military personnel; or (3) federal, state or local government animal or fowl management agency agents in the city as part of authorized training or in the performance of their duties. 
(h)  The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply to the killing of deer pursuant to Code of Virginia § 29.1-529 on land of at least five (5) acres that is zoned for agricultural use. 
(i)  A violation of any provision of this section unless otherwise specified shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 38-2; Ord. No. 1107, 10-20-80; Ord. No. 1220, 9-14-81; Ord. No. 1332, 9-27-82; Ord. No. 1622, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 1624, 9-29-86; Ord. No. 2525, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 3084, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 3188, 6-28-11; Ord. No. 3531, 1-9-18) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate or prohibit discharge of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-865; discharging firearms in streets or public places, §§ 18.2-280, 18.2-286.  
Sec. 38-3.1. - Use of slings or slingshots. 
No person shall use or discharge, within the limits of the city specified by section 38-3 to be unlawful for the discharge of any firearm, any sling or slingshot made for the throwing of shot, stones or other missiles. Every person violating the provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1206, 7-13-81)  
Sec. 38-3.2. - Use of bow and arrow restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot with a bow and arrow within those limits of the city which are specified in section 38-3 to be unlawful for the discharge of any firearm, except within an archery range having clearly designated boundaries and a safe area of impact sufficient to prevent personal injury and property damage. The use of any such range located on public or school property shall be subject to the approval of the director of parks and recreation or the principal of the respective school. The shooting of arrows tipped with suction cups shall not constitute a violation of this section. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to shoot with a bow and arrow or crossbow (i) in or across any road, or within the right-of-way thereof, or in any street; or (ii) at or upon the property of another without permission of the owner or other person lawfully in charge thereof. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1865, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 2171, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 2278, 6-28-94) 
Cross reference— License tax for archery ranges, § 18-104.  
Sec. 38-4. - Possession and discharge of firearms, air guns, etc., by certain minors. 
(a)  Except as provided in Code of Virginia § 18.2-308.7 it shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to have in his possession or use any firearm, shotgun, spring-propelled rifle or pistol. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 3 misdemeanor for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to have in his possession or use any pneumatic gun, unless such minor is under the direct supervision of his parent, legal guardian or other adult supervisor approved in writing by the parent or legal guardian. Additionally and in lieu of direct supervision, a minor age sixteen (16) or above may carry on his person the written consent of his parent or lawful guardian. 
(Code 1965, § 38-6; Ord. No. 3188, 6-28-11)  
Sec. 38-5. - Pointing or brandishing firearm or object similar in appearance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to point or brandish any firearm or any object similar in appearance to a firearm, whether capable of being fired or not, in such manner as to reasonably induce fear in the mind of another, or hold a firearm in a public place in such a manner as to reasonably induce fear in the mind of another of being shot or injured; however, this section shall not be applicable to any person engaged in justified or excusable self-defense. 
(b)  Any police officer, in the performance of his duty in making an arrest under the provisions of this section shall not be civilly liable in damages for injuries or death resulting to the person being arrested if he had reason to believe that the person being arrested was pointing, holding or brandishing a firearm or object which was similar in appearance to a firearm, with intent to induce fear in the mind of another. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the word "firearm" shall mean any weapon in which ammunition may be used or discharged by explosion or pneumatic pressure. The word "ammunition," as used herein, shall mean cartridge, pellet, ball, missile or projectile adapted for use in the firearm. 
(Code 1965, § 38-7; Ord. No. 1994, 8-7-90) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-282.  
Sec. 38-6. - Hunting with firearms while under influence of intoxicant or narcotic drug; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt wildlife with a firearm, bow and arrow, or crossbow in the city while he is (i) under the influence of alcohol; (ii) under the influence of any narcotic drug or any other self-administered intoxicant or drug of whatsoever nature, or any combination of such drugs, to a degree that impairs his ability to hunt with a firearm, bow and arrow, or crossbow safely; or (iii) under the combined influence of alcohol and any drug or drugs to a degree that impairs his ability to hunt with a firearm, bow and arrow, or crossbow safely. Any person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2882, 6-14-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2789, adopted Oct. 28, 2003, repealed former § 38-6 in its entirety, which pertained to permit prerequisite to purchase of certain weapons and derived from the 1965 Code, § 38-5; Ord. No. 1324, adopted Sept. 13, 1982; and Ord. No. 1429, adopted Jan. 23, 1984. Ord. No. 2882, adopted June 14, 2005, added new provisions as § 38-6.  
Sec. 38-7. - Sale, delivery, etc., of blackjacks, metal knucks, switchblade knives and similar weapons. 
If a person sells or barters, or exhibits for sale or for barter, or gives or furnishes, or causes to be sold, bartered, given or furnished, or has in his possession or under his control, with the intent of selling, bartering, giving or furnishing, any blackjack, brass or metal knucks, any disc of whatever configuration having at least two (2) points or pointed blades which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart, switchblade knife or like weapons, such person shall be prima guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. The having in one's possession of any such weapon shall be facie evidence, except in the case of a conservator of the peace, of the intent to sell, barter, give or furnish the same. 
(Code 1965, § 38-4; Ord. No. 1540, 6-24-85)  
Sec. 38-8. - Transporting a loaded rifle or shotgun. 
(a)  No person shall transport, possess or carry a loaded shotgun or loaded rifle in any vehicle on any public street, road or highway. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to duly authorized law enforcement officers or military personnel in the performance of their lawful duties, nor to any person who reasonably believes that a loaded rifle or shotgun is necessary for his personal safety in the course of his employment or business. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 2050, 4-23-91)  
APPENDIX A - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
CITY ZONING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING ZONING REGULATIONS FOR THE CITY OF VIRGINIA BEACH, VIRGINIA, AND PROVIDING FOR THE ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND AMENDMENT THEREOF, AND FOR THE REPEAL OF ORDINANCES AND PARTS OF ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT THEREWITH 
WHEREAS, the Code of Virginia, Title 15.2, Chapter 22, empowers cities to enact zoning ordinances and to provide for their administration, enforcement and amendment, and states the purposes, powers, and procedures for municipal zoning, and 
WHEREAS, the Charter of the City of Virginia Beach confers on and vests in the City of Virginia Beach certain general powers relevant to zoning and the accomplishment of its purposes, makes the planning commission responsible for recommendations to City Council on all phases of city planning, including a master plan, zoning and subdivision control, and provided that the commission shall have the powers and duties provided by general law and such other powers and duties as may be assigned by City Council, and 
WHEREAS, this zoning ordinance has been prepared according to the procedures, for the purposes, and to exercise the powers, set forth in the Code of Virginia, Title 15.2, Chapter 22, and the Charter of the City of Virginia Beach, and has been recommended to City Council by the planning commission; therefore, 
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Virginia Beach: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1773, adopted April 18, 1988, being the completely revised version of the zoning ordinance of the city, has been included as App. A, and is set forth herein as enacted with minor editorial emendations enclosed in brackets made for the purpose of clarity. The absence of a history note following a section in this appendix indicates the section derives unamended from Ord. No. 1773; the presence of a history note indicates subsequent amendment. 
Appendix A formerly set forth the zoning ordinance of the city as enacted by Ord. No. 482, adopted Oct. 29, 1973, as subsequently amended. For the complete disposition of ordinances amending said former zoning ordinance, the user should turn to the Code Comparative Table beginning on page 3343 of this volume. 
Charter reference— Planning commission, §§ 19.01, 19.02; board of zoning appeals, §§ 19.03—19.05. 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance not affected by Code or ordinance adopting Code, § 1-5(7); public disclosure of interest of planning commission or council members in land to be zoned, § 2-80; department of planning, § 2-381 et seq.; planning commission, § 2-396 et seq.; animals and fowl, Ch. 5; beaches, boats and waterways, Ch. 6; beach erosion advisory commission, § 6-161 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8; housing and building maintenance code, Ch. 16; license not to be issued contrary to zoning ordinance, § 18-21; mobile homes, Ch. 19; motor vehicle and traffic code, Ch. 21; open storage of inoperable motor vehicles on residential, commercial property, § 21-377; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28; soil removal and other land-disturbing activities, Ch. 30; solid waste, Ch. 31; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 33; swimming pools, Ch. 34; water supply, Ch. 37; subdivision ordinance, App. B; site plan ordinance, App. C; stormwater management, App. D; Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance, App. F; Southern Watersheds Management Ordinance, App. G. 
State Law reference— Zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-486 et seq. 
The Oceanfront Resort District Form-Based Code can be viewed here . 
 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 100. - Title. 
This ordinance may be known, designated and cited as the "City Zoning Ordinance of the City of Virginia Beach."  
Sec. 101. - Legislative intent. 
This ordinance is enacted to promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city. It is the intention of the city council that the provisions of this ordinance will implement the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan of the city by encouraging the most desirable use of the land for residential, recreational, agricultural, forestry, commercial, industrial, conservation, public service, floodplain, drainage, and other purposes, and the most desirable density of population in the several parts of the city, and by encouraging the most appropriate use and occupancy of buildings, and by protecting and improving the quality of the waters within and adjacent to the city, and by promoting good civic design and arrangement. The provisions of this ordinance provide reasonable standards with respect to the location, height, bulk, size of buildings, and other structures, yard areas, courts, off-street parking facilities and other open spaces, density of population, and the use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, business, residence, or other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2007, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 102. - Establishment of districts and official zoning maps. 
(a)  In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this ordinance, the following districts are hereby established: 
(1)  Preservation District. The Preservation District shall consist of: 
P-1 Preservation District 
(2)  Agricultural Districts. The Agricultural Districts shall consist of: 
AG-1 Agricultural District 
AG-2 Agricultural District 
(3)  Residential Districts. Residential Districts shall consist of: 
R-40 Residential District 
R-30 Residential District 
R-20 Residential District 
R-15 Residential District 
R-10 Residential District 
R-7.5 Residential District 
R-5D Residential District 
R-5R Residential District 
R-5S Residential District 
R-2.5 Residential Townhouse District 
(4)  Apartment Districts. Apartment Districts shall consist of: 
A-12 Apartment District 
A-18 Apartment District 
A-24 Apartment District 
A-36 Apartment District 
(5)  Hotel District. The Hotel District shall consist of: 
H-1 Hotel District 
(6)  Office Districts. The Office Districts shall consist of: 
O-1 Office District 
O-2 Office District 
(7)  Business Districts. Business Districts shall consist of: 
B-1 Neighborhood Business District 
B-1A Limited Community Business District 
B-2 Community Business District 
B-3 Central Business District 
B-4 Mixed Use District 
B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District 
B-4K Historic Kempsville Area Mixed Use District 
(8)  Industrial Districts. Industrial Districts shall consist of: 
I-1 Light Industrial District 
I-2 Heavy Industrial District 
(9)  [Reserved] 
(10)  Planned Development Districts. The Planned Development Districts shall consist of: 
PD-H1 Planned Unit Development District 
PD-H2 Planned Unit Development District 
(11)  Historic and Cultural District. The Historic and Cultural District shall consist of: 
Historic and Cultural District 
(12)  Resort Tourist Districts. The Resort Tourist Districts shall consist of: 
RT-4 Resort Tourist District 
RT-3 Resort Tourist District 
RT-1 Resort Tourist District 
(13)  Districts Implementing Strategic Growth Area Plans. The districts intended to implement Strategic Growth Area Plans shall consist of: 
(1)  OR Oceanfront Resort District; and 
(2)  CBC Central Business Core District 
(a1)  There are hereby established the following overlay districts: 
(1)  Shore Drive Corridor Overlay District ("SD"); 
(2)  North End Overlay District ("NE"); 
(3)  Old Beach Overlay District ("OB"); 
(4)  Historic Kempsville Area Overlay District ("HK"); 
(5)  Workforce Housing Overlay District ("WF"); and 
(6)  Short Term Rental Overlay District ("STR"). 
Such districts shall be designated on the official zoning map by an appropriate notation following the designation of the underlying zoning district. As an illustration, property in the Shore Drive Corridor Overlay District and in the B-4 Mixed Use District shall be designated on the official zoning map as having the classification "B-4(SD)." 
(b)  Official zoning map. The City of Virginia Beach is divided into zones or districts, as shown on the official zoning map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, shall be a part of this ordinance. Said map is composed of a series of sheets in the official zoning atlas, properly identified as such, which shall be on file in the office of the planning director, and shall be the official record of zoning status of areas within the city. 
(1)  Recording amendments to the official zoning map. On the effective date of any map amendment or upon the satisfactory compliance with the conditions imposed, the change shall be posted on the zoning map by the planning director and records accompanying the map shall identify the official action by which such amendment was made, the date of such action, the area involved and the date of posting. 
(2)  Unauthorized changes in zoning map prohibited. No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or any matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures and requirements of this ordinance. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized change in the official zoning map. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 104 and as otherwise provided by law. 
(3)  Replacement of official zoning map. In the event that the official zoning map or any portion thereof becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may by resolution adopt a new official zoning map or portion thereof which shall supersede the prior map or portion. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior map, but no map adopted by resolution shall have the effect of amending the official zoning map, which shall be amended only as provided herein, and in accord with general law. The replacement shall be properly identified as such, with date of the resolution of city council. Unless the prior official zoning map or portion thereof has been lost or totally destroyed, any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(4)  Interpretation of district boundaries. In constructing the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(i)  Centerlines as boundaries. Where district boundaries appear to follow centerlines of streets, alleys, easements, railroads and the like, they shall be construed as following such centerlines. 
(ii)  Property lines and the like as boundaries. Where district boundaries appear to follow street, lot, property or similar lines, they shall be construed as following such lines. 
(iii)  Boundaries in or adjacent to bodies of water. Where district boundaries appear to follow shorelines or centerlines of bodies of water, they shall be construed as following such shorelines or centerlines. In case of change in shorelines or of the course or extent of water, the boundaries shall be construed as moving with the change. Boundaries indicated as entering any body of water, but not continuing to intersect with other zoning boundaries or with the limits of jurisdiction of the city shall be construed as extending in the direction in which they enter the body of water to intersect with other zoning boundaries or with the limits of jurisdiction. 
(iv)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features listed. Where district boundaries are indicated as parallel to or extensions of features listed above, they shall be so construed. 
(v)  Dimensions. Where dimensions are not otherwise indicated on the official zoning map, the scale of the map shall govern. 
(vi)  Variation of actual location from mapped location. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, the actual location shall govern. 
(5)  Limitations of application of rules above. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (4)(i) through (vi) above, no interpretation shall be made which changes the zoning status of a lot or parcel. 
(6)  Action in cases of uncertainty. Where the rules above fail to clarify the status of land in a particular case, the planning director, as agent of the planning commission, shall interpret in such a manner as to carry out the intent and purpose of this ordinance. Appeal from the interpretation of the planning director in such cases shall be to the board of zoning appeals, as provided in the Code of Virginia, Title 15.2, Chapter 22, Section 15.2-2309(1). 
(7)  Unclassified areas. Unless areas are classified on the official zoning map, or classification can be established by the rules above, such areas shall be considered to be classified as agricultural (AG-1) until rezoned by city council. 
(c)  Uses allowed. No use shall be allowed in any zoning district except those which may be allowed as principal uses, conditional uses, and accessory uses; provided, however, that no uses shall be allowed in resource protection areas except as may be permitted by applicable provisions of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance [Appendix F]. 
(Ord. No. 2007, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2017, 11-27-90; Ord. No. 2354, 11-28-95; Ord. No 2472, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2511, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2837, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 2844, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 2911, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2915, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 2997, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3431, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 3578, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 103. - Administration. 
(a)  The zoning administrator shall have all necessary authority on behalf of the city council to administer and enforce this ordinance, including the ordering in writing of the remedying of any condition found in violation of this ordinance, and the bringing of legal action to ensure compliance with this ordinance, including injunction, abatement or other appropriate action or proceeding authorized by this ordinance or the laws of this state. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  The zoning administrator shall be responsible for determining whether applications for building permits as required by the building code are in accord with the requirements of the zoning ordinance, and no building permit shall be issued without certification that plans conform to applicable zoning regulations. 
(d)  No permit for excavation or construction shall be issued before the zoning administrator certifies that the plans, specifications and intended use conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(e)  No person shall use or permit the use of any structure or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, enlarged, or moved, wholly or partly, in use or structure, until a certificate of occupancy reflecting use, extent and location shall have been issued to the owner by the zoning administrator. 
(f)  Such certificate shall show that the structure or use or both, or the affected parts thereof, are on conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, and the zoning administrator shall issue such certificate if he finds that all of the requirements of this ordinance have been met, and shall withhold such certificate unless all requirements of the ordinance have been met. 
(g)  A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the zoning administrator for a period not exceeding six (6) months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion if he finds that such occupancy, with such conditions and safeguards as he may establish as required by the circumstances of the particular case, will not endanger public health. The zoning administrator may reissue a temporary certificate of occupancy for an additional period not exceeding six (6) months, however, in no case shall occupancy be allowed to continue under a temporary certificate of occupancy for a period exceeding one (1) year. 
(h)  Applications for certificates of occupancy shall be accompanied by a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(i)  Upon written request and the payment of a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), the zoning administrator shall issue a zoning verification letter indicating the zoning designation of a particular parcel or parcels of land as shown on the official zoning map. 
(j)  The zoning administrator shall maintain records of all official actions of his office. 
(k)  The zoning administrator or his agent may present sworn testimony to a magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction and, if such sworn testimony establishes probable cause that a zoning ordinance violation has occurred, request that the magistrate or court grant the zoning administrator or his agent an inspection warrant to enable the zoning administrator or his agent to enter the subject dwelling for the purpose of determining whether violations of the zoning ordinance exist. The zoning administrator or his agent shall make a reasonable effort to obtain consent from the owner or tenant of the subject dwelling prior to seeking the issuance of an inspection warrant. 
(l)  The zoning administrator shall provide written notice to the owner of any real property that is the subject of a request for a written order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator. Such notice shall be given by the zoning administrator or by the applicant on forms provided by the zoning administrator within ten (10) days of the date of the request. The appeal period for such order, requirement, decision or determination shall not commence until the notice is sent by registered or certified mail to, or posted at, the last known address or usual place of abode of the property owner or its registered agent, if any. There is a rebuttable presumption that the property owner's last known address is that shown on the current real estate tax assessment records, or the address of a registered agent that is shown in the records of the Clerk of the State Corporation Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2641, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2712, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2891, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 3040, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 3183, 6-14-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 3513, 7-11-17; Ord. No. 3592, 6-18-19, eff. 7-1-19)  
Sec. 104. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), any person who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). If the violation is uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in compliance with this ordinance, within a time period established by the court. Failure to remove or abate a violation within the specified time period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and any such failure during a succeeding ten-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00); and any such failure during any succeeding ten-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each ten-day period punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of Part B of Article 2 hereof shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the initial summons and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional summons. The assessment of a civil penalty shall not preclude the institution of a civil action by the zoning administrator pursuant to section 103(a) of this ordinance, but no such violation shall, unless it results in injury to any person, be prosecuted as a criminal misdemeanor, provided however that when such civil penalties total five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, the violation may be prosecuted as a criminal misdemeanor. 
(c)  The zoning administrator or his or her designee may issue a civil summons as provided by law for a violation. Any person summoned or issued a ticket for a violation may make an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the city treasurer prior to the date fixed for trial in court. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability, and pay the civil penalty established for the offense charged. Such persons shall be informed of their right to stand trial and that a signature to an admission of liability will have the same force and effect as a judgment of court. If a person charged with a scheduled violation does not elect to enter a waiver of trial and admit liability, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided by law. In any trial for a violation, it shall be the burden of the zoning administrator or his or her designee to show the liability of the violator by a preponderance of the evidence. If the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the admission of liability or finding of liability, the court may order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in order to comply with the zoning ordinance. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within a period of time as determined by the court, but not later than six months of the date of admission of liability or finding of liability. Each day during which the violation continues after the court-ordered abatement period has ended shall constitute a separate offense. An admission of liability or finding of liability shall not be a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
(d)  Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. However, specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not be charged more frequently than once in any ten-day period, and a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Civil penalties shall not accrue or be assessed for a period of thirty (30) days after the issuance of a notice of violation from the zoning administrator or during the pendency of an appeal to the board of zoning appeals. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to (i) activities related to land development; (ii) violations of sections 215 and 216 of this ordinance; (iii) violations relating to the posting of signs on public property or public rights-of-way; or (iv) violations resulting in injury to any person or persons. 
(Ord. No. 2392, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 2453, 7-1-97; Ord. No. 2453, 7-1-97; Ord. No. 2518, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 2540, 6-8-99; Ord. No. 2956, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 3043, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 3146, 7-13-10; Ord. No. 3174, 5-10-11; Ord. No. 3565, 8-21-18)  
Sec. 105. - Nonconformity. 
(a)  Any otherwise lawful use, structure, or condition of use which existed in conformity to all applicable zoning provisions before this ordinance was adopted or amended but which does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance as a result of its adoption or amendment shall be deemed a nonconformity. Any lot or use or structure situated on a lot which, due to council action in granting a conditional use permit or rezoning, does not meet the minimum dimensional or area requirements of the district in which it is located shall also be deemed a nonconformity. 
(b)  Intent. It is the intent of this ordinance to allow nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to allow them to become enlarged, expanded, extended, or relocated except upon resolution of city council as provided for in this section, and not to allow them to be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(c)  Continuation. A nonconformity may continue provided that it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the provisions set forth in this section. However, no nonconformity shall continue if it ceases for any reason for a period of more than two (2) years. 
(d)  (1)  Enlargement or extension of nonconformity. No nonconforming use shall be increased in magnitude. No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or extended to cover a greater land area than was occupied by the nonconformity on the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto. No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot, parcel, or structure not occupied by the nonconformity on the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto, and no nonconforming structure shall be moved at all except to come into compliance with the terms of this ordinance. No nonconforming structure shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered, if the effect is to increase the nonconformity. As an exception to the above, any condition of development prohibited by this section may be permitted by resolution of the city council based upon its finding that the proposed condition is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than is the existing nonconformity. City council may attach such conditions and safeguards to its approval as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this ordinance. Applications for the enlargement, extension or relocation of a nonconforming use or structure shall be filed with the planning director. The application shall be accompanied by a fee of six hundred sixty dollars ($660.00) to cover the cost of processing the application. Such fee shall include all costs of notifications and advertisings. The planning director shall cause the application to be advertised for public hearing before the planning commission. Notice shall be given as provided by Section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia; provided, however, that written notice as prescribed therein shall be given at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. A sign shall be posted on the site in accordance with the requirements of section 108 of this ordinance. The planning commission shall hold the public hearing at the time and place announced. Following the public hearing, the commission shall by motion adopt its recommendation and findings, and shall transmit such recommendation and findings to city council. Upon receiving such recommendation, the city council shall give notice of a public hearing as set forth in this section and shall thereafter hold a public hearing and act upon the proposed application. 
(2)  Additions to, or substantial alterations of, nonconforming structures located in a zoning district intended to implement a Strategic Growth Area Plan shall be permitted either in accordance with the regulations of such district or of this section. No nonconforming use located in any form-based district may be converted to any other use except as allowed pursuant to the regulations of such district. 
(e)  (1)  Conversion of a nonconforming use to another use. No nonconforming use shall be converted to another use which does not conform to this ordinance except upon a resolution of the city council authorizing such conversion, based upon its finding that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than is the existing nonconforming use. In the resolution authorizing such change, the city council may attach such conditions and safeguards to its approval as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this ordinance. When any nonconforming use is converted to another use, the new use and accompanying conditions of development shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance in each respect that the existing use conforms, and in any instance where the existing use does not conform to those provisions, the new use shall not be more deficient. Any such use authorized by the city council shall thereafter be subject to the provisions of this section and to any conditions or restrictions attached by the city council. Applications for the conversion of a nonconforming use or structure shall be processed in the same manner as specified in subsection (d)(1). 
(2)  Revocation of authorization. In the event a use other than the specific use authorized by the city council is carried on, or any condition or restriction attached by the city council is violated, intentionally or otherwise, such authorization may be revoked by the city council at a public hearing upon ten (10) days' written notice to the owner of the property upon which the use is carried on and to the operator of such use. 
(f)  Damage or destruction involving nonconformities. Any structure or condition of development which is, houses, or is related to a nonconformity may, if involuntarily damaged or destroyed, be reconstructed or restored to its prior condition and location within two (2) years of its being damaged or destroyed, and the nonconformity may continue as before. If it is not reconstructed or restored within two (2) years, then any future construction or reconstruction on, or use of, the affected lot shall be in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(g)  Location of uses and structures on lots not meeting minimum requirements. Any conforming principal or accessory use, conditional use or conforming structure housing such use may be enlarged, extended, constructed, located, or moved on any lot created prior to the effective date of this ordinance regardless of the size or dimensions of such lot, provided that other requirements of this ordinance are met. However, in the case of any lot created or rezoned upon petition on behalf of the property owner on or after the above date, only those uses and structures shall be located on the lot for which the lot meets the minimum lot requirements in the applicable zoning district except as provided in section 221 herein. Any lot not meeting the applicable size or dimension requirements due to governmental action taken on or after the effective date of this ordinance shall have the same rights of development as before said governmental action took place. 
(Ord. No. 1842, 3-27-89; Ord. No. 1935, 11-13-89; Ord. No. 2209, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 2472, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2741, 4-22-03; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3276, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3413, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 3550, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18)  
Sec. 106. - Appeals and variances. 
(a)  The board of zoning appeals shall hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this ordinance. An appeal shall be filed with the zoning administrator, and include the grounds of appeal, within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision appealed, unless the notice of violation involves temporary or seasonal commercial uses, parking of commercial trucks in residential zoning districts, or similar short-term recurring violations, in which case the appeal period is ten (10) days from the date of the notice of violation. All decisions not timely appealed shall be final and unappealable. In addition thereto, the board shall have such other powers and duties as are set forth in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2309; provided, however, that the board shall have no authority to hear and decide applications for conditional use permits, and provided further, that written notice as prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204 shall be given at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing before the board. The cost of the public notices required by Section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia shall be charged to the applicant. 
(b)  The membership, organization and procedures of the board of zoning appeals shall be as set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2308 through 15.2-2314, as amended. In the event the board denies an application for a variance, substantially the same application shall not be considered by the board for a period of one (1) year from the date of denial. 
(c)  Every application concerning a single-family residence, semi-detached residence or duplex to the board of zoning appeals shall be accompanied by a fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00), and all other applications shall be accompanied by a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Such fee shall include all costs of notification and advertising. Each lot upon which a variance is requested shall be the subject of a separate application and a separate fee; provided, however, that variances from the setback and landscaping provisions of section 201(e)(1), pertaining to fences and walls, may be the subject of a single application and fee where the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The lots upon which the variance is requested are contiguous lots within a single subdivision block, as shown on the recorded plat of the subdivision in which the lots are located; 
(2)  The fence or fences which are the subject of the variance are located wholly upon property owned by a bona fide homeowners' association created by legal instrument recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court, or upon which there is a recorded perpetual easement allowing such homeowners' association, or the members thereof, to construct and maintain a fence upon such property; 
(3)  Such fence or fences are owned by the homeowners' association; and 
(4)  The individual signing the application certifies to the zoning administrator, in writing, that he or she is vested with the authority to act on behalf of the homeowners' association in the matter and that such association has authorized, in the manner prescribed by its by-laws or other instrument, the filing of the application. 
(d)  Any decision of the board shall be binding upon the owner of the property which is the subject of such appeal only if the owner of such property has been provided notice in accordance with section 103(l). Actual notice by the owner or active participation in the decision of the board shall waive the owner's right to challenge the validity of the board's decision because of the failure of the owner to receive notice. 
(Ord. No. 1929, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 1970, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2063, 5-14-91; Ord. No. 2379, 3-26-96; Ord. No 2472, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2605, 8-8-00; Ord. No. 2640, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2672, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 2741, 4-22-03; Ord. No. 3183, 6-14-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 3280, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3553, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18)  
Sec. 107. - Amendments. 
(a)  Initiation. Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice requires, the city council may by ordinance, amend, supplement, or change the regulations, district boundaries, or zoning district classifications of property. Any such action may be initiated by resolution of the city council, or by motion of the planning commission, or, where a change of the zoning district classification of property is sought, by petition of the owner, contract purchaser with the owner's written consent, or the owner's duly authorized agent therefor, of the property which is the subject of the proposed change of zoning district classification, addressed to the city council. City council may refer to Planning Commission an amendment or reenactment of the Zoning Ordinance. Unless a shorter time is prescribed in the referral resolution, Planning Commission must report its recommendation within 100 days of its first meeting after the date of the referred ordinance. City Council shall require a report in less than 100 days only after a public hearing. Notice of such public hearing shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the locality at least two weeks prior to the public hearing and such notice shall also be published on the city website. Any petition submitted by an owner, contract purchaser with the owner's consent or the owner's duly authorized agent shall be addressed to city council but shall be filed with the director of planning. The director shall cause the petition to be placed on the agenda of the planning commission. For purposes of this section, a change of zoning district classification shall be deemed to include modifications of the conditions of a conditional change of zoning district classification pursuant to subdivision (h). 
(b)  Withdrawal of petition. The city council may allow withdrawal of a petition for a change of zoning district classification at any time prior to voting on such petition; provided, however, that the applicant shall notify the city clerk, by letter or electronic mail, that it intends to seek to withdraw the petition. Such notification shall be received by the city clerk no later than noon on the working day next preceding the public hearing. In the event such notification is not timely made, no withdrawal shall be allowed by the city council. However, if such petition is denied by city council, substantially the same petition shall not be filed within one (1) year of the date of denial. The planning director shall determine whether a new petition is substantially the same as the petition denied by the city council, taking into consideration the differences in the zoning district classifications sought, the nature and density or intensity of the proposed use, site design, site layout, traffic, noise, and other potential impacts, measures to mitigate such impacts, and such other factors as he determines to be relevant to such determination. 
(c)  Planning commission action; notice of public hearing. Before making any recommendation on a proposed amendment, the planning commission shall give notice of a public hearing thereon, as set forth in Section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, or any successor statute; provided, however, that written notice as prescribed therein shall be given at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing and in the case of a condominium or a cooperative, the written notice may be mailed to the unit owners' association or proprietary lessees' association, respectively, in lieu of each individual owner. In the case of a proposed change of zoning district classification, the public notice shall state the general usage and density range of the proposed zoning district classification and the general usage and density range, if any, set forth in the applicable part of the comprehensive plan; provided, however, that where a conditional change of zoning is sought, the public notice shall state the proposed uses and density sought in the petition. The cost of the public notices required by Section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia shall be charged to the applicant. 
(d)  Planning commission hearing; action following hearing. Unless the petition is withdrawn before the public hearing, the public hearing shall be held at the time and place announced; provided, however, that if the public hearing, or a decision to approve or deny the petition, is deferred indefinitely, new public notice shall be issued as for the original notice. The applicant shall have the right to withdraw any petition prior to the commencement of the public hearing on the petition, without further action as otherwise would be required by this section. In the event the public hearing is postponed to a date certain announced at the meeting at which the petition was scheduled to be heard, the public hearing on such date certain shall not be required to be readvertised, but written notice of the public hearing shall be re-mailed to those persons entitled to such notice. If the deferral is at the request of the applicant or necessary by reason of the applicant's failure to properly follow applicable procedures, including the posting of signs as required by section 108, the cost of new public notice, including the costs of readvertisement and mailing of written notice, shall be at the applicant's expense. Following the public hearing, the commission shall by motion adopt its recommendation, which may include changes in the original proposal, as allowed by law, and shall transmit such recommendation to city council. 
(e)  Action by city council; notice of public hearing. Before taking any action pursuant to this section, notice of a public hearing thereon, as required by Virginia Code Section 15.2-2204, or any successor statute, shall be given, as set forth in subsection (d). 
(f)  City council action; reconsideration. 
(1)  The public hearing shall be held at the time and place announced. Following the hearing, city council may make such changes to the recommendation of the planning commission as it deems appropriate, as allowed by law; provided, however, that (i) no additional land may be rezoned to a different classification than was contained in the public notice; (ii) no land may be rezoned to a less restrictive classification without new notice and hearing; and (iii) no amendment to the regulations shall be made unless such amendment was fairly encompassed by the descriptive summary of such amendment contained in the advertisement thereof. Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the city council from referring any petition, including a petition that is the subject of reconsideration pursuant to subdivision (2), back to the planning commission for further study and recommendation in the event the city council deems such action necessary or advisable. 
(2)  An affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the city council present and voting shall be required to amend the zoning ordinance or to grant any change of zoning district classification. A tie vote shall be deemed a denial of the proposed amendment; provided, however, that in the event of a tie vote on a petition for a change of zoning district classification due to the absence of one or more members of the city council, any member may, by motion, initiate reconsideration of the petition within thirty (30) days of such tie vote. A motion to reconsider a vote resulting in approval or denial of a petition, other than by reason of a tie vote, may be made within thirty (30) days of the date of approval or denial by any city council member on the prevailing side of such vote. If city council determines, by an affirmative vote of its members present and voting, to grant reconsideration of a petition, a new public hearing shall be advertised in accordance with subsection (e) and a sign shall be posted as required by section 108. No petition that has been denied shall be granted upon reconsideration thereof where the proposed uses, density, intensity, site layout, building design or any other significant characteristics of the petition are substantially changed after the denial that is the subject of such reconsideration, unless the petition is referred back to the planning commission for its review and recommendation prior to final action by the city council. 
(g)  Fee. A petition to amend, supplement or change the district boundaries or classification of property shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one thousand ninety dollars ($1,090.00), provided, that where such a petition is submitted as a conditional zoning, the fee shall be in the amount of one thousand three hundred sixty dollars ($1,360.00). A petition of any property owner for a reconsideration of proffered conditions shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of six hundred sixty dollars ($660.00). Such fees shall include all costs of notification and advertising. 
(h)  Conditional zoning. 
(1)  Criteria for proffers. Proffered conditions shall meet the following criteria: (1) the rezoning itself must give rise for the need for the condition; (2) such conditions shall have a reasonable relation to the rezoning; (3) such conditions shall be in conformity with the comprehensive plan; and (4) such conditions shall not be prohibited by the provisions of Virginia Code Section 15.2-2298 or any successor statute or other applicable law. 
(2)  Proffers which include the dedication of real property or payment of cash. In the event proffered conditions include the dedication of real property or payment of cash, such property shall not transfer and such payment of cash shall not be made until the facilities for which such property is dedicated or cash is tendered are included in the capital improvement program, provided that nothing herein shall prevent the city from accepting proffered conditions which are not normally included in such capital improvement program. If proffered conditions include the dedication of real property or the payment of cash, the proffered conditions shall provide for the disposition of such property or cash payment in the event the property or cash payment is not used for the purpose for which proffered. Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect or impair the authority of the city council to accept proffered conditions which include provisions for timing or phasing of dedications, payments or improvements or to impose or accept conditions of conditional use permits. In the event proffered conditions include the dedication of real property or payment of cash which is not to be made until the facilities for which such property is dedicated or cash is tendered are included in the capital improvement program, the city attorney shall advise the planning commission, and the city council of the adequacy of provisions securing to the city the timely performance of such conditions. 
(3)  Legal form of proffered conditions. All proffers shall be set forth in a conditional zoning agreement, prepared by an attorney licensed to practice law in the Commonwealth of Virginia, and shall be in a form suitable for recordation in the deed books maintained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the City of Virginia Beach. No conditional zoning agreement shall be considered by the planning commission or city council unless and until such agreement has been approved by the city attorney as to legal form and sufficiency, including suitability for recordation by the clerk of the circuit court. 
(4)  Title certificate. Each conditional zoning petition shall be accompanied by a certificate of title, prepared and signed by an attorney licensed to practice law in the Commonwealth of Virginia. The title certificate shall describe the property that is the subject of the petition and shall identify all parties having a recorded interest in the property, including legal and equitable owners, and shall state the source of title or interest for each party. The certificate of title shall state the date through which the attorney examined the title to the property, which date shall not be more than six (6) months prior to the date of the filing of the petition. The city attorney shall reject any certificate of title which, in his opinion, is incomplete or is otherwise insufficient. 
(5)  Parties to the conditional zoning agreement. The conditional zoning agreement shall name, as grantors, all owners of the property and shall be signed by all such parties. In the event that the applicant for the rezoning is a contract purchaser, such purchaser shall also be a party to the agreement, as a grantor. The city attorney may require that any additional person or business entity be made a party to the agreement, when, in his opinion, the inclusion of such person or entity is necessary or appropriate in order to protect the city's interest, and may require that the agreement be approved by a court of competent jurisdiction when such approval of the court is, in his opinion, necessary. 
(6)  Procedure (planning commission). 
(a)  Any applicant for a change of zoning district classification may submit a conditional zoning agreement containing proffered conditions of such change of zoning district classification. Such agreement, together with the title certificate, shall be submitted to the planning director with the petition for change of zoning district classification. The planning director shall include, in his report to the planning commission, such commentary on the individual or collective proffers contained in the agreement as will assist the planning commission and city council in determining the appropriate action to take on the petition. 
(b)  In the event the applicant submits a modified conditional zoning agreement containing any substantive revisions to the agreement after the filing of the petition but prior to the public hearing before the planning commission, such petition shall not be considered by the planning commission, except to allow its deferral, unless such modified conditional zoning agreement meets the requirements of this section and has been received by the planning director no later than the close of business twenty-one (21) days prior to, but not including, the date of the public hearing before the planning commission. 
(c)  The planning commission shall recommend to the city council approval or denial of the petition, and may in addition recommend that one or more of the proffers contained in the conditional zoning agreement be rejected or modified, or that new proffers be added. 
(7)  Procedure (city council). 
(a)  Unless the application is deferred or withdrawn, the city council shall approve or deny the petition and may, in approving the petition, accept all the proffers contained in the agreement or accept some and reject the remainder of such proffers. No proffer shall be modified or added by the city council unless such modified or added proffer is contained in a conditional zoning agreement meeting the requirements of this section that was received by the planning director no later than the close of business ten (10) days prior to, but not including, the date of the public hearing before the city council at which the conditional zoning agreement containing such proffer is considered. 
(b)  The procedure for the consideration of petitions for conditional change of zoning district classification shall in all other respects be as set forth in subsections (a) through (g). 
(8)  Recordation. 
(a)  If the city council approves the petition, the city attorney shall, within ten (10) days of the city council's action, examine the appropriate records so as to determine whether any material change in the ownership of the property has occurred since the date of the title certificate. In the event that the city attorney determines that no such material change has occurred, he shall present the conditional zoning agreement to the clerk of the circuit court for recordation. If the city attorney determines that a material change of ownership of the property has taken place, and that, in his opinion, such change may adversely affect the city's interest, he shall so notify the applicant and the city council by letter. Any member of the city council may thereafter move to reconsider the petition in accordance with the provisions of subsection (f); provided, however, that any such motion may be made within thirty (30) days after the date of the notice from the city attorney. 
(b)  The failure to record any conditional zoning agreement shall not relieve the applicant, or any other person or entity who is bound by the provisions of such agreement, including any successor in interest to an original party to the agreement, from performance of the covenants or conditions contained in the agreement according to their terms, nor shall the failure to record any such agreement affect the validity or enforceability of the action of the city council. 
(9)  Effect of proffers. Once accepted by the city council, the conditions shall continue in full force and effect until a subsequent amendment changes the zoning on the property covered by such conditions; provided, however, that such conditions shall continue if the subsequent amendment is part of the comprehensive implementation of a new or substantially revised zoning ordinance. The adoption of codes or amendments applicable to all or a substantial portion of any Strategic Growth Area designated in the Comprehensive Plan shall not be deemed to be part of a comprehensive implementation of a new or substantially revised zoning ordinance. The zoning administration officer is hereby vested with all necessary authority to enforce such conditions. 
(10)  Amendments to accepted proffers. No amendment shall be made to any accepted proffer except in the manner of a new rezoning petition as set forth herein. 
(i)  Petitions not meeting minimum requirements. Any petition for which the parcel involved or structure on the parcel does not meet the minimum dimensional requirements of the proposed zoning district shall be processed nevertheless, but shall not be approved by the city council unless it finds that either special circumstances pertinent to the site or the proposed conditions of rezoning adequately offset the negative effects of the deficiency. In addition, the city council may, for good cause shown and upon a finding that there will be no significant detrimental effects on surrounding properties, accept proffered conditions reasonably deviating from the setback, lot coverage, landscaping and minimum lot area requirements and height restrictions, except as provided in section 202(b), otherwise applicable to the proposed development. No such deviation shall be in conflict with the applicable provisions of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 1841 3-27-89; Ord. No. 1871, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 1971, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2042, 3-5-91; Ord. No. 2472, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2600, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 2658, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 2741, 4-22-03; Ord. No. 2759, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 3206, 10-11-11; Ord. No. 3245, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3264, 2-26-13; Ord. No. 3274, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3393, 1-20-15; Ord. No. 3552, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18; Ord. No. 3593, 6-18-19, eff. 7-1-19)  
Sec. 107.1. - Alternative compliance in certain districts. 
To the extent provided by the regulations of any zoning district listed in section 102(a)(13): 
(a)  The city council may grant special exceptions in accordance with the alternative compliance provisions of the district to allow the development of new uses or structures, or additions to or alterations of existing structures, that do not conform to the uses or development standards otherwise permitted or required under the applicable district regulations. 
(b)  The fee for applications for special exceptions pursuant to this section shall be in the amount of five hundred sixty dollars ($560.00). Such fee shall include all costs of notifications and advertising. 
(Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3551, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18)  
Sec. 108. - Posting of signs relating to applications for rezoning, etc. 
(a)  In any case in which a property owner or other authorized person petitions the city council for the approval of any application seeking a rezoning, conditional use permit, approval of a PD-H1 or PD-H2 land use plan, special exception, resolution pertaining to a nonconforming use or structure, subdivision or floodplain variance or reconsideration of conditions, the applicant shall erect, on the property which is the subject of the application or within the unimproved portion of the abutting public street, a sign of a size, type and lettering approved by the planning director. All such signs shall be posted and maintained in such manner as to be unobscured by vegetation or other obstructions. One such sign shall be posted within ten (10) feet of the paved portion or, if present, the sidewalk of every public street adjoining the property or in such alternate location or locations as may be prescribed by the planning director. The cost of such signs shall be charged to the applicant. Such sign shall be erected not less than thirty (30) days before the planning commission hearing, or if none, the city council hearing, and shall state the nature of the application and date and time of the hearing. Such signs may not be removed until the city council has acted upon the application, and shall be removed no later than five (5) days thereafter. In any case in which the planning commission or city council determines that the requirements of this section have not been met, the application shall be deferred; provided, however, that the city council may, for any other appropriate reason, deny such application. 
(b)  Applications before the board of zoning appeals shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (a) hereof. Any application in which such requirements have not been met may be deferred or denied by the board. 
(c)  No person having actual notice of an application for which a sign is required to be posted by this section, or to whom a written notice meeting the requirements of Code of Virginia § 15.2-2204 has been mailed, shall contest the validity of any city council action by reason of the applicant's failure to comply with the provisions of this section. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to create any new right to contest the action of the city council. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to applications initiated by the city in which the subject property consists of more than twenty-five (25) parcels of land. 
(Ord. No. 2655, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 2741, 4-22-03; Ord. No. 3047, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 3178, 5-10-11; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3274, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13)  
Sec. 109. - Transmittal of planning commission's recommendations. 
Notwithstanding any provisions contained in this ordinance to the contrary, any and all planning commission recommendations mentioned in this ordinance shall be transmitted by the planning director to the city council within forty-five (45) days after the date of receipt of such recommendations from the planning commission.  
Sec. 110. - Validity, repeal of conflicting ordinances; effective date. 
(a)  Validity. The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, section, provision, exception, sentence, clause, phrase, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances for any reason be adjudged to be invalid, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in full force and effect and its validity shall not be impaired, it being the legislative intent now hereby declared that this ordinance would have been adopted even if such invalid matter had not been included herein, or if such application had not been made. 
(b)  Repeal of conflicting ordinances. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided, are hereby repealed on the effective date of this ordinance; provided, however, that an ordinance of the City of Virginia Beach adopted on October 29, 1973, commonly known as the "Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Virginia Beach," and an ordinance of the City of Virginia Beach adopted August 19, 1957, which became effective September 18, 1957, commonly known as the "Master Zoning Ordinance of the City of Virginia Beach," and an ordinance of the City of Virginia Beach adopted November 25, 1954, commonly known as the "Master Zoning Plan of Princess Anne County," shall not be considered repealed as to any violation thereof existing on the effective date of this ordinance, unless such violation conforms to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(c)  Effective date. This ordinance shall be in effect from and after the date of its adoption, including the official zoning map.  
Sec. 111. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in the singular number include the plural and the plural the singular; the use of any gender shall be applicable to all genders; the word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; the word "land" includes only the area described as being above mean sea level; and the word "person" includes an individual, a partnership, association, or corporation. 
In addition, the following terms shall be defined as herein indicated; provided that in the event a term defined in this section is defined differently in the regulations of any district identified in section 102(a)(13), the latter definition shall control if the property to which the definition applies is located in such district: 
Accessory use. Except as otherwise provided in the zoning district regulations, an "accessory use": 
(a)  Is a use which is conducted on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which it is related (whether located within the same building or an accessory building or structure, or as an accessory use of land) or which is conducted on a contiguous lot (in the same ownership); and 
(b)  Is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with, such principal use; 
(c)  Is operated and maintained substantially for the benefit of the owners, occupants, employees, customers, or visitors of the zoning lot with the principal use. 
Adult bookstore. An establishment that either (a) has twenty (20) percent or more of its stock for sale or rent on the premises, or has twenty (20) percent or more of its stock on display either in plain view or in an enclosed or partitioned area, in books, magazines, periodicals, drawings, sculptures, devices, paraphernalia, motion pictures, films, video recordings or photographs which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein; or (b) devotes twenty (20) percent or more of its display area or floor space, excluding aisles and storage areas, to the sale or display of such materials; or (c) receives in any one-month period twenty (20) percent or more of its gross income from the sale or rental of such materials; or (d) has on the premises one (1) or more mechanical or more mechanical or electronic devices for viewing such materials; or (e) sells products featuring specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and prohibits access by minors, because of age, to any area of the premises that is open to customers, and advertises itself as offering "adult" or "xxx" or "x-rated" or "erotic" or "sexual" or "pornographic" material on signage visible from a public right-of-way. 
(a)  Specified anatomical areas: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(i)  Human genitals, pubic region, buttock; and 
(ii)  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(b)  Specified sexual activities: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sadomasochistic abuse, sexual penetration with an inanimate object, sexual intercourse or sodomy. 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching or human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
Alcoholic beverage. Alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, or any one or more of such varieties containing one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume, including mixed alcoholic beverages, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer and capable of being consumed by a human being. 
Alleys. Alleys are minor ways used primarily for vehicular access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting a street. 
Alternative discharging sewage treatment system. Any device or system which results in a point source discharge of treated sewage for which the department of health may issue a permit authorizing construction and operation when such system is regulated by the State Water Control Board (SWCB) pursuant to a general Virginia Pollution Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit issued for an individual single-family dwelling with flows less than or equal to one thousand (1,000) gallons per day on a yearly average. Such a system is designed to treat sewage from a residential source and dispose of the effluent by discharging it to an all weather stream, an intermittent stream, a dry ditch, or other location approved by the department of health. 
Antenna, building mounted. Any structure or device affixed to a building or other structure, except a water tank, for the purpose of supporting broadcast equipment of any frequency or electromagnetic wave, or any similar system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves. The term does not include communication towers, antennas mounted on communication towers, home satellite dishes, small wireless facilities or television or radio antennas used primarily for the benefit of the occupants of, or visitors to, property on which such antennas are located. 
Antique shop. A retail store, not exceeding three thousand (3,000) square feet, where manmade articles at least one hundred (100) years old are offered for sale and cover at least fifty (50) percent of the display floor area. 
Approximated floodplain. The area for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but where a one (1) percent annual chance floodplain boundary has been approximated as set forth in the Floodplain Ordinance (Appendix K). 
Assembly uses. Uses that involve the gathering of individuals or groups in one (1) location, such as arenas, assembly halls, auditoriums, bingo halls, civic centers, community centers, eleemosynary establishments, private clubs, union halls and excluding religious uses. 
Automobile museum. A museum at which vintage or classic automobiles manufactured prior to 1971, exotic or limited-production automobiles, or automobiles having a special cultural or historical significance and generally regarded as collector's items are displayed as exhibits and may be made available for purchase by members of the general public as an ancillary activity. 
Automobile repair establishment. A building or portion thereof, designed or used for servicing of automotive or other motorized vehicles where repair services are limited to the following and no motor vehicle fuel is dispensed: 
(a)  Adjusting and repairing brakes; 
(b)  Emergency wiring repairs; 
(c)  Greasing, lubrication and oil change; 
(d)  Motor adjustments not involving removal of the head or crankcase; 
(e)  Providing and repairing fuel pumps and lines; 
(f)  Radiator cleaning and flushing; provision of water, antifreeze and other additives; 
(g)  Replacement or adjustment of minor automobile accessories, to include mirrors, windshield wipers and the like; 
(h)  Servicing of nonmotorized bicycles; 
(i)  Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors and distributor parts; 
(j)  Servicing and repair of carburetors; 
(k)  Servicing, repair and sales of mufflers and exhaust systems; 
(l)  Tire sales, servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving; 
(m)  Washing and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and polishing materials. 
Uses permissible at an automobile repair establishment do not include body work, straightening of frames or body parts, steam cleaning, painting, storage of automobiles not in operating condition nor the operation of a commercial garage as an accessory use. 
Automobile service station. Any establishment at which motor vehicle fuel is dispensed at retail. Such establishments may provide some or all of the services provided by an automobile repair establishment. 
Bar or nightclub. An establishment, including a private club as defined by this ordinance, that serves alcoholic beverages, or where alcoholic beverages are consumed, at any time between midnight and 6:00 a.m., except establishments in which the service of alcoholic beverages is incident to a wedding, banquet or similar function not open to the general public, and in which both of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The combined area of the dance floor and any other standing space exceeds fifteen (15) percent of the public floor area of the establishment; and 
(2)  Amplified music, other than prerecorded background music intended solely as an accompaniment to dining, is provided between midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
Base flood. The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year; also referred to as the one hundred (100) year flood. 
Bed and breakfast inn. A residential structure of historical significance in which not more than thirteen (13) rooms are provided for lodging transients, for compensation, on daily or weekly terms, with breakfast. 
Beverage manufacturing shop. A retail establishment in which ingredients for the manufacture or production of beer or wine are sold, and in which beer or wine is manufactured or produced for off-premises consumption. 
Bingo halls. A facility used primarily for the conduct of bingo games, open to the public and not in a subsidiary nature to another use. 
Body piercing establishment. An establishment in which body piercing takes place. For purposes of this definition, the term "body piercing" means the act of penetrating the skin to make a hole, mark, or scar, generally permanent in nature, but does not include the use of a mechanized, pre-sterilized ear-piercing system that penetrates the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear, or both. 
Borrow pit. Any operation involving the breaking or disturbing of the surface soil or rock where the primary purpose of the operation is to facilitate or accomplish the extraction or removal of sand, soil, gravel, fill, or other similar material. Specifically exempt from this definition are the following: 
(a)  Any excavation for roads, drainage, stormwater management facilities as defined in the city stormwater management ordinance (Appendix D), or similar features necessarily incidental to, and in accordance with, the approved construction plans for a residential subdivision or other similar development activity; provided, however, if the depth or surface area of the excavation exceeds that of the approved construction plans and the excavated material is hauled off site, an excavation permit and conditional use permit for a borrow pit must be obtained. 
(b)  Any excavation for the sole purpose of conducting a bona fide agricultural operation, including, but not limited to, excavations to improve drainage, provide watering facilities for livestock, or create a holding lagoon for animal waste, or farm ponds or fish ponds; provided, that none of the excavated material may be hauled off site or sold. 
(c)  Any excavation or excavations on any single lot or parcel of land which total less than one-quarter acre in area and less than twelve (12) feet in excavated depth as measured from the original ground level, to the lowest point of the excavation. 
(d)  Any trench, ditch or hole for utility lines, drainage pipes or other similar public works facilities or projects where the excavation is in accordance with the approved construction plans. 
Boundary walls. A solid wall without openings, situated within a building and erected on the boundary line between adjacent lots and which is to be jointly maintained. 
Building. A structure with a roof intended for shelter or enclosure. 
Building area. The total area covered by enclosed building space including total area of all covered open space (except for open space covered by eaves and normal overhang of roofs) but not including uncovered entrance platforms, uncovered terraces, or uncovered steps where such features do not themselves constitute enclosures for building areas below them. 
Bulk storage yard. A facility for the storage of raw materials, finished goods or vehicles, provided they are in good running order. No sale, storage or processing of scrap, salvage, junk, toxic or hazardous materials is allowed. 
Campground. Premises where spaces are offered for occupancy for relatively short periods by portable recreational housing, including any land, building, structure or facility on such premises used by occupants of such portable recreational housing. 
Cemetery. Any land or structure used or intended to be used for the interment of human remains. The sprinkling of ashes or their burial in a biodegradable container on church grounds or their placement in a columbarium on church property shall not constitute the creation of a cemetery. 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area. Any land designated as such on the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map adopted by the city council, subject to the determination of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Review Committee on a site-specific basis. A Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall consist of a resource protection area and a resource management area, and shall include any designated intensely developed areas. 
Clinic. An office building or group of offices wherein only persons engaged in the practice of a medical profession or occupation are located, but which does not have beds for overnight care of patients. A "medical profession or occupation" is any activity involving the diagnosis, cure, treatment, mitigation, or prevention of disease or which affects any bodily function or structure. 
Coastal high-hazard area. An area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a coastal primary sand dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high-velocity wave action from storm or seismic sources. As a minimum, the coastal high-hazard areas are identified as V zones in the flood insurance study and accompanying maps. 
Collection depot for recyclable materials. A fully enclosed building where recyclable materials are collected or redeemed, and temporarily stored until transported to a separate processing facility. 
College or university housing. Buildings or structures which contain dwelling units for the housing of regularly enrolled students, faculty and employees of an established college or university, and their families. 
Communication tower. Any pole, spire or other structure, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, masts or other appurtenances, intended or used primarily for the purpose of affixing antennas or other wireless telecommunications equipment and any associated base station. For purposes of this ordinance, regulations pertaining to communication towers shall apply to any associated base station as applicable. The term "base station" includes any equipment and non-tower supporting structure at a fixed location that enable wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, and any other equipment associated with wireless communications service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supply, and comparable equipment. The term does not include private home use of satellite dishes and television antennas or by amateur radio operators as licensed by the Federal Communications Commission. 
Communication tower, temporary. A portable communication tower that is intended or used to provide wireless telecommunication service on a temporary or emergency basis and that is not permanently affixed to the site on which it is located. Such towers include, without limitation, Cells-on-Wheels (COW), Site-on-Wheels (SOW), Cell on Light Trucks (COLT) or other portable devices. 
Community boat dock. A facility for secure mooring of boats provided in conjunction with a residential development for use by residents of the development as opposed to the public at large, and that facilities for storage and repair of boats and sale of boating supplies and fuel are not provided for. 
Country inn. A building in which not more than five (5) rooms are provided for lodging transients, for compensation, for daily or weekly terms, with or without board, in conjunction with which antiques may be sold at retail as an accessory use. No such rooms shall have an entrance or exit to the outside of the building, and no such room shall exceed three hundred (300) square feet in floor area. 
Craft brewery. A facility, other than a farm brewery, that produces and distributes beer or other fermented malt beverages in quantities not exceeding fifteen thousand barrels (15,000 BBL) per year and at which beer, ale or other fermented beverages are served to customers for on-premises or off-premises consumption and at which food may be served. 
Craft distillery. A facility that produces and distributes spirits, as defined in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, in quantities not exceeding five thousand barrels (5,000 BBL) per year and at which such spirits produced at such facility are served to customers for on-premises or off-premises consumption and at which food may be served. 
Craft winery. A facility, other than a farm winery, that produces, manufactures and distributes wine, and at which wine is served to customers for on-premise and off-premise consumption, and at which food may be prepared and served. 
Day-care center. Any facility, other than a family day-care home, operated for the purpose of providing care, protection and guidance during a part of the twenty-four-hour day to a group of: (1) children separated from their parents or guardians; (2) adults sixty-two (62) years of age or older; or (3) persons under a disability during a part of the twenty-four-hour day. 
Density. The number of dwelling or lodging units per gross acre. 
Developer. An owner, or any person with written authorization from the owner, who intends to improve or to construct improvements upon a given property. 
Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, or drilling operations. 
Drive-in eating and drinking establishment. Any eating and drinking establishment encouraging the consumption of food or beverages in automobiles through the use of outside service personnel. This does not include those restaurants which only contain drive-in or walk-up service windows. 
Dwelling, attached/townhouses. A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units attached at the side or sides in a series, separated by a boundary wall and each unit having a separate lot with at least minimum dimensions required by district regulations for such sections. 
Dwelling, duplex. A building containing two (2) dwelling units, entirely surrounded by a yard, where each dwelling unit is not on a separate lot. Mobile homes, travel trailers, housing mounted on self-propelled or drawn vehicles, tents or other forms of temporary or portable housing are not included within this definition. 
Dwelling, mobile home. A special form of one-family dwelling with the following characteristics: 
(a)  Designed for long-term occupancy, and containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath, and kitchen facilities, with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems. 
(b)  Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels. 
(c)  Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied complete, usually including major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location and provision of support on the site, connection with utilities and the like. 
(d)  Intended to be used other than as a component in a structure two (2) or more stories in height. 
Dwelling, multiple-family. A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units, entirely surrounded by a yard, where each dwelling unit is not on a separate lot. 
Dwelling, semidetached. A building containing two (2) dwelling units attached at the sides, separated by a boundary wall and each having a separate lot. 
Dwelling, single-family. A building containing one (1) dwelling unit, entirely surrounded by a yard. Mobile homes, travel trailers, housing mounted on self-propelled or drawn vehicles, tents or other forms of temporary or portable housing are not included within this definition. 
Dwelling, single-family, ancillary. A building containing one (1) dwelling unit, entirely surrounded by a yard but located on the same lot with a separate single-family dwelling of greater floor area. Mobile homes, travel trailers, housing mounted on self-propelled or drawn vehicles, tents, or other forms of temporary or portable housing are not included within this definition. 
Dwelling unit. A "dwelling unit" is a room or rooms connected together, constituting an independent housekeeping unit for a family and including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Eating and drinking establishment or restaurant. A commercial establishment where food, beverages and meals are served and consumed, including any areas set aside for their storage or preparation, but not including bars or nightclubs. 
Eleemosynary or philanthropic institution. A charitable or benevolent operation qualifying for tax exemption under section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended. 
Environmental education center. A facility having the primary purpose of educating visitors on the nearby natural environment through the use of informative displays, exhibits, outdoor activities and similar means. 
Exchange visitor program participant. A foreign national who has been selected by a sponsor to participate in an exchange visitor program, and is seeking to enter or has entered the United States temporarily on a non-immigrant J-1 visa and who meets all requirements set forth for participation in the summer work travel program by the United States Department of State. 
Explosive, high. Explosive material, as defined in the current editions of the International Fire Code and International Building Code, which can be detonated by means of a No. 8 test blasting cap when unconfined. 
Explosive, low. Explosive material, as defined in the current edition of the International Fire Code and International Building Code, that will burn or deflagrate when ignited and is characterized by a rate of reaction that is less than the speed of sound. 
Family. A "family" is: 
(a)  An individual living alone in a dwelling unit; or 
(b)  Any of the following groups of persons, living together and sharing living areas in a dwelling unit: 
(1)  Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or approved foster care; 
(2)  A group of not more than four (4) persons (including on premise employees) who need not be related by blood, marriage, adoption or approved foster care; 
(3)  A group of not more than eight (8) persons with mental illness, intellectual disability or developmental disabilities residing with one (1) or more resident or nonresident staff persons in a facility whose licensing authority is the Department of Behavioral Health and Developmental Services; provided, that mental illness and developmental disability shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in section 54.1-3401 of the Code of Virginia; 
(4)  A group of not more than eight (8) aged, infirm or disabled persons residing with one (1) or more resident counselors or other staff persons in a residential facility or assisted living facility for which the Virginia Department of Social Services is the licensing authority; 
(5)  A group of not more than two (2) adults, who need not be related by blood or marriage, and the dependent children of each of the two (2) adults, provided that the children are under nineteen (19) years of age or are physically or developmentally disabled; or 
(6)  A group of not more than eight (8) Exchange Visitor Program Participants as defined by this ordinance living in accordance with the provisions of Article 2, Section 209.7 - Dwelling unit - Exchange Visitor Program Participant Housing. 
Family day-care home. Any private family home which, as a home occupation, provides care, protection and guidance during a part of the twenty-four-hour day to a group of: (1) children separated from their parents or guardians; (2) adults sixty-two (62) years of age or older; or (3) persons under a disability. This term shall apply only to homes in which more than four (4) such persons are received, except persons who are related by blood or marriage to persons who maintain the home or where the total number of such persons received, including relatives, exceeds seven (7). For purposes of this definition, a person is deemed to be under a disability if he or she is found by a licensed physician to be unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity which can be expected to result in death or to last for the duration of such person's life. 
Farm distillery. A distillery that manufactures not more than thirty-six thousand (36,000) gallons of alcoholic beverages other than wine or beer per calendar year, and (i) is located on a farm owned or leased by such distillery or its owner; and (ii) in which all agricultural products used by such distillery in the manufacture of its alcoholic beverages are grown on the farm. 
Farm winery. An establishment licensed as a farm winery pursuant to Code of Virginia § 4.1-207(5) and located on a farm having a producing vineyard, orchard or similar growing area, or agreements for purchasing grapes or other fruits from agricultural growers within the Commonwealth, and with facilities for fermenting and bottling wine on the premises, where the owner or lessee manufactures wine that contains not more than eighteen (18) percent alcohol by volume. 
As used in this definition, the terms "owner" and "lessee" includes a cooperative formed by an association of individuals for the purpose of manufacturing wine. In the event such cooperative is licensed as a farm winery, the term "farm" as used in this definition includes all of the land owned or leased by the individual members of the cooperative within the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Fiber-optics transmission facility. A centralized facility in which fiber-optic voice and data transmission equipment is used to regenerate and route incoming fiber-optic signals. 
Firewood preparation facility. A facility where the cutting and splitting of firewood not grown on the premises occurs and where the operation occupies one (1) acre or more. 
Flex suite. A living unit with separate kitchen and toilet facilities, located within a single-family dwelling and having direct interior access to the primary living unit. 
Flood insurance study. A report by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) that examines, evaluates, and determines flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation, and determination of mudflow or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source and floodplains subject to special restrictions as defined in Appendix K, section 4.10. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that shall be reserved to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. The "floodway" may also be referred to as the "regulatory floodway." 
Floor area. "Floor area" shall be construed as the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings; provided that the following areas shall be excluded from the determination of floor area: Attic areas with headroom of less than seven (7) feet, unenclosed stairs of fire escapes, elevator structures on the roof, areas devoted exclusively to air conditioning, ventilating and other building machinery and equipment, and parking structures. 
Floor area ratio. The ratio of floor area to land area expressed as a percent or decimal which shall be determined by dividing the total floor area on a zoning lot by the lot area of that zoning lot. 
Garage apartment. A structure above a private garage in which provision is made for one (1) dwelling unit, requiring an interior stairway to the second floor, provided that the living area does not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area and the height does not exceed twenty-eight (28) feet. 
Garage, parking. A building or structure, or portion thereof, designed or used for temporary parking of motor vehicles, and consisting of no more than one (1) parking level. 
Garage, private. An accessory structure or part of the principal structure which is intended for parking or temporary storage of automobiles of owners or occupants of the premises. 
Garage, repair. A building or portion thereof, other than a private, storage or parking garage, designed or used for repairing or equipping of automotive vehicles only where the repair work includes activities in addition to those allowed at automobile service stations. Such garages may also be used for storage of automotive vehicles. 
Garage, storage. A building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for the storage of automotive vehicles, and within which temporary parking may also be permitted. 
Guest house. A dwelling or lodging unit for temporary nonpaying guests in an accessory building. No such living quarters shall be rented, leased, or otherwise made available for compensation of any kind, nor shall such quarters include over five hundred (500) square feet of floor area. Kitchen facilities are not permitted. 
Heliport. A landing and take-off place for a helicopter including accessory terminal and fuel accommodations. 
Helistop. A landing and take-off place for a helicopter. 
Home-based wildlife rehabilitation facility. A facility where care is regularly given to sick, injured, orphaned, or displaced wildlife on a temporary basis. 
Home occupation. The conduct of a business in a residential dwelling unit where all of the following characteristics are present: 
(a)  The use of the dwelling unit for the business is clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants. 
(b)  There is no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or any visible or audible evidence detectable from outside the building lot, either permanently or intermittently, of the conduct of such business except for an identification sign regulated by this ordinance. 
(c)  The home occupation is conducted on the premises which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner, and no more than one (1) person other than a member of the immediate family occupying such dwelling unit is employed in the business. 
(d)  There are no sales to the general public of products or merchandise from the home. 
(e)  The use does not qualify as an accessory use as defined by this ordinance. 
Homeowners' association. An incorporated, nonprofit organization made up of homeowners in a specified subdivision or subdivisions, that shall be responsible for maintenance and operation of neighborhood recreation facilities or other community facilities or functions, and that shall assess its members fees or dues to offset the cost thereof. 
Home sharing. A dwelling in which a room or rooms are offered for rental for compensation for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days by an owner who utilizes the dwelling as his principal residence and occupies the dwelling during any such rental period. 
Hotel and motel. A building or group of attached or detached buildings containing dwelling or lodging units in which fifty (50) percent or more of the units are lodging units, and for which compensation is exchanged for short-term occupancy of the dwelling or lodging units. A hotel shall include a lobby, clerk's desk or counter and facilities for registration and keeping of records relating to hotel guests. 
Housing for seniors and disabled persons. A category of multiple-family housing that includes one or more of the following types of housing facility: 
(a)  Independent living facilities are intended for residency by individuals capable of functional independence. Such facilities stress the social, rather than the medical, needs of the resident; 
(b)  Assisted living facilities provide regular medical, nursing, social and rehabilitative services, in addition to room and board, for functionally impaired persons incapable of independent living. Such facilities provide less intensive care for residents than is provided by nursing facilities; and 
(c)  Nursing facilities provide twenty-four-hour nursing service for infirm or incapacitated persons. 
Indoor play center. A type of indoor recreational facility at which indoor playground equipment, inflatable play structures, soft play equipment or similar items are provided for use primarily, but not necessarily exclusively, by children under twelve (12) years of age or at which organized activities for such children are regularly held. 
Junkyard. Any lot or parcel of land, structure or part thereof used for the collection, storage and sale of wastepaper, rags or scrap metal or dis carded material, or for the collection, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition and for the sale of parts thereof. 
Kennel, commercial. Any premises in which caring, breeding, housing, and keeping of dogs, cats, or other domestic animals is done for monetary purposes. 
Kennels, residential. Any premises in which, or parcel of land upon which, more than four (4) dogs over six (6) months of age are kept for pets or for hunting, exhibiting, dog shows, field and obedience trials. 
Kitchen. An area with a housekeeping unit which contains a cooking facility. 
Landscaped. Devoted exclusively to plants which are rooted directly in the ground or in permanently fixed planter boxes properly maintained. 
Limited use accessory dwelling unit. A dwelling unit located on the same zoning lot as the principal dwelling unit which (i) shall only be occupied by a member(s) of the immediate family who currently reside in and are owners of the principal dwelling unit or an on premise employee, (ii) are only allowed in the R-40 Residential Zoning District as an accessory use, (iii) shall not be rented, leased or otherwise used for any purpose not specifically permitted, (iv) shall not contain more than one (1) bedroom nor more than eight hundred (800) square feet of building floor area, and (v) the building floor area of the limited use accessory dwelling unit shall be counted toward the maximum accessory structure building floor area of the zoning lot. For the purposes of this definition a "member(s) of the immediate family" means any person who is a natural or legally adopted child or grandchild, grandparent, parent or spouse of a family member that resides in the principal dwelling, and an "on premise employee" means one who is employed, for compensation, by a family member residing in the principal dwelling and must provide an on premise service such as, but not limited to, caretaker, childcare provider, landscaper, or chef. 
Live-work unit. A unit, consisting of both living space and work space, in which commercial activity is carried on by at least one resident of the unit and in which such activity is not otherwise allowed as a home occupation or accessory use. 
Lodging unit. Living quarters for a family which do not contain independent kitchen facilities; provided, however, that dwelling units which do not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet and are not made available for occupancy on a lease or rental basis for periods of more than one (1) month shall be considered lodging units even though they contain independent kitchen facilities. 
Lot. A piece or parcel of land abutting on a street and treated by proper legal instrument. 
Lot coverage. That percent of a zoning lot covered by enclosed building space including total area of all covered open space (except for open space covered by eaves and normal overhang of roofs) but not including uncovered entrance platforms, uncovered terraces, or uncovered steps where such features do not themselves constitute enclosures for building areas below them. 
Lot, front of. The front of a lot shall be considered to be that boundary of the lot which abuts on a street. In the case of corner lot, the narrowest boundary fronting on a street shall be considered to be the front of the lot. In case the corner lot has equal frontage on two (2) or more streets, the lot shall be considered to front on the principal street on which the greatest number of lots have been platted within the same block. 
Lot, through. Any lot other than a corner lot that has frontage on more than one (1) street or private road. 
Major entertainment venue. An establishment located other than in an Agricultural, Residential or Apartment District on any zoning lot of one and one-half (1½) acres or more in area and having more than three hundred (300) feet of continuous street frontage on a public street or streets, the principal use of which is to provide entertainment consisting of organized professional sporting events, live theatre presentations or concerts, conventions, museum exhibitions, trade shows, or similar activities. 
Major recreational equipment. For purposes of this ordinance, major recreational equipment includes travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, converted buses or similar devices intended for use as portable recreational housing, boats and boat trailers, amphibious houseboats, utility trailers and similar items, and cases, boxes, or trailers used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. 
Major retail venue. An establishment located other than in an Agricultural, Residential or Apartment District on any zoning lot of four million (4,000,000) square feet or more the principal use of which is to provide entertainment (indoor recreation) and retail shopping. Such zoning lot shall be distinguishable by architecture, design and accessibility of the development features of the property. 
Marina, commercial. A facility for secure mooring of boats, including facilities for storage and repair of boats and sale of boating supplies and fuel, for use by the owner or resident of the lot, and those other than the owner or resident of the lot, upon which the facility is located. 
Marina, noncommercial. A facility for secure mooring of boats for use by persons including the owner or resident of the lot and those other than the owner or resident of the lot upon which the facility is located, at which facilities for storage and repair of boats and sale of boating supplies and fuel are not provided for. 
Mini-warehouses. A series of individual enclosed storage units for rent or lease. 
Mixed use. Two (2) or more separate uses allowed as principal or conditional uses that are physically and functionally integrated with the same structure on one (1) zoning lot. 
Mobile home. A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. The term includes, but it is not limited to, the definition of "mobile home" as set forth in regulations governing the mobile home safety and construction standards program. 
Mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more mobile home lots for rent or sale which include facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed, including at a minimum the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets. 
Motor vehicle sales and rental. Any lot or establishment where two (2) or more motor vehicles, including trucks, trailers, house trailers or motor homes, or any combination thereof, but not including motorcycles, are displayed for sale or rent. 
Mulch processing facility. A facility at which raw materials are processed into mulch. 
Municipal oceanfront entertainment venue. An establishment located in the Oceanfront Resort District on property owned or leased by the municipality, and the principal use of which is to provide entertainment to the public consisting of live theatre presentations, concerts, and similar activities. A municipal oceanfront entertainment venue must meet the requirements of section 218. 
Open-air market. An outdoor market for the retail sale of new or used merchandise, produce or other farm products, whether operated by a single vendor or composed of stalls, stands or spaces rented or otherwise provided to vendors. The term does not include the outside display of merchandise as an incidental part of retail activities regularly conducted from a permanent building on sidewalks or other areas immediately adjacent to, and upon the same lot as, such building. The term also does not include merchandise sold at festivals or other special events, temporary in duration, at which the display and sale of merchandise is incidental to the primary cultural, informational or recreational activities of such festival or special event. 
Outdoor amenity space. An outdoor area of an establishment that: (1) serves as an amenity for occupants of the establishment or members of the public or (2) consists of green space, such as gardens (including roof gardens), landscaping beds or other vegetated and maintained areas. Examples of outdoor amenity space include, but are not limited to, courtyards, fountains, plazas, cafes, and gardens, but do not include outdoor display areas. 
Outdoor cafe. An eating and drinking establishment located wholly or partially outdoors. 
Outdoor plaza. An outdoor open area, located in an urban setting, which is intended be used by the public for walking, sitting, informally meeting and similar activities. 
Owner. Any person or authorized agent who has legal title to the land involved or who has a lease having a term of not less than thirty (30) years. 
Parking lot, commercial. A parcel of land or portion thereof used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles as a commercial enterprise for which compensation is charged independently of any other use of the premises. 
Parking lot, commercial, temporary. A commercial parking lot that operates for one (1) year or less. 
Parking structure. A building or structure, or portion thereof, designed or used for temporary parking of motor vehicles and consisting of more than one (1) parking level or containing retail sales establishments and parking at different levels. 
Personal service establishment. An establishment in which personal, financial, technical or similar services are provided, including barbershops, beauty shops, shoe repair shops, cleaning, dyeing, laundry, pressing, dressmaking, tailoring and garment repair shops, linen supply establishments, photography studios and similar establishments, but not including automobile repair establishments, tattoo parlors, body piercing establishments or any other use allowed separately as a principal or conditional use in a zoning district. 
Personal watercraft. A motorboat less than sixteen (16) feet in length which uses an inboard motor powering a jet pump as its primary motive power and which is designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing or kneeling on, rather than in the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside, the vessel. 
Planning director. The director of the department of planning or his designee. 
Portable recreation housing—Recreation units. A general term used to include travel trailers, pick-up campers, tents, converted buses or similar devices, other than mobile homes, intended for use as temporary portable recreational housing. 
Portable storage container. A portable, weather-resistant receptacle designed and used for the storage or shipment of household goods, wares, building materials or merchandise. The term shall not include yard waste containers provided by the city pursuant to City Code section 31-35, roll-off containers, or containers having a storage capacity of less than one hundred fifty (150) cubic feet. 
Principal residence. Principal residence shall be the location where a person lives fifty (50) percent or more of the time. A person shall not have more than one (1) principal residence. 
Principal structure. A structure that encloses or houses any principal use. 
Private club. An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, literary, political, recreational, or like activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
Private sewage treatment facility. Any works, owned or operated by a person or entity other than the City of Virginia Beach or the Hampton Roads Sanitation District, for the treatment of sewage generated by one (1) or more privately owned structures. The term shall include treatment works, interceptor sewers, outfall sewers which provide surface discharge into a ditch, stream or body of water, sewage conveyance systems, and their equipment and appurtenances, but shall not include on-site septic tank systems or similar in-ground systems approved by the Virginia Beach Health Department or facilities connected to the public sewer system. 
Public floor area shall include the entire floor area of an establishment except for rest rooms, offices, storage areas, kitchen areas and other areas in which patrons do not ordinarily congregate. "Standing space" shall include the entire public floor area of an establishment except for areas designated for seating or egress. The permits and inspections administrator of the department of planning shall make such determination based upon the floor plan of the establishment in accordance with the provisions of the International Building Code. Once such a determination has been made, the standing space of an establishment shall not be increased so as to be in excess of fifteen (15) percent of the public floor area except in accordance with section 233.1(a)(5) of this ordinance. 
Public use. Any use conducted by a public agency for a bona fide public purpose on land owned or leased by that agency. 
Recreational resort community. A community with an emphasis on outdoor recreational activities with seasonal living accommodations for tourists and owners. Such communities shall not provide long-term permanent housing or principal residences. Accommodations may consist of any combination of motor homes, recreation vehicles, park model trailers, manufactured housing or cottages. 
Religious uses. Places of religious worship, such as churches, synagogues, temples, mosques, similar places and their appurtenant uses. 
Residential care for seniors. A single-family dwelling in which a resident thereof or twenty-four (24) hour caretakers, for compensation, regularly provide care, protection, and supervision for a maximum of three (3) persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older. 
Resource management area. That component of a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area not classified as a resource protection area. Resource management areas include land types which, if improperly used or developed, have the potential for causing significant water quality degradation or for diminishing the functional value of a resource protection area. 
Resource protection area. That component of a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area comprised of lands at or near the shoreline which have an intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform or are sensitive to impacts which may result in significant degradation to the quality of state waters. 
Retail establishment. Any building used for the display and sale of merchandise, except of an incidental nature, to the general public at retail. As used in Part D of Article 2 of this Ordinance, the term shall also include eating and drinking establishments. 
Shelter for farm employees. A single-family residential structure located on a farm for the purpose of housing a single-family of employees of that farming business. 
Shopping center. A group of two (2) or more retail or other commercial establishments, including those located on outparcels, having any or all of the following characteristics: 
(a)  The establishments are connected by party walls, partitions, canopies or similar features; 
(b)  Some or all of the establishments are located in separate buildings which are designed as a single commercial group sharing common parking areas and vehicular ways and which are connected by walkways or other access ways; 
(c)  The establishments are under the same management or association for the purpose of enforcing reciprocal agreements controlling management or parking; or 
(d)  The establishments are structurally designed in an integrated fashion around or along the sides of a promenade, walkway, concourse or courtyard. 
Short term rental. A dwelling that does not meet the definition of home sharing in which a room or rooms, or the entire dwelling are rented for less than thirty (30) consecutive days for compensation. 
Single room occupancy facility. A building or buildings containing multiple single room occupancy units. 
Single room occupancy unit. A living space with a minimum floor area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet and a maximum floor area of four hundred fifty (450) square feet restricted to occupancy by one (1) person identified by the department of human services as having limited permanent housing alternatives and occupying the unit as a primary residence and not as transient or overnight housing or lodging. 
Small wireless facility. Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume, or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet and (ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the facility has a cumulative volume of no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet. 
Solid waste management facility. A facility or site used for the treatment, source separation, storage, transportation, transfer or disposal of solid waste. 
Special flood hazard area. The land in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as set forth in the Floodplain Ordinance (Appendix K). 
Specialty shop. A retail store, not exceeding three thousand (3,000) square feet, that caters to particularized markets, such as tourists, ethnic groups, collectors, and offering goods not generally available in convenience or general retail stores. 
Street. A vehicular way, whether public or private, (which may also serve in part as a way for pedestrian traffic) whether called street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, alley, mall or otherwise designated. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or requiring a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having or requiring a fixed location on the ground. 
Student center. A building or structure devoted to active or passive recreational facilities for students of a college or university and operated by an agent of the college or university. 
Student dormitory. A building or structure devoted to housing of regularly enrolled students of a college or university which contains lodging units or sleeping rooms and may contain a common kitchen and dining facility for the occupants and operated by an agent of the college or university with which the students are affiliated. 
Substantial damage. Damage from any cause sustained by a structure as a result of which the cost of restoring such structure to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of its market value prior to the occurrence of such damage. 
Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either (a) before the improvement or repair is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Tattoo parlor. Any place in which is offered or practiced the placing of designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin of any person with ink or any other substance, resulting in the permanent coloration of the skin, including permanent make-up or permanent jewelry, by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin, except when performed by a medical doctor, veterinarian, registered nurse or any other medical services personnel licensed pursuant to Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia in the performance of his professional duties. 
Trailer. Any vehicle lacking motive power designed for carrying property or passengers wholly on its own structure and which is customarily drawn by a motor vehicle. 
Truck. Any motor vehicle designed to transport property on its own structure independent of any other vehicle and having a registered gross weight in excess of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) pounds. 
Use. A "use" is: 
(a)  Any purpose for which a structure or a tract of land is designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or 
(b)  Any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a structure or on a tract of land. 
Utility installation (public or private). Any plant, or equipment or other facility used for the production, transmission or distribution to the public of telecommunications, electric, natural gas, water, cable, stormwater or sewage service; provided, however that the term shall not include communication towers or other uses or structures listed separately in this ordinance. 
Wetlands. Areas shall include those defined in section 1401(e)(f)(j) of this ordinance and shall also include tidal wetlands, which are vegetated and nonvegetated wetlands, as defined in section 1401 of this ordinance; and nontidal wetlands, which are those wetlands, other than tidal wetlands, that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as identified or referred to in the City of Virginia Beach Soil Survey by soil names Backbay Mucky Peat; Duckston portion of Corolla-Duckston Fine Sands; Dorovan Mucky Peat; Duckston Fine Sand; Nawney Silt Loam; Pamlico Mucky Peat; Pamlico-Lakehurst Variant Complex; Rapahannock Mucky Peat, Strongly Saline or Pocaty Peat; and any other lands which under normal conditions are saturated to the ground surface and connected by surface flow and contiguous to tidal wetlands or tributary streams. 
Wildlife. Any mammal, bird, reptile or amphibian listed on the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries' list of native and naturalized fauna of Virginia. 
Wildlife rehabilitation center. A professionally-operated facility with an on-site veterinary staff where care is regularly given to sick, injured, orphaned, or displaced wildlife until such time as such wildlife possesses sufficient health that it can be returned to its native habitat. 
Wind energy conversion system. Any device, such as a windmill, wind turbine or wind charger, that converts wind energy into electricity, including the rotors, nacelles, generators, towers and associated control or conversion electronics. 
Wind energy conversion system, freestanding. A wind energy conversion system other than roof-mounted. 
Wind energy conversion system, roof-mounted. A wind energy conversion system affixed to the roof of a building or other structure. 
Wine-tasting room. An establishment licensed as a winery or farm winery that serves only wine or non-alcoholic beverages for retail on-premises or off-premises consumption and that does not serve meals. 
Wireless telecommunication equipment includes antennas and their appurtenances used for purposes of providing wireless telecommunication services. 
Yard. An open space that lies between the principal or accessory building or buildings and the lot lines, and in the case of lots containing ancillary single-family dwellings, a yard also consists of open space that lies between the ancillary single-family dwelling and the principal single-family dwelling located on the lot. This term includes front yards, rear yards, interior yards, and side yards as appropriate. Minimum dimensions of such yards are specified in the appropriate sections of this ordinance and within such minimum dimensions, yards are unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided in this ordinance. 
Yard, required. That portion of a lot adjacent to each lot line and encompassing all points on the lot within a minimum setback distance of the lot lines as set forth in the applicable district regulations. 
Yard, required front. That portion of a lot encompassing all points on the lot within a minimum setback distance of the front of the lot as specified in the applicable district regulations. 
Yard, required interior. That portion of a lot encompassing all points in the lot within a minimum distance between an ancillary single-family dwelling and the principal single-family dwelling located on the lot as specified in the applicable district regulations. 
Yard, required side. That portion of a lot encompassing all points in the lot within a minimum setback distance of the side lot line or lines of the lot as specified in the applicable district regulations. 
Yard, required rear. That portion of a lot encompassing all points in the lot within a minimum setback distance of the rear lot line or line of the lot as specified in the applicable district regulations, except that in the case of through lots there will be no rear yards, but only front and side yards. 
Zoning lot. A lot or any portion thereof, or contiguous lots under common ownership within a single zoning district, which are to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. For the purpose of this definition, lots of the same ownership separated solely by an alley of no more than twenty (20) feet in width and by a distance not exceeding the width of the alley shall be considered contiguous. In a Strategic Growth Area, zoning lots may include lots containing parking structures not under common ownership with the other lots, provided that such parking structures are utilized to satisfy, in whole or in part, the vehicular parking requirements of one or more of the uses on the zoning lot and the property is developed in such manner that the uses, including the parking structures, are functionally integrated by means such as, but not limited to, pedestrian connections, similar building materials and architecture and similarly-styled signage. Such signs shall conform to the Central Business Core District Sign Design Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1836, 3-20-89; Ord. No. 1843, 3-27-89; Ord. No. 1906, 8-14-89; Ord. No. 1915, 9-11-89; Ord. No. 2002, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 2007, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2117, 3-24-92; Ord. No. 2151, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2175, 9-22-92; Ord. No. 2196, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 2210, 4-13-93; Ord. No. 2270, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2315, 4-11-95; Ord. No. 2360, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 2413, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 2459, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 2495, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 2505, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 2513, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 2563, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 2570, 1-4-00; Ord. No. 2607, 8-22-00; Ord. No. 2609, 8-22-00; Ord. No. 2627, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 2660, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 2671, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 2693, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 2704, 6-25-02; Ord. No. 2713, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2782, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 2856, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 2864, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 2883, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 2909, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2929, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 2968, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 2972, 2-27-07; Ord. No. 2976, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 3000, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 3004, 11-13-07; Ord. No. 3042, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 3046, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 3050, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 3080, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 3102, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 3114, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 3115, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 3119, 3-9-10; Ord. No. 3141, 6-22-10; Ord. No. 3145, 7-13-10; Ord. No. 3154, 11-9-10; Ord. No. 3161, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 3217, 2-28-12; Ord. No. 3227, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 3244, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 3246, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3259, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 3310, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3322, 1-14-14; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3361, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3378, 10-7-14; Ord. No. 3390, 1-6-15; Ord. No. 3397, 3-17-15; Ord. No. 3403, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3412, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 3416, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 3423, 7-7-15; Ord. No. 3427, 8-18-15; Ord. No. 3441, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3468, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 3471, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 3506, 6-20-17; Ord. No. 3514, 7-11-17; Ord. No. 3524, 12-5-17; Ord. No. 3526, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 3528, 1-9-18; Ord. No. 3571, 11-20-18; Ord. No. 3578, 1-15-19; Ord. No. 3613, 2-11-20)  
ARTICLE 2. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS  
A. - REGULATIONS RELATING TO LOTS, YARDS, HEIGHTS, OFF-STREET PARKING, OFF-STREET LOADING, AND CERTAIN USES 
 
Sec. 200. - Lots. 
(a)  Density, lot coverage, floor area ratio and lot area. For purposes of determining allowable dwelling unit or lodging unit density, lot coverage, floor area ratio and minimum lot area requirements, the following shall be included: 
(1)  Public and private utility easements, so long as the total width of the easement is twenty (20) feet or less; 
(2)  Easements for ingress and egress in favor of others; 
(3)  Special flood hazard areas; 
(4)  Manmade drainage areas and the easements over them constructed primarily for storage and retention of stormwater runoff on the lot and conveyance from the lot except that only the first ten (10) feet of such areas closest to their boundary shall count toward minimum lot size requirements. 
(b)  The following shall not be included in determining the allowable dwelling unit or lodging unit density, lot coverage, floor area ratio and minimum lot area requirements: 
(1)  The floodway portion of any floodplain; 
(2)  Any body of water except as mentioned above; 
(3)  Any manmade drainage areas such as borrow pits and the easements over them constructed primarily for purposes other than storage and retention of stormwater; 
(4)  Wetlands; 
(5)  Any part of a public or private utility easement whose total width is more than twenty (20) feet; and 
(c)  Floodplains subject to special restrictions pursuant to section 4.10 of the Floodplain Ordinance (Appendix K) shall not be included in determining minimum lot area requirements. 
(d)  Lot width. 
(1)  Lots abutting rights-of-way that are straight or where the radius of curvature is ninety (90) feet or more shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  The width of the lot shall be determined by measuring across the rear of the required front yard. Each lot shall be configured so that a straight line drawn across the rear of the required front yard is equal to or greater in length than the minimum lot width for the district in which the lot is located. 
(ii)  A straight line drawn between the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the right-of-way line shall constitute the street line frontage of the lot. Each lot shall be configured so that the width of this frontage is at least equal in length to eighty (80) percent of the required minimum lot width. 
(2)  Lots abutting rights-of-way when the radius of curvature is less than ninety (90) feet or on the turning circle of culs-de-sac shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  The width of such a lot shall be determined by the following method. First, a straight line is drawn between the two (2) points where the side lot lines intersect the right-of-way line; second, a straight line is drawn from the center of curvature through the midpoint of the first line into the lot; third, a straight line is drawn perpendicular to the second line and a distance back from the right-of-way line equal to the required front yard in the applicable district. The length of this third line between the side lot lines is the width of the lot. Each lot shall be configured so that the width meets the minimum requirement for the district in which it is located. The drawing below illustrates the necessary relationships. 
(ii)  In no case shall the length of the first line, which shall be deemed the street line frontage, be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
 
Cul-de-sac 
(3)  With regard to the measurement of any line for the purpose of determining compliance with minimum standards, no portion of any line that crosses a part of the lot not counting toward meeting minimum area requirements shall count toward meeting minimum width requirements. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the above, on a corner lot or through lot, the lot width shall be measured with regard to the narrowest part of the lot by which legal access is available to the abutting street or streets. 
(e)  Lots of unusual depth. When an existing lot is of sufficient area to permit the creation by subdivision of more than one (1) building lot in residential districts, one (1) additional building lot may be permitted through resubdivision of the lot, provided that the lot can be resubdivided in accordance with applicable zoning requirements and subdivision regulations, and that a fifteen-foot easement of right-of-way meeting the requirements of subdivision regulations is provided and duly recorded in the Clerk's Office of the Circuit Court of the City of Virginia Beach. Such arrangements shall be permissible only where no public expenditures for streets or extensions of utilities are involved, and where the following special conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  That a portion of the lot to be resubdivided be adjacent to a public street. 
(2)  That for reasons of unusual shape, dimensional restrictions, topography or area limitations, a normal street dedication of fifty (50) feet cannot be made. 
(3)  That the lot to be resubdivided shall exist as an isolated example and that it not reoccur in a repetitive manner in the area or subdivision. 
(f)  Lot location. Except as herein provided, every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, or required off-street parking. 
(g)  Erection of structures on lot. Except as herein provided, or as provided in the Oceanfront Resort District Form-Based Code, there shall be no more than one (1) single-family detached dwelling, semidetached dwelling or duplex erected on a lot; provided, however, that one (1) single-family detached dwelling and one (1) ancillary single-family detached dwelling shall be allowed on lots within the R-5D(OB) Residential Duplex District or any Apartment or Resort Tourist District within the Old Beach Overlay District, in accordance with the provisions of section 1903, and two (2) single-family dwellings shall be allowed on lots within the R-5R(NE) North End Overlay District on which duplexes are allowed as a principal use, in accordance with the provisions of section 506. Except where a greater setback or buffer is required, the setback for any such dwelling from a permanent body of water shall be no less than five (5) feet, as measured from the mean high water mark of tidal bodies of water and from the normal water level of nontidal bodies of water, in any zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 1787, 6-13-88; Ord. No. 2007, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2662, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 2910, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2996, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3310, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3431, 11-17-15)  
Sec. 201. - Yards. 
(a)  General. All required yards shall be unobstructed by any structure or other improvement which exceeds sixteen (16) inches in height as measured from ground elevation; provided, however, the following improvements may be located in a yard: 
(1)  In-ground swimming pools, jacuzzis, hot tubs or similar structures may extend to within five (5) feet of any side or rear property line, provided however, that no in-ground swimming pool, jacuzzis, hot tubs or similar structures shall extend into any required yard adjacent to a street, except that swimming pools, jacuzzis, hot tubs or similar structures may be located no closer than twenty (20) feet to any property line to the rear of any principal structure on a through lot. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this ordinance, in-ground swimming pools located on property in the R-5R Residential Resort District adjacent to the public beach of the Atlantic Ocean shall be set back no less than five (5) feet from the property line adjacent to the beach. For purpose of this section, "beach" shall include any bulkheaded area contiguous to, and any unimproved public right-of-way within, the sandy beach. 
The following improvements may be located in a yard without regard to height unless regulated by other sections of this ordinance: 
(2)  Fences, walls, poles, wires and customary yard accessories; 
(3)  Roof overhangs or eaves which do not extend more than four (4) feet into the yard; 
(4)  Residential heating and cooling equipment, generators and pool equipment which do not extend more than five (5) feet into the yard and which are no closer than five (5) feet to the nearest lot line provided that generators and pool equipment shall be screened by a solid fence or landscaping if they are located within ten (10) feet of the lot line; and 
(5)  Chimneys which do not extend more than twenty-four (24) inches into the yard and which are no closer than five (5) feet to the nearest lot line. 
(6)  Covered, unenclosed front porches on single-family or duplex structures constructed prior to the effective date of this ordinance may extend into a required front yard, provided, however, that: 
a.  Except as allowed in subsection (6.1), such porches shall have a maximum depth of six (6) feet, as measured from the exterior wall of the main structure to the exterior edge of the porch foundation and a maximum width of twelve (12) feet; and 
b.  in no case shall the setback from the nearest lot line to the exterior wall of the porch foundation be less than five (5) feet. 
(6.1)  In the R-7.5, R-10 and R-15 Residential Zoning Districts, the minimum front yard setback for covered, unenclosed front porches having a maximum depth greater than six (6) feet or a maximum width greater than twelve (12) feet shall be twenty (20) feet; and 
(7)  Handicapped ramps, to the extent necessary to perform their proper function. 
(8)  Uncovered piers no more than four (4) feet in width may extend into required side or rear yards if necessary to access navigable water, provided that no structures, except for uncovered boat lifts, shall be permitted on any portion of the pier. 
(9)  Encroachments into required setbacks allowed by, and subject to, the provisions of a zoning district listed in section 102(a)(13). 
(10)  Existing nonconforming residential structures located in a Special Flood Hazard Area, as defined in Section 1.3 of the Floodplain Ordinance, which are raised for flood protection, may extend into required yards, provided that the structure remains within the same footprint as the original structure. 
In addition, certain other structures, uses or accessories may be prohibited in certain yards as set forth in the applicable district regulations. 
(b)  Relationship to ultimate right-of-way. An exception to the requirements above, where transportation plans have been approved and adopted by the city council, all yard requirements shall be measured from the ultimate right-of-way line established on said transportation plan or the street frontage line, whichever is the greater distance from the established centerline of the transportation plan. 
(c)  Whenever the side or rear yard of a lot abuts a public right-of-way not more than twenty (20) feet in width, the side or rear yard adjacent to such public right-of-way shall comply with the side or rear yard requirement which would apply to that lot if it did not abut a public right-of-way. 
(d)  Requirements relating to garages and carports in yards. No portion of any garage or carport shall occupy any required front, side or rear yard. 
(e)  Requirements for fences and walls. Except as may be provided by the regulations of the Oceanfront Resort District Form-Based Code, the following requirements shall apply to fences and walls: 
(1)  Fences and walls shall not exceed a height of eight (8) feet. Walls and fences may project into or enclose any part of any yard; provided, however, that any fence that projects into or encloses a required front yard shall not exceed a height of four (4) feet, and that any fence or wall which projects into or encloses a side yard adjacent to a street shall not exceed four (4) feet in height when located within ten (10) feet of the right-of-way except in the case of a through lot when a required front yard setback is clearly and physically the rear of the dwelling, an eight-foot fence will be allowed No fence or wall may be erected closer than five (5) feet to any right-of-way line, and where it is ten (10) feet or closer to any right-of-way line, Category I landscaping shall be installed between it and the right-of-way line. 
(1a)  Fences constructed of materials generally recognized on an industry-wide basis as maintenance-free, such as vinyl and aluminum, may be located on a right-of-way line, provided that (i) Category I landscaping shall be installed immediately inside the entire length of any such fence; (ii) the height of any such fence shall not exceed the limits set forth in subsection (e)(1) above; and (iii) any such fence shall be no greater than fifty (50) percent opaque. 
(1b)  Fences or walls six feet or less in height, located on corner lots, may be erected in the required side yard setback, provided that no such fence or wall shall be closer than ten (10) feet to any right-of-way line. In addition, fences or walls six feet or less in height, located on corner lots, may be erected in the required side yard setback, substantially parallel to the right-of-way line located adjacent to the side yard, in line with the closest corner of any nonconforming dwelling. The closest corner of the nonconforming dwelling shall not include fireplaces, bay windows or similar amenities. No such fence or wall may be erected closer than five (5) feet to any right-of-way line, and where it is ten (10) feet or closer to any right-of-way line, Category I landscaping shall be installed between it and the right-of-way line. 
(1c)  Adjacent to a city, state or federal road project sound-wall directly adjacent to and substantially parallel to a right-of-way, fences or walls located within thirty (30) feet of the right-of-way adjacent to the sound-wall may be placed up to the right-of-way line directly behind the sound-wall provided that (i) such fences or walls shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height, (ii) such fences or walls shall not be installed within the right-of-way unless all necessary permits and approvals are obtained from the department of public works, and (iii) no such fence or wall exceeding four (4) feet in height shall be permitted within the front yard setback in front of the wall closest to the dwelling. 
(2)  Barbed wire and electrified fences are prohibited in all residential and apartment districts or within fifteen (15) feet thereof. Chain link fences shall be permitted, provided that Category I landscaping shall be installed between the entire length of any such fence and the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Fences shall be prohibited along that portion of a parking area of one (1) or more parking spaces which is adjacent to a street, unless required by other sections of this ordinance or a conditional use permit; except this shall not pertain to a decorative fence (excluding wire woven fence) with at least seventy-five (75) percent unobstructed light penetration which meets all applicable height limits for fences. 
(4)  All required fences and walls shall be erected and maintained in accordance with the standards and specifications set forth in the Virginia Beach Landscaping, Screening and Buffering Specifications and Standards. 
(5)  All fences and walls, or portions thereof, which are located within thirty (30) feet of, and are substantially parallel to, any public right-of-way shall comply with the standards pertaining to fences and walls set forth in the Virginia Beach Landscaping, Screening and Buffering Specifications and Standards. Any such fence or wall located on a through lot shall also have a gate through which ingress and egress is provided. 
(6)  No nonconforming fence or wall located within thirty (30) feet of, and substantially parallel to, any public right-of-way shall be enlarged, extended, relocated, reconstructed, or replaced, except that minor repairs consisting only of fence boards, not to exceed ten (10) percent of the total length of the nonconforming portion of the fence, may be replaced within a two-year period, unless such fence or wall is brought into conformity with the provisions of this section. As used herein, the term "nonconforming fence or wall" shall mean any fence or wall which was lawfully constructed prior to the adoption of this section and which fails to conform to any of the requirements of this section. These provisions shall apply notwithstanding that the replacement, reconstruction or relocation of a fence or wall, or portion thereof, is made necessary or otherwise occasioned by reason of condemnation or involuntary destruction or deterioration of, or damage to, such fence or wall or portion thereof. 
(7)  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to fences or walls used principally for agricultural or horticultural purposes. 
(8)  A zoning permit shall be required for the construction of all fences and walls, and for repairs, replacements, and/or reconstruction of fences and walls that involve more than fifty percent (50%) of the existing fence or wall, measured in linear feet. A permit is not required for: hedges or rows of shrubbery; or an interior barrier located entirely within a portion of a yard not directly adjacent to property not owned by the homeowner, including garden fences or dog pens; and temporary fences or walls. A current site survey or other documentation sufficient to ensure that the fence is placed in the correct location is required for such permit. A fence permit shall be valid for 180 days from the date of issuance. 
(f)  Vision clearance at intersections. Visibility triangles, within which nothing shall be erected, placed, or parked, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to impede vision between a height of two and one-half (2½) and eight (8) feet above the centerlines of intersecting trafficways shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Street intersections. A visibility triangle shall be required at all street intersections including at least the area within the first twenty (20) feet along the intersecting rights-of-way (projected if rounded) and a line connecting the ends of such twenty-foot lines. Where sidewalks have been provided within the right-of-way line, vision clearance measurements shall be taken from the curb line, rather than the right-of-way line. 
(2)  Intersections of driveways with streets. No wall, fence or other structure shall exceed a height of thirty (30) inches above the finished elevation of a driveway within a visibility triangle created by measuring ten (10) feet in from the intersection of a driveway boundary and property lines away from the driveway with the ends of the two (2) ten-foot lines connected in a straight line to form the visibility triangle. The thirty-inch height for any portion within the triangle shall be computed from the elevation of the driveway which is perpendicular to that portion of wall or structure within the triangle. 
(Ord. No. 2039, 3-5-91; Ord. No. 2254, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 2268, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2433, 12-17-96; Ord. No. 2929, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 3079, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 3103, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 3108, 11-10-09; Ord. No. 3118, 3-9-10; Ord. No. 3210, 12-6-11; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3324, 1-14-14; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3475, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 3519, 9-19-17; Ord. No. 3579, 2-5-19)  
Sec. 202. - Height regulations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in the Oceanfront Resort District Form-Based Code, whenever height limits for buildings and other structures are established, no portion of any building or other structure shall extend above such height limits, except residential chimneys, communication towers, broadcasting towers, radio or television antennas, spires, flagpoles, water tanks, roof-mounted wind energy conversion systems or monuments otherwise approved for erection; provided, however, that smokestacks may also extend beyond such limits, if they do not exceed in height the distance to the nearest lot line; and further provided that one tower for purposes of an amateur radio station operation, which may contain multiple antennas, may extend beyond said height limits but shall not exceed ninety (90) feet in height above ground elevation. Single-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings and duplexes that are raised or constructed to comply with the requirements of Appendix K, Floodplain Ordinance, may exceed the height requirements for the Zoning District in which they are located by two (2) feet. 
(b)  No artificial structure or tree or other natural growth which on the basis of its height would constitute an obstruction to air navigation pursuant to Part 77, Subpart C, of the Federal Aviation Administration Regulations, 14 C.F.R. §§ 77.21 et seq. or any successor regulation, or which would cause an adjustment to an airfield's established straight-in, circling, alternate, takeoff and safety minima, or which would adversely affect radio reception or radar coverage for any airfield or FAA facility shall be allowed in any district. 
(c)  Any person proposing to construct or alter any building or structure for which a notice or supplemental notice must be given to the Federal Aviation Administration (F.A.A.) pursuant to the provisions of Title 14, Part 77, Subpart B of the Code of Federal Regulations, or any successor regulation, shall be required to provide a copy of such notice as part of the application for site plan approval. In the event that no such notice or supplemental notice is required, the applicant for site plan approval shall certify that no notice or supplemental notice is required by the applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2294, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2781, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 3102, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3310, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 203. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  The following specified uses shall comply with the off-street parking requirements designated therefor: 
(1)  Animal hospitals, business studios, eleemosynary and philanthropic institutions, veterinary establishments, commercial kennels, animal pounds and shelters, wholesaling and distribution operations, laboratories other than medical, passenger transportation terminals and broadcasting studios: One space per four hundred (400) square feet of floor area; 
(2)  Assembly uses, except religious uses: One space per one hundred (100) square feet of floor area or at least one space per five (5) fixed seats, whichever is greater; 
(3)  Banks, credit unions, savings and loans: One space per two hundred seventy (270) square feet of floor area; 
(4)  Botanical and zoological gardens: One space per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area; 
(5)  Bowling alleys: Three (3) spaces per alley; 
(6)  Child care centers and child care education centers: One space per three hundred (300) square feet of floor area; 
(7)  College or university: As specified by the Conditional Use Permit; 
(8)  Commercial recreation facility—Indoor: One space per two hundred (200) square feet of floor area; 
(8.1)  Commercial recreation facility—Outdoor: As specified by the Conditional Use Permit; 
(9)  Country inns: One space per room provided for lodging transients; 
(9.1)  Craft breweries, craft distilleries, and craft wineries: One space per one hundred (100) square feet of area open to the public for drinking, eating and congregating, and one space per employee on the maximum working shift. 
(10)  Drive-in eating and drinking establishments: One space per fifty (50) square feet of floor area; 
(11)  Dwellings, single-family, semidetached, duplex and attached: Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit; 
(12)  Dwellings, multifamily: Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit for the first fifty (50) units located on a zoning lot and one and three-quarters (1¾) spaces per dwelling unit for all units in excess of fifty (50) units; 
(13)  Reserved; 
(14)  Eating and drinking establishments accessory to a hotel: One space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area in dining area; 
(15)  Fraternity or sorority house, student dormitory: One space per two (2) lodging units or one space per three (3) occupants, whichever is greater; 
(16)  Furniture or appliance stores, machinery equipment, automotive and boat sales and service: One space per nine hundred (900) square feet of floor area; 
(17)  Golf courses: Five (5) spaces per hole in the main course; 
(18)  Greenhouses and plant nurseries: One space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of selling area; 
(19)  Hospitals: Two and one-half (2.5) spaces per patient bed; 
(20)  Lodging units: One space per lodging unit; 
(20.1)  Medical offices: One space per two hundred seventy (270) square feet of floor area; 
(21)  Meeting rooms and convention hall facilities accessory to a hotel: One space per twenty (20) seating capacity; 
(22)  Museums and art galleries: Ten (10) spaces and one additional space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof in excess of one thousand (1,000) square feet; 
(23)  Nurses homes and similar housing for institutional employees: One space per four (4) occupants; 
(24)  Offices: One space per three hundred thirty (330) square feet of floor area, except for call centers which are allowed one space per one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of floor area; 
(25)  Personal service establishments: One space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area; 
(26)  Reserved. 
(27)  Private clubs and lodges, social centers, athletic clubs: One space per one hundred (100) square feet of floor area; 
(28)  Public buildings and funeral homes: One space per five hundred (500) square feet of floor area; 
(28.1)  Religious uses: One space per five (5) seats or bench seating space in the main auditorium; 
(29)  Retail establishments, including beverage manufacturing shops and open-air markets: One space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area; 
(30)  Restaurants other than drive-in eating and drinking establishments: One space per one hundred (100) square feet of floor area, and one space per one hundred (100) square feet of additional area encompassed by decks, patios and other areas in which seating is provided and food or beverages are consumed; 
(31)  Sanitariums: One space per four (4) patient beds; 
(32)  Service or repair establishments, motion picture studios, utility installations, manufacturing, industrial, processing, packaging, fabricating, research or testing labs, warehouse establishments, printing, publishing, and plumbing and heating establishments: One space per employee on maximum working shift; 
(33)  Shopping centers containing at least one (1) acre or more than four (4) tenants: One space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area, provided that in shopping centers where restaurants with seating for fifty (50) or more patrons comprise fifty percent (50%) or more of the total floor area, parking shall be one (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet of floor area; 
(34)  Vocational, technical, industrial and trade schools: One space per two (2) seats of designated classroom space or as specified by the Conditional Use Permit; 
(35)  Uses permitted pursuant to a conditional use permit shall comply with the off-street parking requirement specified in the conditional use permit; provided, however, that if no such requirement is specified therein, the applicable requirement shall be as set forth in this section. 
(b)  General standards. The following requirements shall apply to all off-street parking spaces: 
(1)  Any off-street parking space shall have minimum dimensions of nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet, unless permitted under section 203 (3) below, except that in parking garages and parking structures, minimum dimensions shall be eight (8) feet, nine (9) inches by eighteen (18) feet and minimum dimensions for all parallel parking spaces shall be nine (9) feet by twenty-two (22) feet. Where the width of a parking space abuts a street frontage landscaping strip or interior landscaped areas, the length of the parking space may be reduced by one and one-half (1.5) feet; 
(2)  In any parking structure or parking garage with greater than twenty five (25) spaces, the Planning Director may allow a maximum of ten percent (10%) of the total number of spaces within a parking garage or structure to be compact car spaces if he finds that (i) the unusual shape, size, configuration or other building condition of the parking structure or parking garage precludes the efficient layout of parking spaces meeting the dimensional requirements of this section, thus resulting in residual space within such parking structure or parking garage; and (ii) the use of compact car spaces would not substantially reduce the overall safety, ease of ingress and egress, or efficiency of the layout of parking spaces; 
(3)  Within a parking lot not serving a use in the apartment or residential districts and larger than twenty-five (25) spaces, a maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the spaces provided may be designated for compact cars, provided that (i) the minimum dimensions shall be eight (8) by seventeen (17) feet for regular compact car spaces or eight (8) by twenty (20) feet for parallel compact car spaces and (ii) all such compact car spaces shall be clearly marked with the wording "Compact Cars Only." 
(4)  Each space shall be unobstructed, have access to a street and be so arranged that any automobile may be moved without moving another, except in the case of parking for one- and two-family dwellings and in the case of parking for employees on the premises. In parking garages and parking structures, structural encroachments into a maximum of thirty (30) percent of the spaces may protrude into the front portion of a parking space not more than one (1) foot as measured perpendicularly to the drive aisle; 
(4.1)  Within a parking lot, parking garage, or parking structure not serving a use in the apartment or residential districts, one (1) space per every thirty (30) spaces shall be designated motorcycle spaces to accommodate motorcycles, motor scooters, or other licensed vehicles, with dimensions of four (4) by eight (8) feet and shall be clearly marked as motorcycle spaces; 
(5)  Parking surfaces shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt or other suitable material approved by the Planning Director. Where parking areas are illuminated, all sources of illumination shall be so shielded as to prevent any direct reflection toward adjacent premises where the zoning allows residential, apartment, or hotel use; 
(6)  Parking areas for three (3) or more automobiles shall have individual spaces marked, except in the case of parking for one- and two-family detached dwellings, and spaces shall be so arranged that no maneuvering directly incidental to entering or leaving a parking space shall be on any public street, alley, or walkway; and 
(7)  Minimum aisle width required for parking areas shall be according to the following table: 
Parking Angle 
(in degrees) 	Aisle Width 
(in feet) 
0—44 	12 
45—59 	13.5 
60—69 	18.5 
70—79 	19.5 
80—89 	21 
90 	22 
 
In addition, in any parking garage or parking structure a drive aisle adjacent to a parking space which is less than nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet shall be at least twenty-three (23) feet in width. Aisle width shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet unless required for emergency access or off-street loading per section 204. Only areas necessary for parking and safe vehicular maneuvering shall be impervious; 
(8)  In the business, apartment and office districts the number of off-street parking spaces shall not exceed the required number by more than fifty percent (50%). Fractions shall be rounded up to the closest whole number. Such maximum parking requirements shall not apply to uses in the business, apartment or office districts whose off-street parking requirements are allocated within a parking structure; 
(9)  The Planning Director may authorize additional parking spaces above the maximum for uses in the business, apartment and office districts, provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Justification submitted by the applicant for the number of parking spaces proposed based upon estimates of parking demands in accordance with the Institute of Transportation Engineers parking data or other industry specific data or operation specific data. The justification shall document the source of data used to develop the number of parking spaces proposed; 
(ii)  The applicant demonstrates that no other parking alternatives exist including, but not limited to: shared parking opportunities with neighboring properties or businesses, public transit within one quarter (¼) of a mile, carpooling, public structured parking within one thousand (1,000) feet, staggered work shifts/hours of operation and telecommuting opportunities; and 
(iii)  Parking spaces above the maximum shall be constructed with a permeable paving system, as described in the City of Virginia Beach Landscaping Guide as revised, or stormwater runoff from those parking spaces above the maximum or the equivalent runoff from an equal area of impervious cover elsewhere on the site shall drain directly to a stormwater management facility that provides a reduction in runoff for the site. Stormwater runoff as described above shall be equal to the volume produced by one (1) inch of rain on the impervious area. 
Applications must be reviewed and approved or denied within five (5) working days of the submittal of a complete request. Any completed request not approved or denied within five (5) working days shall be deemed approved. 
(10)  Parking, including for bicycles, may be shared among two (2) or more uses that typically experience peak parking demands at different times and are located on the same parcel or on separate parcels at a distance no greater than five hundred (500) feet. 
(i)  For two (2) or more uses on the same parcel, or zoning lot, the total number of minimum required spaces may be reduced by the use of shared parking. To qualify for shared parking, a current parking study shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, who shall determine the final shared parking ratio. A shared parking agreement shall be continually maintained on the parcel or zoning lot in a form approved by the city attorney and a signed copy shall be maintained with the zoning administrator; 
(ii)  For two (2) or more uses on separate parcels within five hundred (500) feet of the main pedestrian entry to a building, the total number of required spaces may be reduced by the use of shared parking. To qualify for shared parking, a current parking study shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, who shall determine the final shared parking ratio under the following conditions: 
(a)  A shared parking agreement shall be continually maintained on the parcels in a form approved by the city attorney and a signed copy shall be maintained with the zoning administrator, which shall maintain the designated number of parking spaces; and 
(b)  Pedestrian access shall be provided from the off-site parking to the user, and shall be designated on the submitted site plan, subject to the approval of the zoning administrator; and 
(c)  Shared parking on both sites will not be detrimental to the sites or surrounding properties; and 
(d)  No parking required by a use may be used as off-site parking for another use, unless approved by the zoning administrator in accordance with this section. 
(11)  The minimum required parking may be reduced upon the submittal of a parking study to the zoning administrator that indicates a substantial number of patrons of the use are pedestrian or arrive by means of public transportation or by bicycle. The zoning administrator shall determine the final parking ratio or reduction in the minimum required parking. 
(12)  All development in the apartment, office or business districts requiring twenty five (25) or more parking spaces shall have a minimum of five (5) bicycle spaces within two hundred (200) yards of the building, in a visible area. Each additional fifty (50) parking spaces above the first twenty-five (25) shall require one (1) additional bicycle space. 
(13)  Bicycle spaces shall be required as follows in all districts for the following uses: 
Use 	Bicycle Parking Requirement 
Primary or secondary school 	Equal to five (5) percent of all the building staff and students above grade three (3) level 
College or university instructional building 	Equal to six (6) percent of the classroom capacity of each building, or the amount required by section 203b (12), whichever is greater 
Dormitories or residence halls 	One (1) space per three (3) students, or the amount required by section 203b (12), whichever is greater 
Public transit station 	Thirty-five (35) percent of the required number of automobile parking spaces or a minimum of twenty (20), whichever is greater, or the amount required by section 203b (12), whichever is greater 
Recreation centers, community centers, fitness centers, etc. (public or private) 	Twelve (12) percent of the required number of automobile parking spaces, or the amount required by section 203b (12), whichever is greater 
Parks and ball fields 	Minimum of ten (10) spaces, or the amount required by section 203 b (12), whichever is greater 
 
(14)  For parking lots with three hundred (300) spaces or more, at least fifty (50) percent of the required bicycle spaces shall be indoors or covered in accordance with the City of Virginia Beach Landscaping Guide, with the exception of parks and ball fields. 
(c)  Parking for accessory uses. Unless otherwise specified in the district regulations, accessory uses shall conform to the parking requirements applicable to such uses, which requirements shall be in addition to any parking required of the principal use. 
(d)  Reserved. [Effective July 1, 2011] 
(e)  Requirements for Access by Disabled Persons. Off-street parking for handicapped persons shall meet the standards established by the Americans With Disabilities Act. 
(f)  Residential parking requirements. Any area within a garage or within an enclosed or covered space may be counted toward meeting off-street parking requirements except where specifically prohibited in the applicable district regulations. 
(g)  Parking requirements in the B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District. Within the B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District, there shall be provided for nonresidential uses, except hotels and uses accessory to hotels, no fewer than three (3) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area, and for residential uses no fewer than one and seven-tenths (1.7) spaces per dwelling unit. Parking requirements for hotels and uses accessory to hotels shall be as specified in subsection (a). 
(h)  Same; shared parking. Notwithstanding anything in this ordinance to the contrary, required off-street parking for any use located on property within the B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District may be made available for use by the general public as well as by the customers or patrons of such use; provided, however, that no parking space shall be used to satisfy the parking requirement of more than one (1) establishment. The required number and dimensions of parking spaces shall be as specified in this section. 
(i)  Required parking in the B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District. Parking requirements for uses within the B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District may be satisfied by any one, or a combination of, the following: 
(1)  On-site parking; 
(2)  Off-site parking facilities, as set forth in section 901 of this ordinance; or 
(3)  Public parking, if the Planning Director determines (i) that there is at least a sufficient number of public parking spaces located within the same development phase of the District as the proposed use to meet public parking demands; (ii) that for uses in the B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District, such public parking spaces are not used to satisfy the parking requirements of any other use, and (iii) that the use of such public parking spaces to satisfy the parking requirements of the proposed use, either wholly or partially, is warranted in light of the following considerations: 
A.  The extent to which the proposed use advances the goals and objectives of the B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District, as stated in section 900 of the City Zoning Ordinance; 
B.  The extent to which the proposed use conforms to the Mixed Use Development Guidelines; and 
C.  The amount of the projected tax revenue to be generated by the proposed use and improvements. 
(j)  Any regulation pertaining to vehicular parking in a zoning district listed in section 102(a)(13) that conflicts with a provision of this section shall be deemed to control to the extent of such conflict. 
For purposes of this section, the term "parking requirements" shall mean the number of off-street vehicular parking spaces required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1976, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2098, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 2100, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 2268, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2315, 4-11-95; Ord. No. 2357, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 2420, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2481, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 2482, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 2614, 10-10-00; Ord. No. 2616, 1-23-00; Ord. No. 2697, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 2725, 10-29-02; Ord. No. 2843, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 3000, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 3061, 12-2-08; Ord. No. 3109, 11-10-09; Ord. No. 3166, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 3174, 5-10-11; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3259, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 3303, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3453, 6-7-16; Ord. No. 3506, 6-20-17; Ord. No. 3524, 12-5-17)  
Sec. 204. - Off-street loading requirements. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in the regulations of any form-based district, the off-street loading requirements herein specified shall apply to all zoning lots exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet in area for the class or kind of uses indicated. In addition, in connection with planned development zoning and conditional use permits involving such classes or kinds of uses, special requirements may be imposed. 
(b)  Moreover, if any building existing on the effective date of these provisions is subsequently altered to increase floor area by fifty (50) percent or more, or converted from any other use to the uses listed in column 1 of the chart below, off-street loading spaces shall be provided as indicated. 
(c)  Where a building is used for more than one (1) use, and floor area for each use is below the minimum requiring a loading space, the aggregate floor area of the several uses shall be used in determining the number of loading spaces required, provided that such calculations shall be based on the use category requiring the greatest number of loading spaces. 
Column 1 
Use or 
Use Category 	Column 2 
Floor Area in 
Square Feet 	Column 3 
Loading Space 
Requirements 
Retail stores, eating and drinking establishments, wholesale houses, warehouses: repair, general service, manufacturing or industrial establishments 	2,000—10,000 
10,001—20,000 
20,001—40,000 
40,001—60,000 
50,000 over 60,000 	1 
2 
3 
4 
1 additional 
Hotels, hospitals or similar institutions or places of public assembly 	5,000—10,000 
10,001—50,000 
50,001—100,000 
Each 100,000 over 100,000 	1 
2 
3 
1 additional 
Funeral homes or mortuaries 	2500—4,000 
4,001—6,000 
Each 10,000 over 6,000 	1 
2 
1 additional 
Offices or office buildings 	20,000—50,000 
50,001—100,000 
Each 100,000 over 100,000 	1 
2 
1 additional 
Hotels on lots in the RT-1 or RT-2 Resort Tourist District having frontage on a trolley lane of Atlantic Avenue 	Any 	One 
Uses in the RT-2 Resort Tourist District other than hotels 	Any 	None 
 
(d)  No loading space required under the provisions of this ordinance shall be in any street or alley, but shall be provided within the building or on the lot. No less than half of the required number of off-street loading spaces, but in all cases at least one (1) space, shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet, and the balance of required spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least ten (10) feet. Each loading space shall have minimum horizontal dimensions of twelve (12) by thirty-five (35) feet. Each space shall be unobstructed and shall be so arranged that any using vehicle may be moved without moving another. Adequate maneuvering areas and access to a street shall be provided and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet. All spaces shall be provided and maintained with an all weather surface. Where loading areas are illuminated, all sources of illumination shall be so shielded as to prevent any direct reflection toward adjacent premises where the zoning allows residential, apartment or hotel use. In addition, loading spaces for three (3) or more vehicles shall have individual spaces marked, and except within the B-3A Pembroke Central Business Core District, spaces shall be so arranged that no maneuvering directly incidental to entering or leaving a loading space shall be on any public street, alley or walkway. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the following number of loading spaces shall be required for uses located within the B-3A Pembroke Central Business District: 
Use 	Floor Area in Square Feet 	Number of Spaces 
Retail 	Less than 5,000 	0 
	5,001—15,000 	1 
	15,001—95,000 	2 
	Each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof 	1 
All other 	Less than 20,000 	0 
	20,001—100,000 	1 
	100,001—300,000 	2 
	Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 	1 
 
(Ord. No. 2856, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3453, 6-7-16)  
Sec. 205. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3174, adopted May 10, 2011 and effective July 1, 2011, repealed § 205, which pertained to major recreational equipment and derived from Ord. No. 1839, 3-27-89; Ord. No. 3004, 11-13-07.  
Sec. 206. - Public and private pump stations, water tanks and other unmanned utility facilities less than four hundred square feet in building area. 
Individual district requirements for minimum lot area, lot width and yard spacing requirements notwithstanding, the following requirements for public and private pump stations, water tanks, and other unmanned utility facilities less than four hundred (400) square feet in building area shall apply in all districts where they are permitted: 
(a)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be forty (40) feet measured at the building location; provided, however, that when a facility covered by this section is not located adjacent to a public street, a right-of-way or easement for ingress of minimum width of fifteen (15) feet shall be provided. 
(c)  Setbacks. The minimum front yard setback shall be ten (10) feet. The minimum side and rear yard setbacks shall be five (5) feet; provided, however, that in the case of a corner lot, the setback from all right-of-way lines shall be ten (10) feet. 
(d)  Each lot for which these reduced requirements apply shall be restricted to the uses described in this section, and this restriction shall be noted on any plat or other document describing such lot.  
Sec. 207. - Building-mounted antennas, small wireless facilities and temporary communication towers. 
(a)  The following provisions shall apply to building-mounted antennas in all districts in which they are permitted, unless otherwise provided by conditional use permit: 
(1)  Antennas shall, through the use of screening, colorization, placement, design, or any combination thereof, be as visually unobtrusive as is reasonably practicable; 
(2)  No antenna shall be located upon any building or structure less than thirty (30) feet in height; 
(3)  No antenna shall extend to a height greater than twenty-two (22) feet above the highest point of the building or structure to which it is affixed; 
(4)  No antenna shall be erected unless a professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia certifies to the building official that the proposed antenna, or array of antennas, complies with all applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations, including, without limitation, regulations pertaining to the emission of radio frequency radiation; 
(5)  Buildings or other structures housing electronic equipment or other equipment or materials used in connection with the operation of an antenna shall meet all application setback and landscaping requirements; and 
(6)  Building-mounted antennas shall not be permitted on single-family dwellings or duplexes in any district or on any property containing such a use. 
(b)  The following provisions shall apply to small wireless facilities placed on an existing structure, other than those located on public rights-of-way or other public property or in the interior of a building, in all districts in which they are permitted: 
(1)  Application requirements. Applications for small wireless facilities may encompass multiple sites up to thirty-five (35) on a single application, provided that all such sites are located within a single, discrete area of the city. Applications shall include: (i) a plan showing the proposed location by Geographic Parcel Identification Number (GPIN) of each small wireless facility, and a diagram or other suitable representation of the proposed location of each such facility on a building or structure, showing the dimensions of each facility, its height from ground level and the type of building or structure on which each such facility is to be affixed; (ii) photographs or accurate renderings, including correct colors and exact dimensions, of each type of proposed small wireless facility; (iii) a statement signed by a professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia the proposed facilities comply with all applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations, including, without limitation, regulations pertaining to the emission of radio frequency radiation; and (iv) such additional information as the planning director may reasonably require in order to determine whether the requirements of this section are met. 
(2)  Such facilities should be substantially concealed from view by means of painting or tinting to match the surface of the building or other structure to which they are affixed or by other suitable method, such as by flush-mounting or integration into the design elements of the building or structure. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Electrical power and battery backup cabinets shall, to the extent practicable, be roof-mounted or otherwise located so as to not be visible from a public street or, where not practicable, such equipment should be appropriately screened by landscaping or other means minimizing visibility from a public street. 
(5)  Minimum height of antennas, if affixed to a building or other vertical structure shall be ten (10) feet. 
(6)  Any small wireless facility that is not in use for a period of one (1) year shall be removed within ninety (90) days after notification by the planning director. If not so removed, the city may contract for its removal and charge the cost thereof to the owner of the small wireless facility. 
(c)  Special provisions for temporary communication towers. Temporary communication towers meeting the requirements of this subsection shall be allowed as principal uses where so provided by the regulations of the district in which they are located: 
(1)  Maximum height shall be one hundred (100) feet; 
(2)  Maximum duration shall be the longer of (i) five (5) days; (ii) where used in conjunction with an event permitted pursuant to City Code section 4-1 (special events permits), forty-eight (48) hours prior to and after such event; or (iii) in cases of declared emergencies resulting in the disablement of existing telecommunications facilities, the duration of the emergency; 
(3)  Minimum setback from any residential district or use, as measured to the nearest lot line of such district or use, shall be two (2) times the height of the tower or one hundred fifty (150) feet, whichever is greater; 
(4)  No grading or removal of vegetation shall be permitted; 
(5)  Noise from generators shall not exceed sixty-five A-weighted decibels (65 dBA) at a distance of twenty (20) feet from the noise source; 
(6)  No signage or lighting other than as may be required by law shall be allowed; 
(7)  A certification that the tower is capable of supporting the total anticipated capacity of the tower, including all appurtenances, and a certification that all equipment intended to be affixed to the proposed tower comply with all applicable regulations promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission pertaining to the emission of radio frequency radiation shall be required prior to deployment of the tower. Such certifications shall be under seal from a professional engineer licensed in Virginia; and 
(8)  Unless allowed by conditional use permit, no temporary communication tower shall be allowed east of Pacific Avenue from 4 th Street to 42 nd Street. 
(Ord. No. 2425, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 3403, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3514, 7-11-17)  
Sec. 208. - Portable storage containers. 
Portable storage containers located outside of an enclosed building or structure shall be allowed only as specified in this section and subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  General requirements. The following requirements shall apply to portable storage containers in all districts: 
(1)  Except in the I-2 Industrial District, or as allowed by conditional use permit in a district in which bulk storage is allowed as a conditional use, or as specifically otherwise provided in subdivision (1) of subsection (d), no more than one (1) portable storage container having a storage capacity greater than three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet, or no more than three (3) portable storage containers, each having a storage capacity no greater than three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet, shall be allowed on a zoning lot. No portable storage container shall have dimensions greater than sixteen (16) feet in length, eight (8) feet in width or eight and one-half (8½) feet in height; 
(2)  No more than one (1) sign having a maximum area of six (6) square feet per sign may be displayed on any portable storage container; 
(3)  Except as provided in subdivision (2) of subsection (b), no portable storage container shall be located (i) closer than five (5) feet to any side or rear lot line, or (ii) on any portion of a lot except behind the nearest portion of the principal building adjacent to a public street. On lots where there is no principal structure, portable storage containers shall comply with the front yard setback requirements of the zoning district; and 
(4)  All portable storage containers in use on a lot shall be in a condition free from rust, peeling paint and other visible forms of deterioration. 
(b)  Residential, Apartment and RT-3 and RT-4 Resort Tourist Districts. In Residential and Apartment Districts and on lots in the RT-3 and RT-4 Resort Tourist Districts on which the principal use is residential in nature, portable storage containers shall be allowed in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) for a period not exceeding a total of sixteen (16) days in any consecutive six-month period, except that: 
(1)  Portable storage containers shall be allowed during construction, reconstruction, alteration or renovation of the principal structure and for an additional period of twenty-four (24) hours before and after such activity, but not to exceed a total of thirty (30) days in any six-month period. In addition, such containers shall be allowed in accordance with the provisions of subdivision (1) of subsection (d) in conjunction with the construction of multiple-family dwellings; and 
(2)  If by reason of site conditions portable storage containers cannot be located in conformity with the provisions of subdivision (3) of subsection (a), such containers may be located on a driveway, so long as a portion of the driveway equivalent to two (2) required parking spaces is unobstructed and no such container is located closer than ten (10) feet to the paved portion of any street. If, however, site conditions prevent such containers from being located in conformity with the provisions of this subdivision, such containers may be located on any portion of a driveway. 
On lots in the RT-3 and RT-4 Resort Tourist Districts on which the principal use is commercial in nature, portable storage containers shall be allowed in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d). 
(c)  Agricultural Districts. On lots in Agricultural Districts on which the principal use is a bona fide agricultural activity, there shall be no restrictions upon the use of portable storage containers in connection with such agricultural activity, and no permit shall be required. On lots where the principal use is other than agricultural, or where portable storage containers are used for purposes other than in connection with bona fide agricultural activity, the requirements of subsection (b) shall apply. 
(d)  Hotel, Office, and RT-1 Resort Tourist Districts; Strategic Growth Areas. In the Hotel, Office and RT-1 Resort Tourist Districts and districts listed in section 102(a)(13), portable storage containers shall be allowed as follows: 
(1)  When used in connection with bona fide construction activity on the site and for an additional period of twenty-four (24) hours before and after such activity, portable storage containers shall be allowed without limitation as to the number of portable storage containers; and 
(2)  Portable storage containers shall be allowed for a period not exceeding sixteen (16) days when used in connection with the moving or relocation of a commercial establishment located, or to be located, on the site. 
(e)  Business and Industrial Districts. In Business and I-1 Industrial Districts, portable storage containers shall be allowed as provided in subsection (d), and in addition thereto, such containers may be allowed pursuant to a conditional use permit for bulk storage where provided by district regulations. In the I-2 Industrial District, portable storage containers shall be allowed in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance pertaining to bulk storage yards. 
(f)  Permits. Except as provided in subsection (c), portable storage containers in all districts shall be allowed only upon issuance of a permit by the zoning administrator. Permits shall be displayed on the outside of the container in such manner as to be plainly visible from the nearest street. The fee for permits shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per zoning lot on which one (1) or more containers are located, except that there shall be no fee if such containers are to be located on a site for no longer than seventy-two (72) hours. 
(g)  Violations; penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the initial violation and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation. The assessment of a civil penalty shall not preclude the institution of a civil action by the zoning administrator pursuant to section 103(a) of this ordinance, but no such violation shall be prosecuted as a criminal misdemeanor. Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense; provided, however, that specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not be charged more frequently than once in any ten-day period, and a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The procedure in cases of violations shall be as specified in section 217(b) of this ordinance. 
(h)  Special event permits. In conjunction with a special event, portable storage containers shall be allowed in any zoning district with a valid special event permit. Such portable storage containers shall comply with all requirements of the special event permit. Only the signage allowed in accordance with subsection (a)(2) of this section shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2864, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3388, 1-6-15)  
Sec. 209. - Wind energy conversion systems. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the use of renewable energy sources by allowing wind energy conversion systems in appropriate locations while minimizing visual, safety and environmental impacts and promoting the safe, effective and efficient use of such systems. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  Conditional use permit applications. In addition to the information required by section 221, applications for a conditional use permit for a wind energy conversion system shall include the following items: 
a.  A site plan or plan drawn to scale, showing the location, height and design of the proposed system, including any accessory buildings or other appurtenances, adjacent land uses, and any other applicable information required by the planning director; 
b.  A certification from a professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia that the proposed system complies with all applicable regulations and requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and Federal Aviation Administration; 
c.  A certification from a professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia that the structure upon which the proposed wind energy conversion system is to be mounted will have the structural integrity to carry the weight and wind loads of the wind energy conversion system and have minimal vibration impacts on the structure; and 
d.  Elevation drawings, computer-generated photographic simulations, or such other documentation as the planning director may require that depict how the proposed wind energy conversion system, including accessory buildings, will appear as constructed on the proposed site; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply if the proposed wind energy system is allowed as a principal use. 
(2)  Building permit/site development plan applications. In addition to information otherwise required by ordinance, applications for building permits or site development plans shall include the information specified in subdivisions a., b. and c. 
(c)  Lot area, setback, height, etc. requirements. Wind energy conversion systems shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Lot area. Minimum lot area requirements for wind energy conversion systems shall be as follows: 
a.  For freestanding wind energy conversion systems outside of residential districts, forty thousand (40,000) square feet plus an additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for each such system in excess of one (1); 
b.  For roof-mounted wind energy conversion systems, the minimum lot area specified in the district regulations; and 
c.  For wind energy conversion systems allowed as a conditional use, the city council may approve an application in which the subject property fails to meet the specified minimum lot area requirements upon a finding that the proposed system is of such size or in such location, or that the conditions attached to the conditional use permit are sufficiently restrictive, that the deficiency in lot area will not result in any adverse effects upon surrounding properties. The planning director shall include in his report to the planning commission the specific factors, if any, that would support the granting of a conditional use permit on lots that fail to meet the minimum lot area requirements of this section. 
(2)  Setbacks. 
a.  No tower in any freestanding wind energy conversion system shall be located closer to any property line or public right-of-way than a distance equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the height of the tower or the setback specified in the applicable district regulations, whichever is greater, or closer to any residential structure or overhead utility transmission line than a distance equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the height of the tower. 
b.  No support structure of a freestanding wind energy conversion system, including guy wires, shall be located in any required front yard or any required side yard adjacent to a street. 
(3)  Height. 
a.  Unless otherwise specified in this section or the conditional use permit, wind energy conversion systems shall be subject to the height regulations of the zoning district in which they are located; provided, that in no event shall the height of any such system exceed that recommended by the manufacturer. 
b.  The height of a freestanding wind energy conversion system shall be measured as the distance from ground level to the highest point on the tower, including the vertical length of any extensions such as rotor blades. The height of a roof-mounted wind energy conversion system shall be measured as the distance from the point at which the base of the system is attached to the building or the lowest point of any component of the wind energy conversion system, whichever is lower, to the highest point on the wind energy conversion system, including the vertical length of any extensions such as rotor blades. 
c.  Notwithstanding any contrary height limitation specified in the district regulations, roof-mounted wind energy conversion systems may project a maximum of eight (8) feet above the roofline of the structure on which they are located unless a greater height is allowed by the conditional use permit. 
d.  The minimum rotor clearance of freestanding wind energy conversion systems shall be twenty-five (25) feet above ground level for systems incorporating horizontal-axis turbines and ten (10) feet for systems incorporating vertical-axis turbines. 
(4)  Signage. No signage, other than safety and warning signs, shall be allowed. 
(5)  Tower construction. All freestanding towers shall be of monopole construction, without guy wires or visible anchors, unless allowed by the conditional use permit. 
(6)  Noise. The highest level of noise generated by the system, as measured at any adjoining property line, shall not exceed an A-weighted decibel level of 55 dB(A). 
(7)  Illumination. No portion of a system shall be illuminated unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(8)  Siting. Systems shall be sited in a manner to minimize shadowing and flickering effects on any adjacent property. 
(9)  Electrical connections. All electrical controls, control wiring and power lines shall be located underground or otherwise hidden from view. 
(10)  Braking. All systems shall be equipped with a redundant braking system that engages at wind speeds in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications so as to minimize the potential for wind damage to the system or its supporting structure. 
(11)  [Appearance.] Unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other governmental authority or allowed by the conditional use permit, all portions of a wind energy conversion system shall be of a nonreflective white, black, galvanized steel, aluminum or other matte-finish color designed to blend with the surrounding environment; provided, however, that blades may be painted black to facilitate deicing. Where more than one system is located on a lot, all such systems shall be of a uniform appearance. 
(d)  Inspections. All wind energy conversion systems, including all associated equipment, shall be inspected every two (2) years to ensure compliance with this section and the conditional use permit. The report of such inspection shall be provided to the planning director. 
(e)  Discontinuance. Any wind energy conversion system that is not in use for a period of one (1) year shall be removed within ninety (90) days after notification by the planning director. 
(Ord. No. 3102, 9-8-09)  
Sec. 209.1. - Farm wineries, farm breweries and farm distilleries. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage control board (ABC) license required. No farm winery, farm brewery or farm distillery shall be operated unless it is properly licensed by the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. 
(b)  Lot area. The minimum lot area for farm wineries, farm breweries and farm distilleries shall be two (2) acres, the entirety of which shall be in the AG-1 or AG-2 agricultural district. No farm winery, farm brewery or farm distillery shall be located on any lot that is subject to a conditional use permit allowing alternative residential development pursuant to section 405. 
(c)  Allowed activities at farm wineries. The following activities are permitted at farm wineries, provided that such activities are not inconsistent with an establishment's ABC license: 
(1)  The production and harvesting of fruit and other agricultural products and the manufacturing of wine; 
(2)  The on-premises sale, tasting, or consumption of wine or beer during regular business hours within the normal course of business of the farm winery; 
(3)  The direct sale and shipment of wine by common carrier to consumers in accordance with applicable provisions of the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and regulations of the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board; 
(4)  The sale and shipment of wine to the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, licensed wholesalers, and out-of-state purchasers in accordance with applicable provisions of the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, and federal law; 
(5)  The storage, warehousing, and wholesaling of wine in accordance with the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, regulations of the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, and federal law; and 
(6)  The sale of wine-related items that are incidental to the sale of wine. 
(d)  Allowed activities at farm breweries. The following activities are permitted at farm breweries, provided that such activities are not inconsistent with an establishment's ABC license: 
(1)  The on-premises sale, tasting, or consumption of beer during regular business hours within the normal course of business of such licensed brewery; 
(2)  The direct sale and shipment of beer in accordance with applicable provisions of the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board; 
(3)  The sale and shipment of beer to licensed wholesalers and out-of-state purchasers in accordance with applicable provisions of the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, and federal law; 
(4)  The storage and warehousing of beer in accordance with applicable provisions of the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, and federal law; and 
(5)  The sale of beer-related items that are incidental to the sale of beer. 
(e)  Allowed activities at farm distilleries. The following activities are permitted at farm distilleries, provided that such activities are not inconsistent with an establishment's ABC license: 
(1)  The production and harvesting of agricultural products and the manufacturing of alcoholic beverages other than wine or beer; 
(2)  The on-premises sale, tasting, or consumption of alcoholic beverages other than wine or beer during regular business hours in accordance with a contract between a distillery and the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 4.1-119(D); 
(3)  The sale and shipment of alcoholic beverages other than wine or beer to licensed wholesalers and out-of-state purchasers in accordance with applicable provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, and federal law; 
(4)  The storage and warehousing of alcoholic beverages other than wine or beer in accordance with applicable provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, and federal law; and 
(5)  The sale of items related to alcoholic beverages other than wine or beer that are incidental to the sale of such alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  Special events. Special events shall be permitted up to six (6) times per year. For purposes of this section, a special event is an event conducted at a farm winery, farm brewery or farm distillery on a single day for which attendance is allowed only by invitation or reservation and whose participants do not exceed fifty (50) people. Special events include, but are not limited to, meetings, conferences, banquets, dinners and other events held for the purpose of marketing wine or beer or at which consideration is received by the farm winery or its agents. Special events do not include private personal gatherings held by the owner of a licensed farm winery, farm brewery or farm distillery who resides at the farm winery, farm brewery or farm distillery or on property adjacent thereto that is owned or controlled by such owner at which gatherings spirits, wine or beer is not sold or marketed and for which no consideration is received by the farm winery, farm brewery or farm distillery or its agents. 
The city council may, by conditional use permit, authorize the number of special events per year to exceed six (6) or the number of allowed participants to exceed fifty (50), or both. 
(g)  No kitchen permitted by the health department as a commercial kitchen shall be allowed in conjunction with a farm winery, farm brewery or farm distillery. Such kitchens may be used by licensed caterers for the handling, warming and distribution of food, but not for cooking food, to be served at such special events or festival. 
(h)  Outdoor amplified music shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 3115, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 3366, 8-19-14; Ord. No. 3423, 7-7-15)  
Sec. 209.2. - Temporary family health care structures. 
(a)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Caregiver" means an adult who provides care for a mentally or physically impaired person. A caregiver shall be either related by blood, marriage, or adoption to or the legally appointed guardian of the mentally or physically impaired person for whom he is caring. 
(2)  "Mentally or physically impaired person" means a person who is a resident of Virginia and who requires assistance with two (2) or more activities of daily living, as defined in Code of Virginia § 63.2-2200, as certified in a writing provided by a physician licensed by the Commonwealth. 
(3)  "Temporary family health care structure" means a transportable residential structure, providing an environment facilitating a caregiver's provision of care for a mentally or physically impaired person, that (i) is primarily assembled at a location other than its site of installation, (ii) is limited to one occupant who shall be the mentally or physically impaired person or, in the case of a married couple, two occupants, one of whom is a mentally or physically impaired person, and the other requires assistance with one or more activities of daily living, as certified in writing by a physician licensed in the Commonwealth, (iii) has no more than three hundred (300) gross square feet, and (iv) complies with applicable provisions of the Industrialized Building Safety Law (Code of Virginia §§ 36-70 through 36-85.1) and the Uniform Statewide Building Code (Code of Virginia §§ 36-97 through 36-119.1). 
(b)  Temporary family health care structures shall be allowed in the R-40 through R-5S Residential Zoning Districts as permitted accessory uses to single-family dwellings. Temporary family health care structures shall be only (i) for use by a caregiver in providing care for a mentally or physically impaired person and (ii) on property owned or occupied by the caregiver as his or her residence. 
(c)  Such structures shall comply with all setback requirements that apply to the primary structure and with any maximum floor area ratio limitations that may apply to the primary structure. Only one (1) family health care structure shall be allowed on a lot or parcel of land. Placement of temporary family health care structures on a permanent foundation shall not be required. 
(d)  A permit to install a temporary family health care structure shall be obtained from the department of planning. The applicant shall provide sufficient proof of compliance with this section, initially and annually thereafter for as long as the temporary family health care structure remains on the property. Such evidence may involve the inspection by the city of the temporary family health care structure at reasonable times convenient to the caregiver, not limited to any annual compliance confirmation. 
(e)  Any temporary family health care structure installed pursuant to this section shall connect to any water, sewer, and electric utilities that are serving the primary residence on the property and shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Virginia Department of Health. 
(f)  No signage advertising or otherwise promoting the existence of the structure shall be permitted either on the exterior of the temporary family health care structure or elsewhere on the property. 
(g)  Any temporary family health care structure installed pursuant to this section shall be removed no later than sixty (60) days after the temporary family health care structure was last occupied by a mentally or physically impaired person receiving services provided for in this section. 
(h)  The zoning administrator may, on behalf of the city council's, revoke the permit granted pursuant to this section if the permit holder violates any provision of this section. The zoning administrator is vested with all necessary authority on behalf of the city council to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 3147, 7-13-10; Ord. No. 3297, 7-2-13)  
Sec. 209.3. - Live-work units. 
(a)  Objectives. The objectives of this section are to: 
(1)  Encourage, in areas of the city in which mixed-use development is allowed, the creation of units that contain both living and working spaces; 
(2)  Ensure compatibility between live-work developments and surrounding land uses and avoid negative impacts both to occupants of live-work units and those of neighboring properties; and 
(3)  Encourage the establishment of small and startup businesses by allowing such businesses to be operated from within the same unit in which the owners, operators or employees of such business live. 
(b)  Where allowed. Live-work units shall be permitted in the following district: 
(1)  The OR Oceanfront Resort District, in accordance with Section 5.2 of the Oceanfront Resort District Form-Based Code. 
(c)  Performance and development standards. Except as otherwise provided by the regulations of the zoning district in which they are located, live-work units shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Commercial activity performed within a live-work unit shall be limited to those uses permitted by the regulations of the district in which such unit is located. Live-work units shall be subject to the provisions of Article 18 (Special Regulations in Air Installations Compatible Use Zones); 
(2)  At least one (1) resident of the live-work unit shall be engaged in the commercial activity performed within such unit and, if required by section 18-5 of the City Code or any successor ordinance, shall have a valid business license for such activity or be a bona fide full-time employee of an individual or entity having such a license; 
(3)  Living and work spaces in a live-work unit shall not be sold, rented or subleased separately; 
(4)  A maximum of five (5) employees who are not residents of a live-work unit may occupy the working space within such unit at any one time; 
(5)  No more than fifty (50) per cent and no less than twenty (20) per cent of the floor area a live-work unit shall consist of work space. For purposes of this section, "work space" shall mean the area within a live-work unit that is used primarily or exclusively for the performance of commercial activity, including any retail sales; 
(6)  Work space shall be located exclusively on the lower floor of any live-work unit having two or more levels, including lofts; 
(7)  Live-work units shall have a minimum floor area of one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area and a maximum floor area of three thousand (3,000) square feet; and 
(8)  Parking requirements shall be in accordance with the regulations of the district in which a live-work unit is located; provided, however, that in any district in which parking requirements are determined exclusively by a parking study, the parking requirement for live-work units shall be two (2) spaces per unit. 
(d)  Building Code standards. Live-work units shall be subject to all applicable regulations of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (USBC), including the regulations of other building codes incorporated by reference into the USBC. 
(Ord. No. 3416, 5-19-15)  
Sec. 209.4. - Wine-tasting rooms. 
In addition to general requirements, wine-tasting rooms shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  A valid license issued by the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board shall be held by the establishment at all times, and the conditions of any such license shall be adhered to by the operator of the establishment at all times; 
(b)  Only wine, non-alcoholic beverages and food other than meals, such as appetizers, tapas, snacks and similar types of food may be served. For purposes of this section, "meals" shall mean an assortment of foods commonly ordered in bona fide, full-service restaurants as principal meals of the day; 
(c)  Wine and non-alcoholic beverages may be sold at retail for on-premises consumption and for off-premises; 
(d)  There shall be no sale or consumption of wine on the premises between midnight and ten o'clock (10:00) a.m.; and 
(e)  Live music shall be performed only inside the establishment and doors and windows shall remain closed during such performances, except during the actual ingress and egress of patrons and employees. 
(Ord. No. 3412, 5-19-15)  
Sec. 209.5. - Reserved.  
Sec. 209.6. - Home sharing. 
To the extent permitted by state law, each dwelling offered as a home share must maintain registration with the Commissioner of Revenue's office and pay all applicable taxes. 
(Ord. No. 3578, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 209.7. - Dwelling unit—Exchange visitor program participant housing. 
(a)  Each dwelling unit providing housing to exchange visitor program participants pursuant to the terms of this section shall be subject to annual review and authorization by the zoning division of the Department of Planning and such authorization shall be valid for a period of one year. 
(b)  No dwelling unit shall house more than eight (8) exchange visitor program participants; 
(c)  Each dwelling unit shall only house exchange visitor program participants in accordance with the room size, number and housing requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, Part 3, Maintenance; and 
(d)  Each dwelling housing exchange visitor program participants shall provide to the zoning division of the Department of Planning the following information: 
(1)  Name and contact information, including emergency phone number, of the property owner; and 
(2)  A floor plan labeling bedrooms with dimensions and the maximum number of exchange visitor program participants intended for occupancy in compliance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, Part 3, Maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 3613, 2-11-20)  
B. - SIGN REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3442, adopted April 19, 2016, amended division B in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division B, §§ 210—218, pertained to similar provisions. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 210. - Purpose and intent; findings. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this part B of Article 2 is to regulate the size, number, color, illumination, movement, materials, location, height, condition and other physical characteristics, but not the content, of signs, thus promoting the protection of property values, the character of the various neighborhoods within the city, the creation and maintenance of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community and the safety and welfare of pedestrians and wheeled traffic, in a manner consistent with the constitutional guarantee of free speech. These regulations attempt to achieve the proper balance among the commercial needs of businesses, the needs of residents and visitors to be able to locate a business and find a desired product, the rights of persons to exercise their First Amendment rights and the need to create and preserve a visual environment that is conducive to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Findings. The city council finds that: 
(1)  Signs have a strong visual impact on the character and quality of a community. They are an integral part of the cityscape and, as such, can enhance or detract from the city's image and character. As a prominent part of the cityscape, they can attract or repel the viewer, affect the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Their suitability or appropriateness helps to define the way in which a community is perceived; 
(2)  The appearance of a community is an important factor in its economic well-being, as aesthetic considerations influence economic value. Communities in which signage is orderly and attractive and adequately serves the needs of businesses are generally perceived as orderly and attractive; 
(3)  The primary function of a commercial sign is to provide identification for a business. By helping consumers recognize that they have arrived at their intended destination or by triggering an impulse to make a purchase, signs help facilitate consumer transactions that allow businesses to be successful. Successful businesses make for vital local economies and a stable tax base; and 
(4)  As the United States Supreme Court has noted, signs "take up space and may obstruct views, distract motorists, displace alternative uses for land, and pose other problems that legitimately call for regulation." It is therefore important that the city regulate signage in a manner that minimizes the adverse impacts of signage while at the same time allowing signs to perform their primary functions. 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 210.01. - General regulations. 
(a)  The regulations set forth in this part shall apply to signs in all zoning districts, including zoning districts listed in section 102(a)(13). 
(b)  Any permitted sign may display any lawful noncommercial message in lieu of any other message; provided, however, that any such sign shall conform to all applicable requirements pertaining to such sign, including, but not limited to, size, height, duration, location, movement, materials and illumination. 
(c)  For purposes of determining the number of signs on a lot or zoning lot, one (1) sign shall be considered to be a display or device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a single unit. Double-faced signs shall be considered a single sign, provided that the faces are parallel or are not separated by an angle greater than fifteen (15) degrees and are part of the same structure. 
(d)  The area of a sign shall be deemed to include the entire surface area within a parallelogram, triangle, circle, semicircle or other regular geometric figure, including all of the elements of the matter displayed, and other information, including changeable copy and graphic displays, but not including blank masking, frames or structural elements outside the sign surface and bearing no advertising matter or other message. The area of each face of a double-faced sign shall be included in determining the area of such sign. 
(e)  Except for marquee signs on buildings occupied by theaters, cinemas, performing arts facilities or similar venues, or as may be allowed by section 218 (major entertainment venues), no sign shall consist of or contain more than two (2) faces. 
(f)  Where the regulations of a zoning district prescribe signage allowances or permitted sign types within the district, such signage shall be deemed to be in addition to signage allowed by the provisions of section 211 and signage allowed on public property by applicable provisions of Chapter 3 or Chapter 33. 
(g)  Where an individual establishment not on a separate lot directly adjoining a street is located in a shopping center within a district in which sign area allowances are determined by the linear distance of street frontage or lot line adjoining a street but not constituting frontage, the sign area allowances of such establishment shall be calculated on the basis of its occupancy frontage, which shall be treated for such purposes as if it were street frontage. 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 210.1. - Sign permits. 
Except as otherwise provided, no sign shall be erected, constructed, replaced, repaired, repainted or otherwise displayed, unless a permit authorizing the same has been issued by the zoning administrator. Fees for such permits shall be as set forth in section 8-31 of the City Code. Applications for sign permits shall be made to the zoning administrator, who may require such plans, diagrams and other information as may be necessary to determine whether a proposed sign complies with the provisions of this ordinance, the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and any other applicable ordinance or regulation. 
The zoning administrator shall approve or deny an application within thirty (30) days of its submittal; provided, however, that if the application or accompanying information is insufficient to allow a determination of compliance, he shall notify the applicant and shall, in such case, approve or deny an application within thirty (30) days of the date of submittal of all required information. Any application meeting the requirements of this ordinance and other applicable provisions shall be approved, and any application not meeting all applicable requirements shall be denied with a statement of reasons for such denial. 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 210.2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to all regulations pertaining to signs in this ordinance, including regulations governing signs in zoning districts listed in section 102(a)(13): 
Awning sign. A sign painted, sewn or otherwise affixed to the surface of an awning. For purposes of this definition, an awning is a sheet of canvas or other material stretched on a frame affixed to and projecting from a building or structure and used to keep the sun or rain off of a storefront, window, doorway or deck. 
Banner sign. A sign consisting of cloth displaying a message. 
Billboard. A sign, including the supporting sign structure, that advertises or directs the attention of the general public to an establishment, business, product or service that is located on a separate site from the billboard, but not including roadside guide signs, public art sponsorship signs or other signs lawfully located on public property. 
Building crown sign. A wall sign mounted at least three-fourths (¾) of the distance from ground level to the top of a building no less than thirty-two (32) feet in height. 
Building frontage means the exterior length of that portion of a building occupied exclusively by a single establishment. 
Cabinet sign or box sign. A sign that has one or more plastic, acrylic, or similar material panels that may or may not be internally illuminated. The sign panels may be either flat or shaped (pan face) and are attached to a metal frame (cabinet). 
Canopy sign. A sign permanently affixed to a building canopy. For purposes of this definition, a canopy is a rigid structure projecting from a building or structure and used to keep the sun or rain off of a storefront, window, doorway or deck. 
Changeable copy. Informational content, such as removable lettering, that can be readily altered by manual means. Changeable copy does not include electronic displays. 
Channel lettering. A component of a sign consisting of letters and symbols constructed and assembled as individual pieces, whether such pieces are individually mounted or grouped together. 
Electronic displays. A component of a sign containing light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs, plasma display screens or other illumination devices, or a series of vertical or horizontal slats or cylinders that are capable of being rotated at intervals, that are used to change the messages, intensity of light or colors displayed by such sign. The term shall not include signs on which lights or other illumination devices display only the temperature or time of day in alternating cycles of not less than five (5) seconds. 
Freestanding sign. A sign supported by structures or supports that are independent of any building or other structure. 
Hanging sign. A sign that hangs from a soffit or other architectural feature of a building or permanent structure or from a bracket affixed to a building wall. 
Information board sign. A sign mounted within a display cabinet located in close proximity to the entrance to a building. 
Major tenant. A single establishment that occupies the space in a building with a building wall height of at least thirty-five (35) feet and with at least one (1) continuous wall containing at least eighty (80) feet of building frontage. 
Marquee sign. Any sign attached to or hung from a marquee. For the purpose of this article, a marquee is a covered structure projecting from and supported by the building with independent roof and drainage provisions and which is erected over a doorway or doorways. 
Monument sign. A freestanding sign supported primarily by internal structural framework or integrated into landscaping or other solid structural features other than support poles, the base of which is at least seventy-five (75) percent of the total width of the sign. Monument signs have the following additional characteristics: 
(a)  The width of the base does not exceed twice the height of the total sign structure and does not extend more than one (1) foot beyond either outside edge of the face of the sign; 
(b)  The height of the base is between eighteen (18) inches and four (4) feet; and 
(c)  The maximum height of the sign, as measured from ground level, does not exceed eight (8) feet. 
Neon sign. An illuminated sign containing a glass tube or tubes filled with neon, other noble gases or phosphors, bent to form letters, symbols or other shapes. 
Occupancy frontage. The exterior length of that portion of a building occupied by a retail, office or other nonresidential use having at least one (1) exterior public entrance. 
Projecting or blade sign. A sign that projects from and is supported by a wall or parapet of a building with the display surface of the sign in a plane perpendicular to the wall surface to which it is affixed. 
Sandwich board or A-frame sign. A two-sided portable sign, hinged or attached at the top of the sign panels. 
Sign. Any structure, display, device or other object or thing, visible from any public street or right-of-way, any area open to use by the general public, or any navigable body of water, including, but not limited to, any word, letter, series of words or letters, painting, mural, logo, insignia, emblem, service mark or other graphic or pictorial representation, that: (i) identifies or advertises, or directs or attracts attention to, any product, merchandise, service, business or establishment, (ii) suggests the identity or nature of any business or establishment, (iii) invites or proposes a commercial transaction, or (iv) communicates a message of a noncommercial nature. The term does not include architectural elements incorporated into the style or function of a building, numerals signifying a property address, dates of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type construction and made an integral part of the structure. 
Table umbrella sign. A sign that is part of the fabric, or affixed to the pole, of a table umbrella. 
Temporary sign. A sign constructed of cloth, canvas, vinyl, paper, plywood, fabric, or other lightweight material designed to be displayed and removed within a limited period of time and neither permanently installed in the ground nor permanently affixed to a building or structure permanently installed in the ground. 
Traffic direction sign. A sign, whether temporary or permanent, oriented primarily so as to be visible to vehicles entering the premises on which such sign is located. 
Wall sign. A sign attached to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in a plane parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of said wall. 
Window sign. A sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed in or on a window exposed to public view. An interior sign that faces a window exposed to public view and that is located within three (3) feet of the window shall be considered a window sign. 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3464, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 211. - Signs permitted in all districts. 
The following types of signs are exempted from all of the provisions of this ordinance, except for illumination, construction, and safety regulations and the following standards: 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Temporary signs. 
(1)  Temporary signs at the site of any public, charitable, educational, religious or other noncommercial event or function, located entirely upon the property on which such event or function is held. Such signs shall be (i) set back no less than seven (7) feet from the property line; (ii) no greater than thirty-two (32) square feet in area; (iii) allowed no more than thirty (30) days prior to the event or function and (iv) removed within seven (7) days after the conclusion of the event or function. Such signs may be illuminated in accordance with the restrictions set forth in section 213 hereof. If building-mounted, such signs shall be flat wall signs and shall not project above the roofline of the building to which they are affixed. If freestanding, the height of any such sign shall be no more than twelve (12) feet above ground level. 
(2)  Temporary signs of a commercial nature at the site of any business establishment holding a grand opening or other special event or promotion, subject to the limitations set forth in subdivision (1) hereof. Such signs shall not be displayed more than three (3) times per year at any business establishment, or for any period in excess of seven (7) days. 
(3)  Temporary signs displayed upon balloons, subject to the requirements of subdivision (2) hereof, provided, however, that balloons displaying such signs may, if affixed to the roof of a building or structure, project no more than thirty (30) feet above the roofline or, if affixed to the ground, have a height not exceeding thirty (30) feet from ground level. Such signs shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in surface area. 
(4)  Temporary signs erected by civic leagues or property owners' associations that are holding or have scheduled a meeting or event, provided that such signs shall be located on property owned by the civic league or property owners' association holding the meeting or event. Such signs shall be no greater than thirty-two (32) square feet in area. No more than one (1) such sign shall be permitted at each entrance to the neighborhood or subdivision represented by the civic league or property owners' association. Such signs shall be in place for no more than fourteen (14) days before the meeting or event or three (3) days after the meeting or event has been held. Such signs may be illuminated in accordance with the restrictions set forth in section 213. 
(5)  Temporary signs other than those allowed by the provisions of subdivisions (1) through (4), subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Within a Preservation, Agricultural, Residential, Apartment, or Historic and Cultural District, or a noncommercial area of a PD-H1 or PD-H2 Planned Development District, a total of sixteen (16) square feet of temporary signage shall be allowed on a lot. Within all other districts, a total of thirty-two (32) square feet of temporary signage shall be allowed on a lot. No such sign shall be higher than eight (8) feet above grade directly below such sign. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Private traffic direction signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area. One (1) such sign shall be permitted at each entrance or exit and at drive-through lanes. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  Construction signs. One (1) sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area on each roadway frontage adjoining an active construction site during the time construction at such site or is actively under way. Such signs shall set back no less than ten (10) feet from any property line. 
(h)  Reserved. 
(i)  Reserved. 
(j)  Signs for public schools or private schools having curriculums similar to public schools: The following signs shall be permitted for public schools and private schools having curriculums similar to public schools: 
(1)  Wall signs. A maximum of two (2) wall signs for each building wall facing a public street, as prescribed below: 
a.  One (1) square foot of wall signage for every two (2) linear feet of each building wall facing a public street, not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet for each such wall, provided that signage on any building wall located five hundred (500) feet or more from a public street shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet. 
(2)  Freestanding monument signs, as prescribed below: 
a.  For schools located on lots less than fifteen (15) acres in area, one (1) freestanding monument sign with a maximum of two (2) faces of forty (40) square feet per face. 
b.  For schools located on lots fifteen (15) acres or more in area, a maximum of one (1) freestanding monument sign no greater than forty (40) feet per face in area per abutting street, located at the principal vehicular entrance from each street. 
c.  No freestanding monument sign shall be installed within fifty (50) feet of a residential use. 
(k)  Reserved. 
(l)  Construction fence signs. Signs on temporary protective fencing erected around a site at which demolition or construction is being carried on shall be allowed, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Signs consisting of banners, wraps or similar material shall be securely affixed to the fence on which they are located, and any portions of a sign that become partially detached shall be promptly re-affixed to the fence; and 
(2)  Signs and the fencing to which they are affixed shall be maintained in good condition at all times and graffiti or other forms of defacement shall be removed or repaired promptly. 
(m)  Signs for city-owned parks and recreation centers. The following signs shall be permitted for city-owned parks and recreation centers: 
(1)  Wall Signs. City-owned parks and recreation centers may have a maximum of two (2) wall signs for each building wall facing a public street, as prescribed below: 
a.  One (1) square foot of wall signage for every two (2) linear feet of each building wall facing a public street. Said signage shall not exceed a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet for each such wall. 
b.  Any building wall located five hundred (500) feet or more from a public street shall not exceed a maximum of two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of signage for each such wall. 
(2)  Freestanding Signs. City-owned parks and recreation centers may have freestanding monument signs as prescribed below: 
a.  Any city-owned park or recreation center located on a lot with an area less than fifteen (15) acres shall be permitted one (1) freestanding monument sign with a maximum of two (2) faces of forty (40) square feet per face. 
b.  Any city-owned park or recreation center located on a lot with an area of fifteen (15) acres or more in size shall be permitted one (1) freestanding monument sign per street, located at the principal vehicular entrance of each street. In no case, shall there be more than one (1) freestanding monument sign on each street. Each sign shall not exceed a maximum of two (2) faces of forty (40) square feet per face. 
c.  No freestanding monument sign shall be installed within fifty (50) feet of a residential use. 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 212. - Prohibited signs. 
Except as otherwise provided, the following signs are prohibited: 
(a)  Signs that imitate an official traffic sign or signal or contain the words "stop," "go slow," "caution," "danger," "warning," or words of similar import, except as provided in section 211(d). 
(b)  Signs that, by reason of their size, location, movement, content, coloring, or manner of illumination, are likely to be confused with or construed as a traffic-control device, or that obscure any traffic or street sign or signal or obstruct the view in any direction at a street intersection. 
(c)  Signs on any public property in any zoning district, except as otherwise expressly allowed. 
(d)  Signs identifying or advertising an activity, business, product, or service no longer produced or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located; provided, however, that such signs may remain in place for not more than ninety (90) days from the date of vacancy. 
(e)  Signs that contain or consist of pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, strings of light bulbs, or other similar moving devices. Such devices, when not part of any sign, are also prohibited when intended to attract attention to the establishment on which they are located. 
(f)  Signs posted on or otherwise affixed to utility poles, trees, or fences, or in an unauthorized manner to walls or other signs. 
(g)  Signs advertising activities that are illegal. 
(h)  Reserved. 
(i)  All portable or nonstructural signs, except as temporary signs as may be expressly allowed. For purposes of this ordinance, a sign shall be considered as portable or nonstructural if it has no permanently mounted, self-supporting structure or is not an integral part of a building to which it is accessory. 
(j)  Reserved. 
(k)  Except as otherwise provided, signs projecting above the roofline or to a height greater than three-fourths (¾) of the vertical distance between the eaveline and ridgeline of the roof of the building or structure on which they are located; provided, however, that signs mounted on parapet walls may extend to a height equal to, but no greater than, the height of the parapet wall. 
(l)  Reserved. 
(m)  Electronic display signs, except as expressly allowed by the city council in conjunction with major entertainment venues or as provided in section 217 (electronic displays of motor vehicle fuel prices). 
(n)  Any sign that emits sound, smoke, vapor, particles, or odors. 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 213. - Illumination. 
(a)  The light from any illuminated sign shall be so shaded, shielded or directed that the light intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect surrounding or facing premises nor adversely affect safe vision of operators of vehicles moving on public or private roads, highways, or parking areas. Light shall not shine or reflect in an offensive manner on or into residential structures, including motels. 
(b)  No exposed reflective type bulbs or incandescent lamps shall be used on the exterior surface of any sign in such a manner that will cause offensive glare on adjacent property or create a traffic hazard. 
(c)  No sign shall contain or consist of blinking, flashing or intermittent lights or similar illuminating devices, whether or not such devices constitute a public safety or traffic hazard. 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 214. - Sign height, setback and landscaping. 
(a)  No freestanding sign shall exceed twelve (12) feet in height from ground level at the base of such sign. 
(b)  No freestanding sign shall be set back less than seven (7) feet from any existing public right-of-way; provided, however, that a freestanding sign having a height of eight (8) feet or less may be set back five (5) feet from any such right-of-way. The minimum sign setback from interstate roadways and expressways designated by the city council shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
(c)  A minimum of seventy-five (75) square feet of planted area shall be provided around any freestanding sign, in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Planting materials shall include a combination of grass, ground cover and low shrubs not exceeding a height of three (3) feet at maturity or design elements used in conjunction with the sign, not exceeding the three (3) foot height limit; 
(2)  All plant materials shall be placed in a defined planting area, which shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in width and shall be maintained so as not to obstruct the view of the sign face on either side; 
(3)  All plant materials shall be subject to the approval of the planning director or his designee in accordance with established industry standards; 
(4)  Landscaping shall be compatible with parking lot plantings in order to help achieve the goal of a unified project design; and 
(5)  Landscaping shall be included as a credit in the calculation of any required parking lot landscaping as specified in Section 5A of the Site Plan Ordinance (Parking Lot and Foundation Landscaping). 
(d)  Freestanding signs, including replacements of sign faces, shall display the street number of the property upon which the sign is located. Such display shall consist of numerals no larger than twelve (12) inches and no less than six (6) inches in height and shall be located within, but not extended above, the top portion of the face of the sign, unless impractical. The portion of the sign displaying the street number shall not be deemed a part of the sign for purposes of measuring the surface area of such 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 215. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 105(f) of this ordinance, no nonconforming sign shall be structurally altered, enlarged, moved or replaced, whether voluntarily or by reason of involuntary damage to or destruction of such sign, unless such sign is brought into compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. Except as provided in section 216, no nonconforming sign shall be repaired at a cost in excess of fifty (50) percent of its original cost unless such sign is caused to comply with the provisions of this ordinance. Any nonconforming sign in an unsafe condition shall be removed. 
(b)  Any nonconforming sign that has been abandoned for a period of two years or longer shall be removed by the owner of the property on which the sign is located, after notification by the zoning administrator. If, following such two-year period, the zoning administrator has made a reasonable attempt to notify the property owner, the city through its own agents or employees may enter the property upon which the sign is located and removed any such sign wherever the owner has refused to do so. The cost of such removal shall be chargeable to the owner of the property. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from applying to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order requiring the removal of such abandoned nonconforming sign by the owner by means of injunction or other appropriated remedy. For purposes of this section, a sign shall be deemed to be abandoned if the business for which the sign was erected has not been in operation for a period of at least two (2) years. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) hereof, the zoning administrator may, at his discretion and with the concurrence of the director of planning, vary the requirements of this ordinance pertaining to the allowed number of signs, total sign area, individual sign area, number of freestanding signs and height of freestanding signs in cases in which the owner of a sign or other proper party desires to repair, replace, relocate or structurally alter an existing nonconforming sign or combination of signs and such repair, replacement, relocation or structural alteration is not required, or has not been made necessary, by reason of damage, destruction, deterioration, disrepair or noncompliance with applicable building code standards or any of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or otherwise impair the right of any proper party to apply to the board of zoning appeals for a variance from any of the sign regulations set forth in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 216. - Outdoor advertising structures, billboards, signboards and poster panels. 
(a)  No new billboards shall be erected within the city, effective immediately. All existing billboards shall be governed by the provisions of section 215 of this ordinance. No billboard heretofore erected shall be located, in whole or in part, upon improved property. 
(b)  No billboard shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of an interchange, or intersection at grade, on any highway, interstate or city council designated expressway (measured along the highway, interstate or expressway to the nearest point of the beginning or ending of pavement widening at the exit from or entrance to the main traveled way). On all other streets, no billboard shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of any right-of-way of any underpass, overpass, bridge or tunnel or a plaza serving such facility. 
(c)  No billboard shall be located within: (i) fifty (50) feet of any property line; (ii) six hundred sixty (660) feet of the right-of-way line of any interstate or expressway designated by city council; (iii) twenty-five (25) feet of the right-of-way of any other street; or (iv) two hundred (200) feet of any residential or apartment zoning district. No billboard shall be located upon any lot having a street frontage of less than two hundred (200) feet and an area of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(d)  The repair of lawfully nonconforming billboards visible from the main traveled way of any interstate highway, federal-aid primary highway, as that system existed on June 1, 1991, or national highway system highway shall be governed by the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 33.2-1219, the regulations promulgated thereunder or any successor statute or regulation. No building permit authorizing the repair of any such billboard shall be issued unless the owner of the billboard provides to the building codes administrator a letter from the commonwealth transportation commissioner approving the proposed repairs. In the event the building codes administrator determines that the cost of the proposed repairs exceeds fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost of the billboard, he shall, within thirty (30) days of the filing of the building permit application, submit an objection to the determination of the commissioner, together with documentation supporting such objection. A copy of such objection and documentation shall be provided to the billboard owner. The determination of the commissioner upon reconsideration shall be binding. 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 217. - Electronic displays of motor vehicle fuel prices. 
Motor vehicle fuel prices may be displayed on an electronic display sign, subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Such signs shall be allowed only pursuant to a conditional use permit authorizing an automobile service station at which motor vehicle fuels are offered for sale or at establishments for which a conditional use permit allowing such fuel sales has previously been granted and remains in effect. 
(b)  Such signs shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  No more than one such sign shall be permitted on any zoning lot; 
(2)  Such signs shall be monument-style, as defined in section 210.2, and no such sign, including the base, shall exceed a height of eight (8) feet; 
(3)  No such sign shall have more than three (3) separate panels capable of displaying information electronically, and each such panel shall be limited to the display of a single grade of fuel. The total area of the portion of that sign that is capable of electronic displays shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area; 
(4)  The pixel pitch of the electronic display portion of such signs shall be nineteen (19) millimeters or smaller; 
(5)  Fuel prices shall not be changed more often than two (2) times in any twenty-four (24) hour period, and scrolling, flashing, blinking or any other type of intermittent movement or illumination of elements of the electronic display shall be prohibited. Change sequences shall be accomplished by means of instantaneous re-pixelization; 
(6)  Electronic displays shall consist of no more than two (2) colors; 
(7)  Audio speakers on, or electronically connected to, such signs shall not be permitted; 
(8)  Such signs shall not exceed a maximum illumination of five thousand (5,000) candelas per square meter from sunrise to sunset or five hundred (500) candelas per square meter between sunset and sunrise, as measured from the sign face at maximum brightness, and shall be equipped with a working dimmer control device capable of automatically reducing the illumination to the required sunset-to-sunrise level. Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed the maximum intensity level; and 
(9)  The electrical service lines providing power to such signs shall be underground. 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 218. - Major entertainment venue and major retail signs. 
Signage for major entertainment venues and major retail venues, other than signage otherwise allowed, shall be allowed only with the approval of the City Council and shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  An application for such signage shall be submitted to the Planning Director by the property owner, contract purchaser with the written consent of the property owner, or the duly authorized agent for the property owner. Applications shall include a fee in the amount of eight hundred dollars ($800.00), and the required plan as described in subsection (b), along with any other information required by the Planning Director. Applications shall be heard by the Planning Commission and the City Council in accordance with the procedures prescribed in subsections (d) and (e) of section 221 of the City Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  The sign plan shall show, in the form and manner specified by the Planning Director, the type, location, setback, size, dimensions and height of all signs, and any other characteristics of or information pertaining to such signage deemed necessary by the Planning Director in order to adequately evaluate the proposed sign plan according to the criteria set forth subsection (d). Individual banners intended to display special or recurring events or activities shall not be required to be approved separately, but it shall be sufficient that the sign plan show the number, size and location of banners generally. 
(c)  Where a sign plan for a major entertainment venue includes electronic display signage, the following additional information shall be provided: 
(1)  The pixel pitch of the proposed electronic display signs; 
(2)  Whether such signs will display static or animated text or images, and the dwell time for each display; 
(3)  The maximum and minimum illumination level in candelas per square meter, and the times during which such illumination levels will be used; and 
(4)  In no case shall any electronic display sign contain, or be connected to, audio speakers, and all electrical service lines providing power to such signs shall be underground. 
(5)  Major retail venues shall not be permitted to have electronic display signage. 
(d)  The City Council shall consider the following criteria in acting upon an application: 
(1)  The extent to which the proposed signage is consistent with applicable sign regulations and Sign Design Guidelines, if any, of the district; 
(2)  The extent to which the proposed signage is consistent with the recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan; 
(3)  The extent to which the scale, color, materials, shape, illumination and landscaping of the proposed signage, considered as a whole, is compatible with surrounding properties; 
(4)  The impact of the proposed signage on traffic safety, taking into consideration the degree to which view obstructions are created or improved, avoidance of confusion with or obstruction of traffic control signs and devices, and other safety-related factors; and 
(5)  The degree to which the proposed signage is integrated into a unified development concept, considering the building design, other signs, landscaping, traffic circulation, and other development features of the property. 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3528, 1-9-18)  
C. - CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 220. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to recognize certain uses which, by their nature, can have an undue impact upon or be incompatible with other uses of land within a given zoning district. These uses as described may be allowed to be located within given designated districts under the controls, limitations and regulations of a conditional use permit. It shall be the duty of the city council under the provisions of this article to evaluate the impact and the compatibility of each such use, and to stipulate such conditions and restrictions including those specifically contained herein as will assure the use being compatible with the neighborhood in which it is located, both in terms of existing land uses and conditions and in terms of development proposed or permitted by right in the area; or where that cannot be accomplished, to deny the use as not being in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan or as being incompatible with the surrounding neighborhood.  
Sec. 221. - Procedural requirements and general standards for conditional uses. 
(a)  Application for conditional use permit. Any property owner, developer, optionee, prospective occupant, lessee, governmental official, department, board or bureau may file with the planning director an application for a conditional use permit, provided that the conditional use sought is permitted in the particular district; and provided further that in the case of other than the owner, the application is acknowledged by the owner of the property. The application shall be accompanied by a plan showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot, the exact sizes and locations on the lot of existing buildings, if any, the general location of proposed buildings, if any, and the existing and proposed uses of structures and open areas; and by such additional information relating to topography, access, and surrounding land uses. 
(b)  Fees. The application shall be accompanied by the following fees to cover the costs of processing the application. One thousand ninety dollars ($1,090.00) for all applications except applications submitted by a nonprofit organization or for a home occupation under section 234 of this ordinance. The fee for such applications shall be three hundred sixty dollars ($360.00). An application to reconsider existing conditions shall be accompanied by a fee of six hundred sixty dollars ($660.00), except that applications submitted by a nonprofit organization or for a home occupation under section 234 of this ordinance, which shall be accompanied by a fee of three hundred sixty dollars ($360.00). Such fees shall include all costs of notifications and advertising. 
(c)  Action by the planning director. The planning director shall study the application and shall confer with pertinent city agencies to determine whether the proposed conditional use conforms to the general purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan, any applicable regulations that have been adopted, and the requirements of this ordinance. Upon completion of such review, if the director shall determine that any proposal in the application does not meet the requirements of this ordinance, he shall reject the application and return it forthwith, with its accompanying fee, to the applicant. If the application does meet the requirements of this ordinance, the director shall transmit all the findings and recommendations of the city agencies to the planning commission. However, nothing herein shall prohibit the director from accepting a conditional use permit application if failure to meet the applicable requirements is due solely to area or dimensional insufficiency of the lot upon which it is proposed. Any appeal from the decision of the planning director may be made directly to the city manager. 
(d)  Action by the planning commission. After receiving the report of the director, with all pertinent related material, the planning commission shall give notice of and hold a public hearing in accordance with applicable provisions of Virginia Code Section 15.2-2204; provided, however, that written notice as prescribed therein shall be given at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The cost of the public notices required by Virginia Code Section 15.2-2204 shall be charged to the applicant. Within forty-five (45) days after the hearing, the commission shall submit its recommendations to the city council through the planning director; provided, however, that upon mutual agreement between the commission and the applicant, such time may be extended. 
(e)  Action by the city council. After receiving the recommendations of the city agencies and the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing and act upon the proposed conditional use, granting the application in whole or in part, with or without modifications, or denying it. In addition to the general or specific requirements set forth in this ordinance concerning the proposed use, which shall be considered minimum requirements with respect to the permit, additional requirements, conditions and safeguards may be added by the city council as required for the protection of public interest in the specific case. In any case where the area or dimensions of the subject site or existing structures on the site fails to meet the minimums established by this ordinance, the city council shall not approve such application unless it finds that conditions attached to its approval satisfactorily offset the negative effects inherent in the area or dimensional deficiency. 
(f)  Rehearing the conditional use permit. If the city council finds that there is public benefit to be gained by modifying a conditional use permit under consideration, and that significant public inconvenience would not result from consideration within one (1) year of the modified request, it may allow withdrawal of an application for a conditional use permit during public hearing; however, if the conditional use permit is denied by the city council, substantially the same application shall not be filed within one (1) year of denial. 
(g)  Term of conditional use permit. Unless otherwise provided when a conditional use permit is issued, the applicant must show and bear evidence in good faith of his intention to proceed with the construction and use of the land. All time limits pertaining to commencement of construction and duration of the conditional use permit shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Virginia Code. Once the conditional use permit is activated by commencement of construction or use, then the general and specific conditions attached to the conditional use permit shall constitute additional zoning regulations and requirements for the site which to the extent of any conflict shall supersede the zoning district regulation. 
(h)  Revocation of conditional use permit. If the provisions of this ordinance or the requirements of the conditional use permit are not met, the city council may revoke the conditional use permit after notice and hearing as provided by Virginia Code Section 15.2-2204; provided, however, that written notice as prescribed therein shall be given at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. 
(i)  Compliance with requirements. No conditional use permit shall be issued except upon a finding by the city council that the proposed use conforms to the requirements set forth in this ordinance and that the proposed conditional use, together with the conditions attached, will be compatible with the neighborhood in which it is to be located, both in terms of existing land uses and conditions and in terms of proposed land uses and uses permitted by right in the area. Among matters to be considered in this connection are traffic flow and control; access to and circulation within the property; off-street parking and loading; refuse and service areas; utilities; screening and buffering; signs, yards and other open spaces; height, bulk and location of structures; location of proposed open space uses; hours and manner of operation; and noise, light, dust, odor, fumes and vibrations. 
The city council may, for good cause shown and upon a finding that there will be no significant detrimental effects on surrounding properties, allow reasonable deviations from the following requirements otherwise applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Required setbacks; 
(2)  Required landscaping; 
(3)  Height restrictions, except as provided in section 202(b); 
(4)  Minimum lot area requirements; and 
(5)  Required lot coverage. 
(j)  Conformity with adopted plans. The proposed conditional use shall be in accord with the purposes of the comprehensive plan and all the zoning regulations and other applicable regulations. 
(k)  Administrative renewal of use permits. All use permits unless otherwise provided in specific instances by the city council, which are subject to time limitations may be reviewed and extended for like periods of time, after a determination by the director of planning that the continuation of the use permit would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare and that to continue the activity under the use permit would not cause public inconvenience, annoyance, disturbance or have an undue impact on the community or be incompatible with other uses of land in the particular zoning district. Among the matters to be considered in this connection, based in part upon a physical site review, are traffic flow and control; access to and circulation within the property; off-street parking and loading; refuse and service areas; utilities; screening and buffering; signs, yards and other open spaces; height, bulk and location of structures; location of proposed open space uses; hours and manner of operation; and noise, light, dust, odor, fumes and vibrations. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the director of planning may, upon his request within thirty (30) days of the decision, with respect to the issue of approval or conditions attached to approval, have the matter reviewed by the planning commission and the city council after following the procedure set forth in section 221(a) of the zoning ordinance. This shall not be construed to limit the rights of any aggrieved person under section 221(h) of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1840, 3-27-89; Ord. No. 1871, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 1968, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2152, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2714, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2741, 4-22-03; Ord. No. 2758, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 3194, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 3275, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3395, 3-3-15; Ord. No. 3554, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18)  
Sec. 221.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2905, adopted Dec. 20, 2005, repealed former § 221.1 of the zoning ordinance, which pertained to specific standards for certain conditional uses located within airport noise and aircraft accident potential zones and derived from Ord. No. 2293, adopted Aug. 23, 1994; and Ord. No. 2507, adopted Sept. 22, 1998.  
Sec. 222. - Specific standards for certain conditional uses. 
In addition to the general standards listed above, the following conditional uses shall comply with the respective specific standards set forth.  
Sec. 223. - Animal hospitals, pounds, shelters, commercial and residential kennels. 
Except where animals are kept in soundproof, air-conditioned buildings, no structure or area occupied by such animals, whether in animal hospitals, pounds, shelters, commercial or residential kennels, shall be within one hundred (100) feet of the property line of any adjacent lot. At least one (1) off-street parking space per four hundred (400) square feet of floor area shall be provided. However, in residential kennels, this off-street parking requirement shall not apply but shall be as specified in the conditional use permit.  
Sec. 223.1. - Automobile museums. 
In addition to general requirements, automobile museums shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  No automobiles, except for vintage or classic automobiles manufactured prior to 1971, exotic or limited-production automobiles, or automobiles having a special cultural or historical significance and generally regarded as collector's items shall be exhibited, displayed, offered for sale or stored on the property. 
(b)  All automobiles that are exhibited, displayed or offered for sale shall be of exhibition quality and appearance; 
(c)  No automobiles shall be exhibited, displayed or stored except within a fully-enclosed building; provided, that a maximum of three (3) automobiles may be parked outside of a building for up to seventy-two (72) hours for purposes of preparing such automobiles to be displayed as a museum exhibit or delivered to a purchaser, and provided further, that if allowed by the conditional use permit, special shows of automobiles meeting the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) may be held outdoors for periods of a maximum of five (5) days and no more frequently than once every thirty (30) days. 
(d)  No automobile shall be offered for sale unless it has been displayed as a museum exhibit or at a special show for at least three (3) days. 
(e)  No repairs or other work on automobiles, except for refurbishing and restoring of automobiles meeting the requirements of subsection (a), detailing in preparation for exhibition, and final preparation and assembly for delivery to a person purchasing an automobile, shall be permitted. All such work shall be performed indoors, except as allowed in subsection (c). 
(f)  The city council may attach such other and further reasonable conditions of the conditional use permit as it may deem necessary to ensure that the sale of automobiles is conducted in such manner as to be ancillary to the use of the property as a museum. 
(Ord. No. 3050, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 224. - Automobile repair garages. 
In addition to general requirements, the following special requirements and limitations shall apply to automobile repair garages in districts in which they are generally permitted: 
(a)  Fencing. The automobile repair garage shall be completely enclosed, except for necessary openings for ingress and egress, by a fence not less than six (6) feet in height, except where prohibited by section 201(e)(1), and Category VI landscaping. 
(b)  Lighting. All outdoor lights shall be shielded to direct light and glare onto the premises, said lighting and glare shall be deflected, shaded, and focused away from all adjoining property. Any outdoor lighting fixtures shall not be erected any higher than fourteen (14) feet. 
(c)  Storage and work areas. All storage of parts and repair work are to be conducted within the automobile repair garage structure. There shall be no outside storage of parts or outside of parts or outside repair permitted.  
Sec. 225. - Automobile service stations. 
In addition to general requirements, the following special requirements and limitations shall apply to automobile service stations in districts in which they are generally permitted: 
(a)  Minimum lot and yard requirements. The minimum lot size shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet with a minimum lot width of one hundred fifty (150) feet. When operated in conjunction with a grocery store or carry-out food store, restaurants or similar eating places, or similar uses, the minimum lot size shall be thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. When operated in conjunction with a car wash and a grocery store or carry-out food store, restaurants or similar eating places, or similar uses, the minimum lot size shall be forty thousand (40,000) square feet. No gasoline service islands shall be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to any adjoining right-of-way nor closer than fifty-five (55) feet to any other building on the lot. 
However, no automobile service station shall be operated in conjunction with a grocery store or carry-out food store, restaurant or similar eating places, or similar uses, unless such use is conducted in a freestanding building with two (2) public restrooms provided, and provided that gasoline pumps are protected from traffic circulation by walls, posts, or other similar barriers. 
(b)  Offstreet parking. Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each service bay plus three (3) additional spaces for employee parking. The following uses shall comply with the off-street parking requirements designated below: 
(1)  Grocery stores and carry-out food stores: At least one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
(2)  Restaurants or similar eating places and accessory uses other than drive-in eating and drinking establishments: At least one (1) space per seventy-five (75) square feet of floor area. 
(c)  Fencing and screening. Category VI screening shall be erected along all property lines separating the site from any residential, apartment or office district except where required front yards adjoin required front yards of another district. A solid fence or masonry wall five (5) feet in height shall be erected to enclose any trash area or outside storage yard which would otherwise be visible from any such districts or from any public street. 
(d)  The rental of nonmotorized utility cargo trailers is permissible in connection with automobile service stations provided that not more than eight (8) such trailers shall be permitted outdoors on the lot at any one time. Parking areas for utility trailers permitted as above shall be located in portions of the lot where off-street parking is generally permitted; provided however, that no such parking area for utility trailers shall occupy portions of the lot set aside for required off-street parking, or any other area designed for use by cars awaiting servicing. Under no circumstances shall any such parking be located in any way which interferes with normal traffic flow onto, within, or from the lot, or which creates dangerous impediments to traffic visibility. No such parking shall be permitted closer to any street than the setback line established for principal structures. Space for such parking shall be marked by clearly visible boundaries, and no such unit shall be parked outdoors other than within such boundaries except when being served.  
Sec. 225.01. - Bars or nightclubs. 
(a)  Requirements. In addition to general requirements, bars or nightclubs shall be subject to the following requirements, which shall be deemed to be conditions of the conditional use permit: 
(1)  Category VI landscaping shall be installed along any lot line adjoining a residential or apartment district without an intervening street, alley or body of water greater than fifty (50) feet in width. The fencing element of such landscaping shall not be less than six (6) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in height and shall be free from graffiti. Landscaping and fencing shall be maintained in good condition at all times; 
(2)  The operation of such establishments shall not disturb the tranquility of residential areas or other areas in close proximity or otherwise interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring property by reason of excessive noise, traffic, overflow parking and litter. Noise from any establishment located within five hundred (500) feet of any residential or apartment district or use or hotel shall not be audible from outside the building in which such establishment is located or, where such establishments are located in a freestanding building, from any location not on the same lot, except when exits are opened to allow patrons, employees or other persons to exit; 
(3)  Operators of such establishments shall not allow loitering or congregations of individuals in the parking lot or other exterior portions of the premises, except for areas in which the consumption of alcoholic beverages is specifically permitted by the terms of the establishment's alcoholic beverage control license, and shall keep all entrance and exit doors closed at all times of operation, except when patrons, employees or other persons are actually entering or exiting the establishment; 
(4)  Such establishments shall be required to implement any other reasonable measures the city council deems necessary or appropriate to minimize noise or other potential adverse effects upon neighboring areas; and 
(5)  No increase in the combined area of the dance floor and any other standing space shall be allowed without the approval of the city council if, after such increase, the combined area of the dance floor and other standing space exceeds fifteen (15) percent of the total floor area of the establishment. 
(b)  Violations. A violation of any of the aforesaid requirements shall be grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 221(h); provided, however, that where a bar or nightclub has not previously been found to be in violation of the conditional use permit, the zoning administrator shall give notice of the violation to the property owner or operator of the establishment alleged to be in violation of the conditional use permit and allow a reasonable time for the violation to be corrected or remedied prior to the institution of proceedings to revoke the conditional use permit under section 221(h). Any finding by the zoning administrator that a bar or nightclub is in violation of the conditional use permit may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with section 106. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Bars or nightclubs shall not be allowed as an accessory use in any zoning district. 
(d)  Expansions, etc. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, no conditional use permit or resolution pursuant to section 105(d) shall be required for the enlargement, extension, reconstruction or structural alteration of a bar or nightclub lawfully in existence as of [date of adoption of amendments], provided that: 
(1)  It has not previously been found to be in violation of the conditional use permit authorizing it, if any; 
(2)  The net occupant load of the bar or nightclub is not increased as a result of the enlargement, extension, reconstruction or structural alteration; 
(3)  The bar or nightclub has not been expanded or extended since the date of adoption of this section; and 
(4)  Except with respect to structural alterations or reconstructions not resulting in an increase in occupant load, such bar or nightclub is not located within an accident potential zone (APZ). 
It shall be a condition of any enlargement, extension, reconstruction or structural alteration pursuant to this section that the bar or nightclub shall thereafter be subject to the standards and conditions set forth in subsection (a) hereof. Any enlargement, extension, reconstruction or structural alteration of a bar or nightclub not meeting the criteria set forth herein may be allowed by the city council in accordance with section 105(d) or by conditional use permit, as the case may be. In the event any such standard or condition is found by the city council to have been violated, it may revoke the permission to enlarge, extend, reconstruct or structurally alter the establishment. Any enlargement, extension, reconstruction or structural alteration of a bar or nightclub not meeting the criteria set forth herein may be allowed by the city council in accordance with section 105(d) or by conditional use permit, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 225.1. - Bed and breakfast inns. 
In addition to general requirements, bed and breakfast inns shall be subject to the following requirements, which shall be deemed to be conditions of the conditional use permit: 
(1)  No more than thirteen (13) lodging units may be provided, and no such units shall have direct ingress or egress to the outside of the building. Living quarters for the owner or manager of the inn shall be provided in addition to lodging units. The operator, or his designated representative who is responsible for the premises, shall be available on the premises while it is open for use. Such owner or manager shall be on site and available on a twenty-four-hour basis. 
(2)  Antiques may be sold at retail as an accessory use if expressly permitted by the conditional use permit, provided, that such sales are conducted from within the same building in which the lodging units are located and that no more than twenty (20) percent of the total floor area of the building shall be used in the conduct of such sales. 
(3)  Food and beverages will be served if expressly permitted by the conditional use permit, and in no event shall seating capacity exceed forty (40) persons, including lodging guests. Breakfast shall be provided to guests. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this ordinance, signage shall be limited to one (1) sign not exceeding nine (9) square feet per face. 
(5)  At least one (1) vehicular parking space per lodging unit shall be provided on the site. Additional parking capacity may be required by the city council if food service capacity exceeds the number of lodging units. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the conditions of the conditional use permit. 
(6)  The following plans shall be submitted with the application for conditional use permit: 
a.  A floor plan delineating, at a minimum, the total floor area of the building, the number and dimensions of lodging units, the location and dimensions of areas to be used for food service and antique sales, if applicable, and the location of all entrances and exits; and 
b.  A plan delineating the location, dimensions, colors, materials and illumination of proposed signage; and 
c.  A parking plan showing the location, capacity and design of areas to be used for vehicular parking. 
(7)  The bed and breakfast inn shall be operated only in a primary residential structure and in any accessory structure specified in the conditional use permit. The primary structure shall be historically, architecturally or culturally significant because (1) it is associated with events that have made a contribution to the broad patterns of our history or (2) is associated with the lives of persons or groups important to our past, or (3) embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, design or method of construction, represents the work of a recognized master, or possess high artistic values. 
(8)  Maximum length of stay for a transient paying guest shall be fourteen (14) consecutive days in any thirty-day period of time. 
(9)  Receptions and other such functions, for compensation, shall be permitted only as specified in the conditional use permit. 
(10)  A minimum of one (1) bathroom, to include a bathtub or shower, shall be provided on each floor of the structure to be occupied by guests; however, city council may require additional bathrooms as a condition of approval of the use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2782, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 3080, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 226. - Bicycle and moped rental establishments. 
(a)  Where a conditional use permit is issued for the operation of a bicycle or moped rental establishment, not more than forty (40) bicycles or mopeds per zoning lot shall be permitted. A barrier shall be provided consisting of a canvas screen with grommets laced with suitable line secured to rust-resistant pipe and stanchion, anchored to a weighted base, or properly secured in ground. Such screen will be thirty-six (36) inches in height and capable of delineating the limits of the property for the duration of the use permit. It shall have an access opening not more than five (5) feet wide on either side of the enclosure not facing the ocean. Only one (1) nonilluminating sign in connection with the establishment may be allowed; provided, however, that the surface shall not exceed four (4) square feet, and further be a permanent part of the portion of canvas screen which is oriented towards the beach. 
(b)  Bicycle and moped rental establishments located in the OR Oceanfront Resort District shall also be subject to the requirements of Section 5.3.5 of the Oceanfront Resort District Form-Based Code. 
(Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 227. - Borrow pits. 
(a)  Application. Each application for a use permit for a borrow pit shall include the following information in addition to the general information required by this ordinance: 
(1)  A boundary survey of the subject property, together with the proposed location of the limits of excavation; 
(2)  The means of vehicular access to the proposed excavation; 
(3)  The number of cubic yards to be excavated; 
(4)  The areas proposed for the storage of overburden and other spoil during the process of excavating; 
(5)  The proposed date on which excavating will commence, the proposed date on which the excavation will be completed and the proposed date that all required restoration measures are to be completed; 
(6)  The location of all haul roads leading to public streets and highways within the area, as well as the on-site haul road, the point at which the haul road intersects the public right-of-way, the nearest street intersections in all directions leaving the excavation site, and all existing and proposed entrances on both sides of the public street within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed entrance; 
(7)  A detailed description of the on-site haul road and the entrance to the public right-of-way, including width, radii, composition of surface material and length of improved surface; 
(8)  A description or plan of all proposed improvements to mitigate the traffic impacts associated with the hauling operation including, but not limited to, turn lanes, signalization, striping and other traffic control measures; 
(9)  A statement listing the public streets to be used as haul routes to access an arterial or major street or highway; 
(10)  A plan showing the proposed use of the property once excavation has been completed, including the location of proposed lots, streets, structures, and other features; 
(11)  A plan for filling of the borrow pit, if this is intended, once excavation has been completed. No filling of the borrow pit will be allowed unless plans for the filling have been approved by city council as a part of or as an amendment to the use permit application, and until the director of planning has issued a fill permit for such activity. 
(b)  Special requirements. 
(1)  Undrained pockets and stagnant pools resulting from surface drainage shall be sprayed in accordance with requirements of the state board of health to eliminate breeding places for mosquitoes and other insects. 
(2)  Off-street parking areas adequate for all employees' vehicles and trucks shall be provided. 
(3)  The edge of the area to be excavated shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from all exterior property lines. The setback area shall not be used for any purpose during the period of excavation, including overburden and spoil storage, except the setback area may be used for access roads. Exterior limits of all work shall be monumented with iron markers no less than five (5) feet above surface of the earth. 
(4)  Access roads. Access roads to any excavation where hauling is being conducted shall be maintained in a dust-free manner. All access roads shall be constructed so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles with public streets and highways and no access road shall intersect any public road at any angle of less than sixty (60) degrees. 
(5)  Operating hours. Operating hours of excavation shall be restricted to between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or such lesser hours of operation as the city council may deem appropriate. No Sunday operations shall be permitted. 
(6)  Construction of buildings. All buildings used for the production and processing of excavated material shall be constructed and maintained as required by the building code of the city. 
(7)  Roadside landscape. Existing trees and ground cover along public street frontage shall be preserved and maintained and replaced during the period of excavation if the appropriate city authorities deem it necessary. 
(8)  Excavation permits. No excavation on the site shall commence until all permits required by chapter 30 of the City Code have been received from the department of planning and all requirements of chapter 30 of the City Code have been met. 
(c)  Factors relating to approval. Before issuing any use permit for the excavation or fill of a borrow pit, the city council shall give due consideration to the following factors: 
(1)  Effect of the proposal upon groundwater supply and drainage in the area; 
(2)  Effect of the proposal upon the city streets of the area, including, but not limited to, the factor of traffic safety; 
(3)  Impact from noise, dust, odor or other nuisance, upon surrounding properties; 
(4)  Effect of the proposal as a potential health or safety hazard. 
(d)  Bonding requirements. The city council may require a bond or letter of credit in an amount and with surety satisfactory to the department of planning, securing to the city compliance with the conditions and limitations set forth in the use permit. No excavation on the site shall commence until such bond, if required, has been filed and accepted by the director of planning. 
(Ord. No. 2145, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2362, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2414, 8-13-96)  
Sec. 228. - Bulk storage, auto storage and contractor storage yards. 
In addition to general requirements, the following special requirements and limitations shall apply to bulk storage, auto storage and contractor storage yards in districts in which they are generally permitted: 
(a)  Fencing. The storage yard shall be completely enclosed, except for necessary openings for ingress and egress, by a fence not less than six (6) feet in height, except where prohibited by section 201(e)(1), and Category VI landscaping. 
(b)  Lighting. All outdoor lights shall be shielded to direct light and glare onto the premises, said lighting and glare shall be deflected, shaded, and focused away from all adjoining property. Any outdoor lighting fixtures shall not be erected any higher than fourteen (14) feet.  
Sec. 228.1. - Car wash facilities. 
In addition to general requirements, the following special requirements and limitations shall apply to car wash facilities in districts in which they are generally permitted: 
(a)  No water produced by activities at the facility lot shall be permitted to fall upon or drain across public streets or sidewalks or adjacent properties; and 
(b)  A minimum of three (3) off-street parking spaces for automobiles shall be provided for each car wash space within the facility, unless otherwise provided in the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 229. - Cemeteries, columbariums, crematories, mausoleums. 
With respect to cemeteries, columbariums, crematories and mausoleums, certificates of approval shall be required from the state department of health as to conformity with its regulations, and, in cases where bodies are to be interred, from the health department, indicating that there is no danger of contamination of water supply.  
Sec. 230. - Craft breweries, craft distilleries and craft wineries. 
(a)  In addition to general requirements, craft breweries shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  A valid license issued by the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board shall be held by the establishment at all times, and the conditions of any such license shall be incorporated by reference into any conditional use permit authorizing a craft brewery; 
(2)  Beer or other fermented malt beverages, non-alcoholic beverages, and food may be served; 
(2.5)  Unless expressly allowed by the conditional use permit, there shall be no food preparation; 
(3)  Beer or other fermented malt beverages may be sold for on-premises consumption and for off-premises consumption at retail or wholesale; 
(4)  Unless expressly allowed by the conditional use permit, there shall be no sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises between midnight and 10:00 a.m.; 
(5)  Live music shall be performed only inside the establishment and doors and windows shall remain closed during such performances, except during the actual ingress and egress of patrons and employees; 
(6)  The city council may impose such reasonable conditions as it deems necessary to avoid or mitigate adverse impacts upon other property; and 
(7)  Off-street parking shall be calculated in accordance with the requirements of section 203. 
(b)  In addition to general requirements, craft distilleries shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  A valid license issued by the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board shall be held by the establishment at all times, and the conditions of any such license shall be incorporated by reference into any conditional use permit authorizing a craft distillery; 
(2)  Only spirits and non-alcoholic beverages may be served unless otherwise permitted under applicable state alcoholic beverage control laws and regulations for private events; 
(2.5)  Unless expressly allowed by the conditional use permit, there shall be no food preparation; 
(3)  Spirits may be sold for on-premises consumption or off-premises consumption at retail or wholesale; 
(4)  Unless expressly allowed by the conditional use permit, there shall be no sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises between midnight and 10:00 a.m.; 
(5)  Live music shall be performed only inside the establishment and doors and windows shall remain closed during such performances, except during the actual ingress and egress of patrons and employees; 
(6)  The city council may impose such reasonable conditions as it deems necessary to avoid or mitigate adverse impacts upon other property; and 
(7)  Off-street parking shall be calculated in accordance with the requirements of section 203. 
(c)  In addition to general requirements, craft wineries shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  A valid license issued by the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board shall be held by the establishment at all times, and the conditions of any such license shall be incorporated by reference into any conditional use permit authorizing a craft winery; 
(2)  Only wine produced by the operator of the facility, on-site or off-site, non-alcoholic beverages, and meals prepared in the facility may be served. For the purpose of this section, "meals" shall mean an assortment of foods commonly ordered in a bona-fide, full-service restaurants as principal meals of the day; 
(3)  Wine may be sold at retail/wholesale for on-site and off-site consumption; 
(4)  Unless expressly allowed by the conditional use permit, there shall be no sale or consumption of wine on the premise between midnight and 10:00 a.m.; 
(5)  Live music shall be performed only inside the establishment and doors and windows shall remain closed during such performances, except during the actual ingress and egress of patron and employees, unless specified in the conditional use permit; 
(6)  The city council may impose such reasonable conditions as it deems necessary to avoid or mitigate adverse impacts upon other properties; and 
(7)  Off-street parking shall be calculated in accordance with the requirements of section 203. 
(Ord. No. 3378, 10-7-14; Ord. No. 3397, 3-17-15; Ord. No. 3476, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2506, 6-20-17)  
Sec. 231. - Collection depots for recyclable materials. 
Where a conditional use permit is issued for a collection depot for recyclable materials, all materials to be recycled shall be stored within a fully enclosed building. Operation of the collection depot shall be restricted to the collection or redemption of recyclable materials. Collected materials may be packaged for shipment and temporarily stored until transported to a separate processing facility. Operation of the collection depot shall not include the on-site processing of recyclable materials.  
Sec. 232. - Communication towers; building-mounted antennas; small wireless facilities. 
(a)  Purpose; applicability. 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to (1) facilitate the provision of wireless communications services to the citizens and businesses of the city; (2) minimize the risk of physical damage and other potential adverse impacts of communications towers; (3) require, where commercially reasonable, the joint use of communications towers by providers of wireless telecommunications services so as to avoid unnecessary proliferation of communication towers and related facilities; and (4) allow the use of public property under circumstances in which such use (i) minimizes the potential adverse visual and other impacts of communication towers and their appurtenances; (ii) does not adversely affect the operation of public facilities such as public safety communications facilities and water tanks for their primary purpose; and (iii) conforms to applicable requirements pertaining to the use of public property for purposes of communication tower siting. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 105(d) of this ordinance, any co-location of antenna arrays or other modifications to a communication tower or base station that substantially changes, whether individually or cumulatively, the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, shall require a new or modified conditional use permit. For purpose of this section, the standards set forth in Title 47, Part 1, Subpart CC of the Code of Federal Regulations (47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 et seq.), or any successor regulation, shall be determinative of whether a co-location or other modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of a communication tower or base station. 
(b)  Preapplication conference. Prior to submitting an application for a conditional use permit for a communication tower, the applicant shall meet with the director of planning or his designee in order to discuss: 
(1)  The feasibility of co-locating the proposed antenna facilities on an existing communication tower or other suitable structure, including a publicly-owned facility, where such use will not adversely affect the primary use of such facility; 
(2)  The availability of suitable alternative sites, including publicly-owned sites, for the proposed communication tower; 
(3)  Specific issues presented by the proposed application, including, but not limited to, potential interference with governmental public safety communications facilities, potential visual and other impacts on nearby properties and means, if any, of eliminating or mitigating such potential impacts; 
(4)  The feasibility of camouflaging wireless telecommunications equipment; and 
(5)  Such other matters as may be relevant to the application, 
No application for a conditional use permit for a communication tower shall be accepted by the planning director unless a preapplication conference has been held. 
(c)  Application requirements. In addition to the information required by section 221, applications for a conditional use permit shall include the following items: 
(1)  A site plan or plan drawn to scale, showing the location and design of the proposed tower, including any accessory buildings or other appurtenances, vehicular parking areas, access points, landscaped areas, adjacent land uses, and any other information required by the planning director; 
(2)  A landscaping plan showing the type, size, number and location of plant materials, including existing trees or other plant materials to be used; 
(3)  A report from a professional engineer licensed in Virginia, under seal, detailing the height, design and total anticipated capacity of the proposed tower, including the number and type of antennas that can be accommodated, and any other information deemed necessary by the Building Code Administrator to determine whether such tower conforms to the requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Such report shall also include a certification from the engineer that the tower is capable of supporting the total anticipated capacity of the tower, including all appurtenances; 
(4)  A certification from a professional engineer licensed in Virginia, under seal, that all antennas or antenna arrays intended to be affixed to the proposed tower comply with all applicable regulations promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission pertaining to the emission of radio frequency radiation; 
(5)  Where the proposed communication tower is to be located within one-quarter mile of any residential or apartment zoning district or use, an application shall be supplemented by the following materials no later than 30 days prior to the date of the public hearing before the planning commission: 
a.  Balloon tests, computer-generated photographic simulations showing such tower in the proposed location, visibility maps, and any other information deemed necessary by the planning director to assess the visual impact of the tower and its appurtenances; and 
b.  A summary of the applicant's planned contacts with the residents of the area regarding the proposed tower. The applicant shall, as soon as practicable after such contacts have occurred, notify the Planning Director of the substance of such contacts, including the neighborhoods or other areas in which residents were contacted by the applicant; 
(6)  Verifiable information satisfactory to the planning director of the lack of available space or structural capacity for the applicant's wireless telecommunications equipment on (i) existing towers, buildings or other structures, (ii) sites on which existing towers are located, or (iii) sites on which the proposed tower would be less visible from or located a greater distance from residential or apartment districts than the proposed location. Information submitted to demonstrate such findings shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  The absence of existing towers or other structures meeting the height, structural strength or other technical needs of the applicant within the appropriate geographic area; 
b.  Engineering analyses demonstrating that the applicant's proposed equipment would cause interference with the equipment on an existing tower of other structure, or the equipment on an existing tower or other structure would cause interference with the applicant's proposed equipment; or 
c.  Evidence that the rents, fees or other contractual provisions required to co-locate the applicant's antenna equipment on an existing communications tower, or to construct a communications tower on property to be purchased or leased, would be commercially unreasonable in light of the location of the proposed facilities; 
(7)  Where the proposed communication tower or antenna is to be located within one (1) mile of an existing or planned public safety communications facility, an intermodulation study submitted by a professional engineer licensed in Virginia, under seal. Such study shall: 
a.  Include the frequencies used by the city or other public entity for public safety purposes at any site within one (1) mile of the proposed facility; 
b.  Analyze 2nd, 3rd, 5th and 7th order intermodulation calculations using the maximum number of signals for each order; and 
c.  Include the frequencies used for each intermodulation order calculation, the name of the channel used and the bandwidth of each channel; 
(8)  A geographical map, with sufficient markings and detail, illustrating that the proposed communications equipment will not be located within a two-hundred-foot buffer of the microwave path between any existing public safety communications sites; and 
(9)  Where the proposed wireless communication equipment is to be located on a water tank or within the secure area of any water tank site, a security plan showing the times at which access to the proposed equipment will be allowed, the identities of the persons with authorized access to such facilities and such other information as the director of public utilities may require; provided, however, if such security plan is incorporated in a lease between the city and the applicant, this requirement shall be waived. 
(d)  Locational and design requirements. In determining whether to grant or deny a conditional use permit application for a new or expanded communication tower or other wireless telecommunication equipment, the city council shall give primary consideration to the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the antennas or other equipment intended to be affixed to such tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower within such radius as is reasonably necessary to provide adequate coverage and capacity for any of the following reasons: 
a.  The planned equipment would exceed the height or structural capacity of the existing or approved tower, and the existing or approved tower cannot reasonably be modified so as to accommodate the planned equipment, as documented by a licensed professional engineer; 
b.  The planned equipment would cause electromagnetic interference affecting the usage of other existing or approved equipment, and such interference cannot reasonably be prevented; or 
c.  Existing or approved communication towers or other structures within such radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary for its proper functioning; 
(2)  Whether the proposed communication tower is designed structurally and in all other respects to accommodate both the planned equipment and comparable equipment of at least two (2) additional users if the proposed tower is greater than one hundred (100) feet in height or at least one (1) additional user if the proposed tower is less than one hundred (100) feet in height; and 
(3)  Whether the proposed application conforms, if applicable, to the requirements of subsection (h), pertaining to public safety communications facilities and water tanks; and 
(4)  Whether the applicant has agreed, in writing, to allow the co-location of the equipment of other wireless telecommunications providers, to the extent of the capacity of the proposed communication tower, upon commercially reasonable terms applicable to the location of the proposed tower. 
(e)  Construction requirements. All communication towers constructed or expanded after the adoption of this section shall comply with or exceed all applicable requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, including all model codes incorporated therein. In addition, all such towers shall be non-illuminated and painted such color or colors as to minimize visibility, unless otherwise required by Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission or other applicable laws or regulations. 
(f)  Landscaping and screening requirements. Landscaping and screening shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Existing trees on the lot or within the leased area or other area within the control of the applicant shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable; 
(2)  To the extent permitted by applicable setback requirements, towers shall be located on a site so as to maximize the effectiveness of trees as screening; 
(3)  For towers one hundred (100) feet or less in height, at least one (1) row of evergreen shrubs forming a continuous hedge at least five (5) feet in height, with individual plantings spaced not more than five (5) feet apart, shall be provided. In addition, at least one (1) row of evergreen trees with a minimum caliper of one and three-fourths (1¾) inches at the time of planting and spaced not more than twenty-five (25) feet apart shall be provided within fifteen (15) feet of the perimeter of the required setback line; 
(4)  For towers more than one hundred (100) feet in height, in addition to the requirements of subdivision (3) above, one (1) row of deciduous trees, with a minimum caliper of two and one-half (2½) inches at time of planting and spaced not more than forty (40) feet apart shall be provided within twenty-five (25) feet of the perimeter of the required setback; 
(5)  All required landscaping shall: (i) be installed in accordance with established procedures using plant materials of good quality, (ii) be installed by the first planting season following the granting of a conditional use permit, unless appropriate surety in form acceptable to the city attorney is first provided, and (iii) at all times be maintained in healthy and growing condition. 
Existing landscaping meeting the requirements of this section or other screening may be used to satisfy the foregoing standards, which may be modified by the city council as it deems appropriate. 
(g)  Setback requirements. The following setback requirements shall apply to communication towers other than those affixed to electrical transmission line structures: 
(1)  Minimum side and rear yard setbacks, as measured from the base of the communication tower, excluding its appurtenances, shall be fifty (50) feet in residential, apartment, mixed-use and agricultural districts and twenty-five (25) feet in all other districts, provided, however, that no tower shall be located closer to an existing residential or apartment structure than a distance equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the height of the tower and provided further, that the minimum setback from any street, as measured from the base of the tower, shall be fifty (50) feet. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the city council may require a greater or lesser setback when it deems such other setback to be necessary or advisable to protect existing or future structures from damage, to enhance the screening effect of on- or off- site trees or other vegetation, or for other appropriate reasons. 
(2)  Minimum setbacks of equipment buildings shall be as specified in the zoning district regulations. 
(h)  Public safety communications facilities; water tanks. In light of the special security and public safety concerns applicable to sites occupied by city facilities such as public safety communications facilities and water tanks, the following additional requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Public safety communications facilities. No private wireless telecommunications facilities shall be allowed: (i) on sites with public safety communications facilities or within the secure compounds of such sites; (ii) in any location at which the director or communication and information technology determines, based upon an intermodulation study required by subdivision (7) of subsection (c), that the operation of the proposed wireless telecommunications facilities would present a substantial possibility of causing interference with one or more public safety communications facilities and cannot be satisfactorily mitigated; or (iii) in any location within a two-hundred-foot buffer of the microwave path of any existing or future public safety communications microwave facility. 
(2)  Water tanks. No private wireless telecommunications facilities shall be allowed on any city water tank or within the secure area of any water tank site unless there is a demonstrable public need for wireless telecommunications services in the area to be served by such facilities and there is no reasonable alternative site available. In such cases, the applicant shall be required, as a condition of the conditional use permit, to comply at all times with a security plan approved by the city council. 
(i)  Other requirements. The following additional regulations shall apply to all communication towers: 
(1)  No signage shall be permitted on any communication tower; 
(2)  All communication towers and their appurtenances shall comply with applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and Federal Aviation Administration. Where regulations and requirements of this section conflict with those of the Federal Communications Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration, the federal requirement shall govern; 
(3)  All communication towers shall be subject to periodic reinspection by the building code administrator. If any additions, changes or modifications are to be made to the structural characteristics of the tower, the building code administrator shall have the authority to require proof, through the submission of engineering and structural data, that the addition, change or modification conforms to structural wind load and all other requirements of the Uniform Statewide Building Code; and 
(4)  Any communication tower or wireless telecommunications equipment that are not in use for a period of one (1) year shall be removed within ninety (90) days after notification by the planning director. If not so removed, the city may contract for their removal and charge the cost thereof to the owner of the communication tower or wireless telecommunications equipment. 
(j)  Special provisions for communication towers affixed to electric transmission line structures and building-mounted antennas. 
(1)  Communication towers affixed to electric transmission line structures and building-mounted antennas shall be allowed as principal uses where so permitted in the district regulations, provided that the following requirements are met: 
a.  Communication towers and building-mounted antennas shall be made of materials or painted in such manner as to match, to the maximum extent practicable, the color of the structure upon which they are affixed or mounted; 
b.  Communication towers shall not project above the top of the structure to which they are affixed by more than twenty (20) percent of the height of the structure; 
c.  The owner of the communication tower or his agent submits to the planning director a list containing the name and last known address of the owner of all abutting lots, as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records. The planning director shall thereafter notify such property owners of the filing of the site plan or building permit application seeking approval of the communication tower. No such site plan or building permit shall be approved for a period of seven (7) days from the mailing of the notices; and 
d.  Building-mounted antennas shall conform to the requirements of section 207. 
(2)  Communication towers affixed to electric transmission line structures and building-mounted antennas not meeting the applicable requirements of this section may be permitted as conditional uses where so provided by the regulations of the district in which they are located. 
(k)  Temporary communication towers not meeting the requirements of section 207 may be allowed as conditional uses where so provided by the regulations of the district in which they are located. Small wireless facilities not placed on existing structures may be allowed as conditional uses where so provided by the regulations of the district in which they are located. 
(Ord. No. 3046, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 3403, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3514, 7-11-17)  
Sec. 233. - Drive-in theatres. 
(a)  Minimum area of a drive-in theatre site shall be ten (10) acres. 
(b)  Relation to major streets, entrances and exits. The site shall be adjacent to a major street, and entrances and exits shall be from the major street; provided, however, that where adjacent minor streets can be used for access to the major street, this arrangement may be permitted, except in residential districts. 
(c)  Waiting areas. Off-street parking or storage lanes for waiting patrons shall be available to accommodate not less than thirty (30) percent of the vehicular capacity of the theatre; provided that, if at least four (4) entrance lanes, each with a ticket dispenser, are provided, then the amount may be reduced to ten (10) percent of the vehicular capacity.  
Sec. 233.01. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3328, adopted February 25, 2014, repealed § 233.01, which pertained to multiple family dwelling units in the B-3A Pembroke Central Business Core District. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 233.02. - Drugstores with drive-through facilities in the B-4K Historic Kempsville Area Mixed Use District. 
Drugstores with drive-through facilities located in the B-4K District shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Drive-through facilities shall be located on the same parcel as the structure within which the principal use for the drive-through is located; 
(b)  Drive-through facilities shall be located on the rear side of the building, facing the interior of the block or within the ground floor of a parking structure, such that the facility is not visible from a public right-of-way; 
(c)  Drive-through facilities shall not utilize exterior speakers that are audible at the property line; 
(d)  Drive-through facilities shall not operate before 10:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.; 
(e)  Drive-through facilities shall be restricted to one lane with direct service from the drive-through window; 
(f)  There shall be no signs for the drive-through facility on the building or site, with the exception of directional signs not visible from a public right-of-way. Such signs shall not be internally illuminated; and 
(g)  An overhead canopy for the drive-through facility shall be allowed, except that such canopy shall not project more than four (4) feet from the wall of the building above the drive-through window and shall not exceed the width of the drive-through window by more than one (1) foot on each side. In no case, however, shall a drive-through facility have an overhead canopy that extends to cover the total length of a drive-through lane. 
(Ord. No. 3343, 4-22-14)  
Sec. 233.1. - Eating and drinking establishments with drive-through windows. 
(a)  Drive-through facilities shall be located on the same parcel as the structure within which the principal use for the drive-through is located; 
(b)  Drive-through facility lanes shall not be located between the building and the right-of-way unless screened with a Category I landscape buffer in addition to all landscaping required by the City Zoning and Site Plan Ordinances; 
(c)  Drive-through facilities shall not utilize exterior speakers that are audible at the property line adjacent to residential property; 
(d)  Drive-through facilities shall not operate from 12:00 midnight - 5:00 a.m.; 
(e)  Drive-through facilities shall be restricted to one lane; 
(f)  There shall be no signs for the drive-through facility on the building or site, with the exception of directional signs not visible from a public right-of-way. Such signs shall not be internally illuminated; 
(g)  An overhead canopy for the drive-through facility shall be allowed, except that such canopy shall not project more than four (4) feet from the wall of the building above the drive-through window and shall not exceed the width of the drive-through window by more than one (1) foot on each side. In no case, however, shall a drive-through facility have an overhead canopy that extends to cover the total length of the drive-through lane; and 
(h)  The architectural design shall conform to the purpose and intent of the Historic Kempsville Area Master Plan. 
(Ord. No. 3610, 1-21-20)  
Sec. 233.1.1. - Environmental education centers. 
Environmental education centers operated by a nongovernmental entity shall be allowed only as a conditional use in the P-1 Preservation District and, in addition to general requirements, shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Environmental education centers may include offices of the entity operating the center and of other nonprofit entities having similar purposes, classrooms, shelters, outdoor exhibits, noncommercial piers, kayak/canoe launches and storage facilities and similar uses consistent with the purpose of the center. 
(b)  On-site parking shall be required in accordance with the conditional use permit authorizing the center; provided that, unless otherwise specified in the conditional use permit, all stormwater from parking and other impervious surfaces on the site shall be captured and reused or retained on site or treated by low impact development (LID) techniques such as the use of permeable paving systems, bioretention, rain gardens, vegetated roofs, vegetated swales or similar means of controlling pollution from stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 3154, 11-9-10)  
Sec. 233.2. - Firewood preparation facility. 
(a)  Location criteria. Such uses shall be located where noise, traffic and other effects of the operation will not adversely affect nearby residences. 
(b)  Site characteristics. In considering approval of each application, the city council shall take into account the scale of the proposed operation to be sure it is appropriate for the site under consideration and to assure that there is adequate provision for safe vehicular ingress, egress, storage and maneuvering. 
(Ord. No. 2120, 3-24-92)  
Sec. 233.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3259, adopted August 28, 2012, repealed § 233.3, which pertained to flea markets and derived from Ord. No. 2315, 4-11-95.  
Secs. 233.4—233.14. - Reserved.  
Sec. 233.15. - Fiber-optics transmission facilities. 
In addition to general requirements, fiber-optics transmission facilities shall be subject to the following requirements, which shall be deemed to be conditions of the conditional use permit: 
(a)  All equipment shall be located within a fully-enclosed building; 
(b)  Minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; 
(c)  All lighting shall be directed toward the interior of the site and shall be designed so as to shield adjacent properties from light and glare; and 
(d)  Where adjacent to a residential or apartment district without an intervening street, alley or body of water greater than twenty-five (25) feet in width, a minimum fifteen-foot setback shall be required along all lot lines adjoining such residential or apartment district, and Category IV landscape screening shall be required unless otherwise specified in the conditional use permit. No building or structure or vehicular parking surface shall be located within such setback. 
(Ord. No. 2505, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 3467, 11-15-16)  
Sec. 234. - Home occupations. 
In districts where they are generally permitted, an occupation may be conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that: 
(a)  Not more than twenty (20) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit and accessory structures shall be used in the conduct of the activity. Provided, however, this limitation shall not have application to family day-care homes. 
(b)  No traffic, including traffic by commercial delivery vehicles, shall be generated by such activity in greater volumes than would normally be expected in the neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such activity shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard. 
(c)  No sign shall be permitted. However, as an exception, the city council, upon a finding that a sign would not be detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood, may as a condition of the use permit allow up to one (1) sign, not to be illuminated or to exceed one (1) square foot in area, mounted flat against the wall of the residence. 
(d)  No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard, or any other hazard or nuisance to any greater or more frequent extent than would normally be expected in the neighborhood under normal circumstances wherein no home occupation exists. 
(e)  The following uses are specifically excluded: Convalescent or nursing homes, tourist homes, massage parlors, radio or television repair shops, auto repair shops, or similar establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2111, 1-14-92; Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 235. - Housing for seniors and disabled persons. 
Housing for seniors and disabled persons shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Fire standards. The fire chief of the City of Virginia Beach shall review each application and make appropriate recommendations for fire protection requirements which may be more stringent than those specified by the Uniform Statewide Building Code. These recommendations may be made conditions of the conditional use permit by city council. 
(b)  Development guidelines. Projects should conform to the Senior Housing Facility Development Guidelines set forth in Appendix 2 of the Report on Senior Housing, Multi-family Issues, dated April 10, 1998, which Appendix is hereby incorporated by reference in this ordinance. The density of the project shall be determined by the city council upon consideration of the extent to which such project conforms to the Development Guidelines and the adequacy of facilities and services to meet the proposed needs of the project. 
(c)  Parking requirements. There shall be one (1) parking space provided for each independent living dwelling unit. For assisted living dwelling units, there shall be one (1) parking space provided for every two (2) residents. For nursing facilities, there shall be one (1) space for every three (3) patient beds. However, this requirement may be modified by the city council when it is found that special conditions warrant such a modification. 
(d)  Occupancy criteria. Independent and assisted living facilities shall contain dwelling units for occupancy only by (1) families who have at least one family member who is sixty-two (62) years of age or older; (2) single persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older; or (3) disabled or ill persons or their family members as care givers. For purposes of this section, a person is deemed "disabled" if he or she is found by a licensed physician to be unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity which can be expected to result in death or to last for the duration of such person's life. 
(e)  Sign requirements. Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the district in which the use is located; provided, however, that in residential districts, housing for seniors and disabled persons shall be allowed one monument (1) sign located at an entrance not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet per face or such other signage as may be specified in the conditional use permit. No such sign shall have more than two (2) faces. 
(Ord. No. 2268, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2495, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 3469, 12-6-16)  
Sec. 236. - Marinas, commercial, noncommercial and community boat docks. 
(a)  Location and site requirements. Commercial marinas, noncommercial marinas and community boat docks shall be so located as to be accessible from major roads without creating traffic congestion on minor streets through residential, apartment or hotel districts. 
(b)  Parking requirements. 0.50 off-street parking space per boat slip shall be required, provided that where wheel launching ramps adjoin the parking area, the parking spaces all have a minimum dimension of twelve (12) feet by forty (40) feet. Where appropriate and conditions warrant, city council may modify the number of required parking spaces. 
(c)  Rentals of personal watercraft shall not be deemed to be an accessory use and shall not be allowed except by conditional use permit. 
(d)  The following shall apply to noncommercial and community boat docks only: 
(1)  A security and maintenance plan is required at time of application. This plan shall address ownership of the facility, individuals or group responsible for maintenance, the methods proposed for limiting access to owners, members or their guests to all docks, piers, launching ramps and parking areas and methods proposed for limiting hours of operation if required by subparagraph (2) below. 
(2)  Launching ramps, clubhouses, and parking areas on land which are to be open for use between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall be at least three hundred (300) feet from the nearest lot line of any lot on which a residence is permissible. If any such areas or functions are not open between the hours indicated, the distance may be reduced to one hundred fifty (150) feet or if parking areas are enclosed by a solid masonry wall at least six (6) feet in height, the distance may be reduced to one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(3)  Rentals of personal watercraft shall not be permitted. 
(e)  Passenger vessels permitted by United States Coast Guard regulations to carry more than one hundred forty-nine (149) passengers and used for commercial purposes shall not be deemed to be accessory uses and shall not be allowed in any zoning district except by conditional use permit. No such conditional use permit shall be granted unless the city council finds that: 
(1)  The use is compatible with surrounding land uses; 
(2)  The proposal will protect sensitive environmental features; 
(3)  The nature and scale of related land uses likely to develop near the marina as a result of the vessel's mooring will not negatively impact existing residential uses; 
(4)  Existing public infrastructure will not be unduly burdened; and 
(5)  The economic impact upon the surrounding community and the city will be positive. 
(f)  In addition to the information requirecd by section 221(a), an application for a conditional use permit for a passenger vessel permitted by United States Coast Guard regulations to carry more than one hundred forty-nine (149) passengers and used for commercial purposes shall contain the following materials: 
(1)  A traffic impact study, including projected traffic generation, general traffic circulation, tour bus and taxi management, employee and visitor parking, pedestrian circulation, service and loading areas, and projected traffic impacts upon adjacent neighborhoods and land uses; 
(2)  A plan identifying all sensitive environmental features and measures to be used to protect such features; 
(3)  A detailed description of the proposed operation, including capacity, hours of operation, size and layout of the vessel, support facilities to be operated on shore, and security measures to be implemented; and 
(4)  A plan showing all proposed signage and physical improvements to the marina at which such vessel is moored, including landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 2097, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 2513, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 2552, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 3166, 4-26-11)  
Sec. 237. - Mini-warehouses. 
In addition to general requirements, the following special requirements and limitations shall apply to mini-warehouses in districts in which they are generally permitted: 
(a)  Lighting. All outdoor lights shall be shielded to direct light and glare onto the mini-warehouse premises; said lighting and glare shall be deflected, shaded, and focused away from all adjoining property. Any outdoor lighting fixtures shall not be erected any higher than fourteen (14) feet. 
(b)  Fencing. The mini-warehouse facility shall be completely enclosed, except for necessary openings for ingress and egress, by a fence or wall not less than six (6) feet in height, except where prohibited by section 201(e)(1) of this ordinance, and Category VI landscaping.  
Sec. 238. - Mobile homes. 
(I)  Mobile home parks shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Minimum allowances. In districts where allowable, minimum area for a mobile home park shall be twenty-five (25) acres. Streets, other than alleys and service entrances used for general vehicular entrances, and exits shall be sixty (60) feet; for portions containing lots for buildings generally open to occupants, minimum front yard dimension shall be two hundred (200) feet. Minimum number of lots completed and ready for occupancy before first rentals are permitted shall be one hundred (100). 
(b)  Tract. The mobile home park shall comprise a single tract except where divided by public streets or alleys or where the total tract includes separate parcels for necessary utility plants, maintenance or storage facilities with appropriate access to the park. All lands involved shall be so dimensioned and related as to facilitate efficient design and management. Density shall not exceed seven (7) units per gross acre. Any mobile home park located in a floodplain shall also be subject to the provisions of the Floodplain Ordinance (Appendix K) of the City of Virginia Beach. For purposes of floodplain management, the terms "mobile home," "mobile home park" and "mobile home subdivision" shall have the same definitions as the terms "manufactured home" and "manufactured home park or subdivision," respectively, as set forth in the Floodplain Ordinance (Appendix K) of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(c)  Permitted principal uses and structures are as follows: 
(1)  One-family detached mobile homes; 
(2)  Parks, playgrounds, community centers, and noncommercial recreational facilities, such as gold courses, shuffleboard courts, swimming pools, tennis courts, marinas, gamerooms, libraries, and the like; 
(3)  Structures and uses required for operation of a public utility, performance of a government function, or performance of any function necessary for the construction, operation or maintenance of the mobile home park. 
(d)  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted principal uses and structures, including approved storage facilities. 
(e)  Permissible uses and structures. In addition to principal and accessory uses and structures permitted by right, as indicated above, facilities planned for development as part of the district and serving needs not otherwise served in the general area may be permitted by city council as part of the MH-Park provided: 
(1)  That such facilities include only service, commercial and office uses intended primarily to serve the needs of persons in the MH-Park; 
(2)  Are of a nature permitted in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District and conform to the requirements of that district for such uses; 
(3)  Are designed and located to protect the character of the district and surrounding residential districts; and 
(4)  Shall occupy in total not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the district. 
(f)  No sales lots for mobile homes or other moveable dwellings or component modulars shall be permitted in any such district. 
(g)  Off-street parking requirements. At least two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Such spaces need not be located on lots occupied by such dwelling units, but at least one such space shall be reserved for and shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of the entrance of the dwelling unit by normal pedestrian routes. 
(h)  Recreational facilities. Not less than ten (10) percent of the total area of any mobile home park established under these regulations shall be devoted to common recreational areas and facilities, such as playgrounds, swimming pools and community buildings. Where only one recreational area is provided, it shall be in a central location conveniently accessible to all dwellings. In larger parks, decentralized facilities may be provided. No central recreation area shall be credited toward meeting these requirements unless it contains at least thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. Recreational areas shall be so located, designed and provided as to minimize traffic hazards to users and adverse effects on surrounding residential uses. 
(II)  Shelter for farm employees shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  They shall be located on land otherwise used for agricultural purposes. 
(b)  They shall not exceed ten (10) per farming business, even if all parcels of land involved in such business are not contiguous. 
(c)  They shall be allowed only with farming business involving at least one hundred (100) contiguous acres under the same ownership. 
(d)  They shall be removed from the land at such time as the farming business ceases to comply with the conditions set forth herein. 
(e)  No such unit, excluding the first unit, shall be located closer than five hundred (500) feet from a public street. 
(f)  There shall be at least twenty (20) feet distance between each unit. 
(g)  Quarterly inspections shall be conducted by appropriate city inspections agencies pertaining to minimum housing, health, zoning and fire. Each unit shall be on an individual site of at least one acre in area and at least one hundred fifty (150) feet in width. Determination of dimensions shall be in accordance with section 200 of this ordinance. 
(h)  The property owner shall submit an affidavit to the department of planning within the first ten (10) days of each calendar year assuring that the residents of each shelter for farm employees on his property are bona fide farm employees and their families. 
(Ord. No. 2210, 4-13-93; Ord. No. 2375, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 3310, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 239. - Motor vehicle sales and rentals. 
In addition to general requirements, the following special requirements and limitations shall apply to motor vehicle sales and rentals in districts in which they are generally permitted: 
(a)  The minimum lot size shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(b)  No motor vehicle shall be displayed for sale or rental within the first five (5) feet of any front yard or side yard abutting the right-of-way line of a street to be measured from the property line to any displayed motor vehicle on the premises. 
(c)  All lighting shall be directed toward the interior of the site and away from adjoining properties. 
(d)  Where such establishment abuts a residential or apartment zoning district, there shall be a six-foot solid privacy fence, or other suitable buffering as required as a condition of the use permit, installed along the property line.  
Sec. 239.01. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2597, adopted June 27, 2000, repealed § 239.01, which pertained to outdoor cafes in the B-3A Pembroke Central Business Core District and derived from Ord. No. 2356, adopted Nov. 28, 1995.  
Sec. 239.02. - Mulch processing facilities. 
In addition to the general standards set forth in section 220, the following requirements shall apply to mulch processing facilities: 
(a)  Minimum lot area shall be five (5) acres; 
(b)  No machinery shall be operated between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 
(c)  No such facility shall be located where noise and other potential adverse impacts may affect nearby residential properties; 
(d)  There shall be no retail sales of processed mulch to the general public; and 
(e)  Such facilities may be operated only in conjunction with an active farming operation on the site. 
(Ord. No. 2883, 6-14-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2597, adopted June 27, 2000, repealed § 239.02 of the zoning ordinance, which pertained to outdoor plazas in the B-3A Pembroke Central Business Core District and derived from Ord. No. 2356, adopted Nov. 28, 1995. Ord. No. 2883, adopted June 14, 2005, added new provisions to the zoning ordinance as § 239.02.  
Sec. 239.03. - Open-air markets. 
(a)  Applications for conditional use permits shall include, in addition to the information required by section 221 of this ordinance, the following information: 
(1)  A plan depicting the layout of the site, including dimensions, of the sales area, accessways, parking areas and location of trash receptacles; 
(2)  Specific days and hours of operation requested; and 
(3)  The means, such as stalls, tables or other structures, by which merchandise is to be displayed. 
(b)  In addition to any other standards or requirements of this ordinance, open-air markets shall be subject to the following requirements, which shall be deemed to be conditions of the conditional use permit: 
(1)  Vehicular parking shall be provided on-site and shall comply with the provisions of section 203 of this ordinance; 
(2)  There shall be no less than one (1) trash receptacle per one thousand (1,000) feet of sales area, all trash receptacles shall be emptied regularly so as not to overflow, and litter and debris shall be not be allowed to accumulate; 
(3)  Merchandise, stalls or other materials shall not be stored outdoors while the use is not open for business; 
(4)  Operation shall be restricted to the time between 9:00 a.m and 5:00 p.m., unless otherwise specified in the conditional use permit; and 
(5)  The operation shall not disturb the tranquility of residential areas or other areas in close proximity or otherwise interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring property by reason of excessive noise, traffic or overflow parking. 
(c)  The city council may impose any other condition it deems necessary or appropriate to minimize noise or other potential adverse effects upon neighboring areas. 
(Ord. No. 3259, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 239.05. - Parking structures and parking garages. 
(a)  In addition to the general standards set forth in section 220, the city council shall consider the extent to which the following standards have been met in deciding applications for conditional use permits: 
(1)  Access to the parking structure is designed so as not to disrupt or obstruct the flow of traffic on adjacent public streets; 
(2)  The parking structure provides adequate ingress and egress to all parking spaces, ample clearance, and safe pedestrian access; 
(3)  Safety features such as glass-backed elevators, interior scanning systems and alarm systems have been incorporated to ensure the well being of pedestrians and vehicles; and 
(4)  The architecture, building materials, signage and landscaping are of high quality and conform to the design standards for parking structures set forth in the Comprehensive Plan Reference Handbook (Special Area Development Guidelines for Urban Areas and Special Purpose Guidelines re: Parking Structure Standards) or, in zoning districts listed in section 102(a)(13), to the design guidelines applicable in such district. 
(b)  In addition to the information required by section 221(a), an application for a conditional use permit shall include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing access, parking spaces, traffic control, lighting, drive aisles, elevators, stairwells, pedestrian access features, interior clearance and landscaping; 
(2)  Building elevations or renderings showing architectural styling, building materials and colors and signage; and 
(3)  A narrative describing safety features to be employed. 
(c)  Except as provided in section 1501(a)(1)(iv) or in the regulations of any zoning district listed in section 102(a)(13), in districts in which they are conditional uses, parking structures and parking garages shall not be allowed as accessory uses. 
(d)  Parking structures and parking garages located in any zoning district listed in section 102(a)(13) shall be subject to the applicable provisions of such district in addition to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2570, 1-4-2000; Ord. No. 3172, 5-10-11; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 239.1. - Private sewage treatment facilities. 
(a)  An application for a conditional use permit for a private sewage treatment facility shall be accompanied by an engineering study, which shall include a bioassay of the receiving waters and a wasteload allocation. Such study shall be reviewed by appropriate departments of the city to determine whether the effluent discharged from the proposed facility will degrade the ambient water quality of the receiving stream or other waterbody or have an adverse effect upon groundwater. Only those applications in which the engineering study demonstrates that the ambient water quality of the receiving stream or other waterbody will not be degraded, and that the groundwater will not be adversely affected, by the effluent discharged by the proposed facility shall be transmitted to the planning commission by the planning director. All other applications shall be returned to the applicant by the planning director. 
(b)  Private sewage treatment facilities shall be permitted only as conditional uses in the AG-1 and AG-2 Agricultural Districts and in residential districts. No such facility shall be permitted in any district as an accessory use or in a resource protection area. 
(c)  No such facility shall be permitted on any site for which public sewer systems are reasonably available. The public utilities director shall determine whether public sewer systems are reasonably available. 
(d)  The following requirements and restrictions shall be conditions of all conditional use permits granted by the city council pursuant to this section, whether or not expressly stated: 
(1)  In the event a public sewer system operated by the City of Virginia Beach or the Hampton Roads Sanitation District becomes reasonably available to a site served by a private sewage treatment facility, the facility shall, within such time as may be prescribed in the conditional use permit, be decommissioned and its sewage conveyance system connected to the public system. The cost of decommissioning and connection to the public sewer system shall be borne by the owner or operator of the facility and shall be bonded or otherwise secured by appropriate surety prior to the issuance of a building permit; 
(2)  Such facilities shall be configured so as to facilitate connection to the public sewer system; 
(3)  Such facilities shall be subject to inspection by the city at all reasonable times and upon reasonable notice; 
(4)  The operator of the facility shall take samples of influent and effluent from the facility on a daily basis and shall analyze, or contract with a laboratory to analyze, such parameters as may be deemed necessary by the director of planning. Analyses shall be submitted to the director monthly. 
At a minimum, such parameters shall, unless waived by the director, include the following: 
(i)  Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD); 
(ii)  Total suspended solids (TSS); 
(iii)  Fecal coliform; 
(iv)  Total residual chlorine, if chlorine is used; 
(v)  Ammonia (as elemental nitrogen); 
(vi)  Oil and grease; 
(vii)  Discharge flow; 
(viii)  Dissolved hydrogen (pH); 
(ix)  Temperature; 
(x)  Total organic carbon (TOC); 
(5)  In the event any discharge parameter set forth in the facility's Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit is exceeded, the operator shall immediately notify the planning director. The director may, in such cases, require submissions of effluent analyses more frequently than once per month; 
(6)  There shall be an annual fee paid by the owner or operator of the plant in such amount as will defray the cost of inspection and monitoring by the city; 
(7)  Operators shall be certified in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state board for certification of operators of wastewater works. 
(e)  An existing single-family or duplex septic system that experiences a complete system failure shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, and shall not be required to obtain a conditional use permit for an alternative discharging sewage system. However, for this exemption to apply, public sanitary sewer must not be readily available and all available in-ground sewage treatment systems must not be able to function on the site. The alternative discharging sewer treatment system shall be approved by the department of health and shall comply with all department of health requirements and regulations. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2002, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 2152, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2670, 10-23-01)  
Sec. 240. - Recreational campgrounds. 
Recreational campgrounds shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Physical character of site. Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards. Recreational campgrounds located within floodplains shall also be subject to the provisions of Floodplain Ordinance (Appendix K) of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(b)  Location and access. No recreational campground shall be created in any location unless it is served by roads so located and improved as to assure safe access during periods of operation. 
(c)  Permitted principal uses and structures are as follows: 
(1)  Uses of transportable recreational housing, other than for permanent occupancy as dwelling units, except as specified in subsection (d), provided that storage of unoccupied units not in a condition for safe occupancy and sale of units shall be prohibited. It shall be the responsibility of the recreational campground operator to enforce the provisions of this subdivision. 
(2)  Structures and uses required for the operation, maintenance and management of the recreational campground. 
(d)  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Includes uses and structures customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses and structures, including permanent mobile homes with a maximum of one mobile home per one hundred fifty (150) recreational campground spaces, not to exceed five (5) mobile homes, for the specific purpose of occupancy of employees operating and maintaining the recreational campground. Private sewage treatment facilities shall not be permitted except by conditional use permit. 
(e)  Permissible uses and structures. In addition to principal and accessory uses and structures permitted by right, facilities planned for development as part of the district and promoting the comfort, convenience or enjoyment of campers within the district may be permitted by the governing body subject to limitations and requirements stated below in particular, and to such additional conditions and safeguards as may be established by the governing body as appropriate to the circumstances of the particular district and its relation to surrounding property. Such facilities include the following: 
(1)  Recreational campground convenience establishments. Establishments for the sale or rental of supplies or for provision of services, for satisfaction of daily or frequent needs of campers, within the district may be permitted. Such establishments include those providing groceries, ice, sundries, bait, fishing equipment, self-service laundry equipment and the like but not sale of gasoline to automobiles. Such establishments shall be designed to serve only the needs of campers within the campground, but shall not, including their parking areas, occupy more than two (2) percent of the area of the campground and shall not be so located as to attract patronage from outside the grounds, nor to have adverse effects on surrounding land uses. 
(2)  Marinas, launching ramps. Marinas, launching ramps and the like may be permitted when appropriate to the character and location of the campground, provided that such installations shall not provide facilities for long-term storage of boats other than those rented in connection with the campground operation, or for major repair or overhaul of boats. Requirements and restrictions applied in particular cases may include limitations on hours and manner of operation, requirements for appropriate parking space for boat trailers, and the like. 
(f)  Minimum dimensional requirements: 
(1)  Minimum area for creation of a recreational campground shall be twenty-five (25) acres. At the opening of any recreational campground for occupancy by units, all required facilities and improvements shall have been completed, and the minimum number of spaces available and ready for occupancy shall be fifty (50). Maximum density in recreational campgrounds shall not exceed twelve (12) spaces per acre. Signs shall be as allowed in the district where the use is first permitted as a conditional use. 
(2)  Recreation area. Not less than eight (8) percent of the area of the recreational campground shall be devoted to recreation area. Such recreation area may include space for common walkways and related landscaping in block interiors provided that such common open space is at least twenty (20) feet in width, as passive recreation space, but shall include at least half of the total required recreational area in facilities for active recreation, such as swimming pools or beaches, ballfields, shuffleboard courts, play lots for small children and the like, of a nature so designed to serve the type of campers anticipated and so located as to be readily available from all spaces and free from traffic hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2002, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 2210, 4-13-93; Ord. No. 2375, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 3310, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 240.1. - Religious uses. 
In addition to general requirements, the following special requirements and limitations shall apply to religious uses in districts in which they are generally permitted: 
(a)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be three (3) acres. 
(b)  Off-street parking. At least one space per five (5) seats or bench seating spaces in the main auditorium; provided, however, that the requirement for any church located in a shopping center shall be as specified in the conditional use permit allowing such church. 
(c)  Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the district in which the use is located; provided, however, that in residential districts, religious uses shall be allowed one (1) sign per entrance not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet per face or such other signage as may be specified in the conditional use permit. No such sign shall have more than two (2) faces. 
(Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 241. - Recreational resort community. 
In addition to general requirements, a recreational resort community shall be subject to the following requirements, which shall be deemed to be conditions of the conditional use permit: 
(a)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area of a recreational resort community shall be ten (10) acres. 
(b)  Density. Density shall not exceed seven (7) units per acre. 
(c)  Parking requirements. A minimum of one (1) parking space shall be provided for every unit. The use of permeable pavers and a provision for guest parking is encouraged. 
(d)  Recreational facilities. Not less than ten (10) percent of the developable acreage of any recreational resort community shall be devoted to common recreational areas and facilities, such as playgrounds, swimming pools and community buildings. Recreational areas shall be so located, designed and provided as to minimize traffic hazards to users and adverse effects on surrounding residential uses and environmental features. 
(e)  Signage. One (1) two-sided free standing monument style sign having a maximum of twenty-four (24) square feet per side is permitted per entrance. No such sign shall be closer than one hundred (100) feet to another such sign. In addition, any common building may be identified with one (1) sign having a maximum of twenty (20) square feet. 
(f)  Sewer system. The community shall be connected to the public sewer system. 
(g)  Applications. Applications for conditional use permits for a recreational resort community shall include, in addition to the information required by section 221 of this ordinance, the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing the community layout, including where applicable: number of units, parking spaces, recreational amenities, open space, pedestrian walkways and trails, boat slips/lifts and any accessory structures; and 
(2)  Architectural elevations and description of housing unit types that will be allowed, including minimum and maximum size permitted per type, maximum building height, foundation types, building materials and colors; and 
(3)  Description of any nonresidential uses that are proposed, including a description of recreational amenities, storage areas or maintenance facilities; and 
(4)  Description of how water will be provided; and 
(5)  Description of any green development features such as permeable pavers, native plant landscaping, reduced street lengths and pavement width, bio-retention islands, shared parking, vegetated swales in lieu of curb and gutter or other features of development intended to enhance environmental quality; and 
(6)  Designate any natural vegetation or other natural features on the site that will be preserved. Provide a general landscape plan and a tree preservation plan; and 
(7)  For gated communities, describe how access will be provided for emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 3390, 1-6-15)  
Sec. 241.1. - Single room occupancy facility. 
(a)  In determining whether to grant a conditional use permit for a single room occupancy facility, the city council shall consider, in addition to the compatibility of the proposed facility with nearby residential and commercial areas and other general criteria: 
(1)  The proximity of the proposed facility to mass transit lines and to retail, medical, recreational and other uses necessary to support the residents of the facility; 
(2)  The proposed layout of the site, including open space and landscaping; 
(3)  The architectural design of the proposed facility; and 
(4)  The management plan required by subsection (b) below. 
(b)  Single room occupancy facilities shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Density. The maximum number of single room occupancy units in the facility shall be established by the city council in the conditional use permit, irrespective of the maximum dwelling unit density permitted in the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
(2)  Parking. There shall be one (1) parking space for each single room occupancy unit, provided that the city council may allow a lesser number if it finds that special conditions warrant such a reduction. 
(3)  Facility management. A single room occupancy facility shall provide on-site management, including a manager who shall reside in a unit within the facility. A management plan for the facility shall be provided as part of the conditional use permit application. Such plan shall address the management and operation of the facility, rental procedures, safety and security of residents and building maintenance. 
(4)  [Bathroom facilities.] Full or partial kitchen and bathroom facilities may be included in each unit or may be shared among units. 
(Ord. No. 2972, 2-27-07)  
Sec. 241.2. - Short term rental. 
Short term rentals shall be subject to the following conditions unless specifically modified by action of the city council in granting a conditional use permit or creating a short term rental overlay district: 
(1)  Any property utilized as a short term rental shall provide adequate off street parking for its guests. A minimum of one parking space per bedroom is required. If such parking cannot be provided on-site, the owner must submit a parking plan indicating how the parking requirement will be met. Such plan shall be reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator. Stacking of vehicles shall be allowed and no on-street parking shall be part of the plan; 
(2)  No events with more than fifty (50) people present, shall be held absent a special events permit. Events with more than fifty (50) people are limited to no more than three (3) events in a calendar year. No more than one hundred (100) people shall be present at any event held on the property; 
(3)  The owner or operator must provide the name and telephone number of a responsible person, who may be the owner, operator or an agent of the owner or operator, who is available to be contacted and to address conditions occurring at the short term rental within thirty (30) minutes. Physical response to the site of the short term rental is not required; 
(4)  No signage shall be on site, except that each short term rental is allowed one (1), four-square foot sign, posted on the building which identifies the short term rental. Architectural signs naming the structure are excluded from this limitation; 
(5)  To the extent permitted by state law, each short term rental must maintain registration with the Commissioner of Revenue's office and pay all applicable taxes; 
(6)  There shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the dwelling a summary provided by the zoning administrator of City Code sections 23-69 through 23-71 (noise), 31-26, 31-27 and 31-28 (solid waste collection), 12-5 (fires on the beach), 12-43.2 (fireworks), and a copy of any approved parking plan; 
(7)  All refuse shall be placed in automated refuse receptacles, where provided, and comply with the requirements of City Code sections 31-26, 31-27 and 31-28; 
(8)  A short term rental shall have no more than two (2) rental contracts during any consecutive seven (7) day period; 
(9)  The owner or operator shall provide proof of liability insurance applicable to the rental activity at registration and renewal of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) underwritten by insurers acceptable to the city; 
(10)  There shall be no outdoor amplified sound after 10:00 p.m. or before 10:00 a.m.; 
(11)  The maximum number of persons on the property after 11:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m. ("Overnight Lodgers") shall be three (3) individuals per bedroom; 
(12)  Any short term rental that has registered and paid transient occupancy taxes to the Commissioner of the Revenue prior to July 1, 2018 shall be considered grandfathered and shall not be required to obtain a conditional use permit, but must meet the conditions of section 241.2. Any expansion of the footprint of the dwelling housing the short term rental that expands the overall square footage by more than twenty-five (25) percent or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is less, shall have its grandfathered status revoked and must immediately obtain a conditional use permit to continue such use. Grandfathered status shall run with the land; 
(13)  To the extent permissible under state law, interconnected smoke detectors (which may be wireless), a fire extinguisher and, where natural gas or propane is present, carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in each short term rental; 
(14)  Accessory structures shall not be used or occupied as short term rentals; 
(15)  In addition to other remedies available for violations of the city zoning ordinance, upon the occurrence of a violation of the provisions of this section; a violation of a condition imposed in a conditional use permit; or if the conditions for grandfathered status are no longer satisfied, the city council may revoke the conditional use permit or grandfathered status of a property after notice and hearing as provided in Code of Virginia § 15.2-2204; provided, however, that written notice as prescribed therein shall be given at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing; 
(16)  All conditional use permits issued for short term rentals shall expire five (5) years from the date of adoption. The renewal process of the conditional use permit will be administrative and performed by the planning department; however, the planning department shall notify the city council in writing prior to the renewal of any conditional use permit for a STR, where the STR has been the subject of neighborhood complaints, violations of its conditions or violations of any building, housing, zoning, fire or other similar codes. 
(Ord. No. 3578, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 242. - Storage or processing of salvage, scrap or junk. 
Facilities for the storage or processing of salvage, scrap or junk shall be subject to the following conditions: A solid fence or wall not less than five (5) nor more than six (6) feet in height and Category VI landscaping. Category VII landscaping may also be required as appropriate to enclose storage areas from view by street or neighboring property.  
Sec. 242.1. - Tattoo parlors and body piercing establishments. 
Tattoo parlors and body piercing establishments shall be permitted only as conditional uses in the B-2 Community Business District, and, in addition thereto: 
(a)  Tattoo parlors and body piercing establishments shall be subject to the requirements pertaining to tattoo parlors and body piercing establishments set forth in Chapter 23 of the City Code, which requirements shall be deemed to be conditions of the conditional use permit; and 
(b)  No tattoo parlor or body piercing establishment shall be located within six hundred (600) feet of another tattoo parlor or body piercing establishment. 
(Code 2627, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 3435, 1-5-16)  
Sec. 242.2. - Truck and trailer rentals. 
In addition to general requirements, the following special requirements and limitations shall apply to truck and trailer rentals: 
(a)  The minimum lot size shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(b)  Trucks and trailers for rental shall be displayed in an area designated on a site plan submitted with the application for a conditional use permit, no more than three (3) trucks or trailers for rent shall be displayed and no truck or trailer shall be displayed within the first ten (10) feet of any front or side yard abutting the right-of-way line of a street to be measured from the property line to any displayed truck or trailer on the premises. 
(c)  All lighting shall be directed toward the interior of the site and away from adjoining properties. 
(d)  Trucks or trailers for rental which are not being displayed as provided for in (b) above shall be located within a building or in a designated area located behind the nearest portion of a building adjacent to a public street. The designated area shall be screened, except for necessary openings for ingress and egress, from any public right-of-way or adjoining residential or apartment zoning district within one hundred (100) feet of the designated area by a fence not less than six (6) feet in height and Category VI landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 2660, 8-28-01)  
Sec. 242.3. - Home-based wildlife rehabilitation facility. 
Home-based wildlife rehabilitation facilities shall meet the following standards: 
(a)  Each operator shall ensure that each animal is provided with: 
(1)  Adequate food and water; 
(2)  Adequate shelter that is clean and of the proper type and size for the particular type of animal and its age, size, species, and weight; 
(3)  Adequate exercise; 
(4)  Adequate lighting; and 
(5)  Veterinary care as necessary to prevent suffering or disease transmission. 
(b)  Each operator shall hold a valid category I or category II A or B wildlife rehabilitation permit from the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries, and a migratory bird wildlife rehabilitation permit issued by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service if the operator rehabilitates migratory birds. 
(c)  Only species for which an operator holds current state and, if applicable, federal permits shall be kept in such a facility for more than twenty-four (24) hours. All animals not authorized to be kept pursuant to such permits shall be transported to an appropriate wildlife rehabilitation center or a permitted home-based wildlife rehabilitation facility within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of such animal. 
(d)  No operator shall keep a greater number of animals at any one time than those for which the operator maintains adequate caging as required by the applicable state or federal permit or permits held by the operator. 
(e)  No animal shall be kept at any such facility for a period in excess of one hundred and eighty (180) days. 
(f)  All animals shall be kept or maintained in such manner that a nuisance is not generated by insects, excessive odor, dust, noise, or other conditions deemed by the zoning administrator to be detrimental to the community health, safety and welfare. 
(g)  Removal of dead animals shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 5-14 of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach. The home-based rehabilitator shall be the owner of the wildlife they are rehabilitating for the purposes of City Code section 5-14. 
(h)  Removal of all waste, including medical waste, shall be conducted daily in accordance with the provisions of section 31-7 of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(i)  All structures, buildings, or cages used for the shelter of animals shall comply with the dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which the facility is located, provided that cages or other wildlife confinement areas shall not occupy more than a total of twenty (20) percent of the lot on which the facility is located. Structures in which animals are confined shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
(j)  There shall be no signs pertaining to the use on the property other than one (1) non-illuminated sign, not to exceed one (1) square foot in area, that may provide identification of the facility, notice to the public of any potential hazards related to the operation of the facility, and notice to the public of basic instructions for delivery of sick, injured, orphaned, or displaced wildlife. 
(Ord. No. 2976, 4-24-07)  
Sec. 242.4. - Wildlife rehabilitation center. 
Wildlife rehabilitation centers shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Each operator shall ensure that each animal is provided with: 
(1)  Adequate food and water; 
(2)  Adequate shelter that is clean and of the proper type and size for the particular type of animal and its age, size, species, and weight; 
(3)  Adequate exercise; 
(4)  Adequate lighting; and 
(5)  Veterinary care as necessary to prevent suffering or disease transmission. 
(b)  Each operator shall hold a valid Category III Wildlife Rehabilitation permit from the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries, and a migratory bird wildlife rehabilitation permit issued by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service if the operator rehabilitates migratory birds. 
(c)  No operator shall keep a greater number of animals at any one time than those for which the operator maintains adequate caging as required by the applicable state or federal permit or permits held by the operator. 
(d)  All animals shall be kept or maintained in such manner that a nuisance is not generated by insects, excessive odor, dust, noise, or other conditions deemed by the zoning administrator to be detrimental to the community health, safety and welfare. 
(e)  Removal of dead animals shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 5-14 of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach. The operator of the rehabilitation facility shall be the owner of the wildlife they are rehabilitating for the purposes of City Code section 5-14. 
(f)  Removal of all waste, including medical waste, shall be conducted daily in accordance with the provisions of section 31-7 of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(g)  All structures, buildings, or cages used for the shelter of animals shall comply with the dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
(h)  Vehicular parking requirements shall be as specified in the conditional use permit. 
(i)  Signage shall conform to the regulations of the district in which the facility is located or to the conditions of its conditional use permit if different. 
(j)  The operator may provide educational outreach services at the facility if permitted by its conditional use permit. 
(k)  The operator may exhibit at the facility wildlife that has been determined to be rehabilitated yet permanently disabled such that the wildlife can no longer be released to the wild, provided that such activity is allowed by an exhibition permit issued by the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries or the United States Fish and Wildlife Service that limits the number and type of wildlife permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2976, 4-24-07)  
Sec. 242.5. - Wind energy conversion systems. 
In addition to general requirements, wind energy conversion systems shall be subject to the provisions of section 209. 
(Ord. No. 3102, 9-8-09)  
D. - DESIGN, ETC. STANDARDS FOR RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS AND SHOPPING CENTERS 
 
Sec. 243. - Findings of fact; intent. 
(a)  The city council finds that: 
(1)  While retail establishments, whether in the form of single establishments or shopping centers, are critical to the continued economic vitality of the city and to the well-being of its citizens, they can also have significant aesthetic, economic, traffic-related and other impacts upon the community; 
(2)  Because the viability of retail establishments depends in large part upon high visibility from public streets and location in busy areas of the city, their building and site design has an especially significant impact upon the character and attractiveness of the city in general and its streetscapes in particular; 
(3)  The protection and enhancement of the positive aesthetic qualities of the city, including its commercially developed areas, has a direct and substantial bearing upon its continued economic vitality, especially in light of the city's reliance upon the economic benefits provided by its tourism industry; and 
(4)  As noted by the Virginia General Assembly, the visual environment confronted by individuals in their daily routines has a profound effect on personal attitudes and productive capacities. 
(b)  It is the intent of the city council in adopting this part to promote retail development which utilizes high-quality design and building features in such manner as to enhance the functional, as well as aesthetic, attributes thereof, and thereby to protect and enhance the continued positive economic development of the city, its businesses and its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 2607, 8-22-2000)  
Sec. 244. - Applicability; rules of construction; modifications. 
(a)  The provisions of this part shall apply to the construction of new retail establishments, including conversions of other uses to retail use, and to additions or expansions of existing retail establishments where the gross square footage of floor area thereof is increased by fifty (50) percent or more; provided, however, that the provisions of this part shall not apply to establishments located within a zoning district listed in section 102(a)(13). 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a), the requirements of this part shall be in addition to all other applicable ordinances, regulations and requirements, and to the extent that any provision of this part conflicts with any other ordinance, regulation or requirement, the provision of this part shall control; provided, however, that in the event the conditions of a conditional use permit conflict with any of the provisions hereof, such conditions shall control. 
(c)  The use of the word "shall" denotes a mandatory requirement. The use of the word "should" denotes a voluntary provision; provided, however, that when any proposed retail establishment or shopping center requires the approval of the city council, whether by rezoning, conditional zoning or conditional use permit, the city council shall, in determining whether or not to grant such approval, consider the extent to which the proposed retail establishment or shopping center conforms to the voluntary provisions of this part; and provided further, that high-quality design elements not addressed by the provisions of this part shall be encouraged. 
(d)  The planning director is hereby authorized to allow modifications of the requirements of this part where such modifications: 
(1)  Are demonstrably necessary by reason of the unusual shape, size, configuration or other site conditions of the property on which a retail establishment or shopping center is sought to be located; and 
(2)  Do not substantially reduce the overall quality of the proposed development. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall impair the right of any proper party to apply to the board of zoning appeals for a variance from any of the provisions of this part. 
(Ord. No. 2607, 8-22-2000; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 245. - Building design. 
The following building design features shall apply to retail establishments and shopping centers which are subject to the provisions of this part: 
(a)  Facades and exterior walls: 
(1)  Building facades visible from a public street and greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet in length, measured horizontally, should incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least three (3) feet; 
(2)  Building fronts and sides of buildings oriented toward a public street should incorporate features such as arcades, display windows, entry areas, false windows, awnings and similar features adding visual interest; 
(3)  Facades not facing public streets should incorporate a repeating pattern that includes changes in color, texture and material, each of which should be integral parts of the building and not superficially-applied trim, graphics, or paint. At least one of the foregoing elements should repeat horizontally. In addition, the structural or architectural bay pattern of the building should be expressed on the exterior through the use of reveals, projecting ribs or offsets at a minimum depth of twelve (12) inches; 
(4)  Facades not visible from a public street or from a private internal street or way used by the public should be painted a coordinating color to complement the front and side facades; and 
(5)  In areas of the city characterized by urban-type development, such as the Pembroke Town Center and Oceanfront Resort Area, developers are encouraged to reduce the footprint of large retail establishments through the use of multiple levels. 
(b)  Roofs: 
(1)  Variations in roof lines should be accomplished through the use of overhanging eaves, parapets, pop outs, entrance features or height variations. The front of the building should incorporate at least one three-dimensional feature. 
(2)  Flat roofs and all rooftop equipment such as heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) units shall be concealed from typical street level view by the use of parapets or other means. Parapets should feature three-dimensional cornice treatment, rather than two-dimensional superficial treatment. 
(c)  Materials and colors: 
(1)  Exterior building materials for all portions of a building should be of high quality and should exceed the level of quality required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Predominant exterior building materials should include any combination of brick, wood, stone, or tinted and textured concrete masonry. 
(2)  Smooth-faced concrete block, tilt-up concrete panels, or pre-fabricated steel panels should be used as exterior building materials only if such materials have been incorporated into the overall design of the building and reflect an overall appearance of high quality. 
(3)  Facade colors for all portions of the building should be of low reflectance and of neutral or earth tone, rather than primary, colors. Building trim and accent areas should feature brighter colors, including primary colors. In the RT-1 and RT-3 Resort Tourist Districts, the use of pastel colors on trim and accent areas is also encouraged. 
(d)  Entryways. Except in the RT-1 and RT-3 Resort Tourist Districts, entryway design elements and variations shall provide orientation to building. Buildings shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances, which should incorporate two (2) or more of the following features: 
(1)  Canopies or porticos; 
(2)  Overhangs; 
(3)  Recesses or projections; 
(4)  Arcades; 
(5)  Raised corniced parapets over entranceways; 
(6)  Peaked roof forms; 
(7)  Arches; 
(8)  Outdoor patios; 
(9)  Display windows; 
(10)  Architectural details such as tile work or moldings integrated into the building structure and design; or 
(11)  Integral landscaped areas or places for sitting. 
(e)  Outdoor display areas, vending machines and ground level mechanical equipment: 
(1)  All outdoor display areas, including garden centers and any seasonal sales, shall be enclosed on all sides with high-quality fencing. Chain-link fences are strongly discouraged. All outdoor display areas shall be designated on the site plan and shall not extend into parking areas. 
(2)  Vending machines shall not be visible from a public street. If vending machines are present, building facades should include an area screened from public streets but visible to security personnel. 
(3)  Mechanical or HVAC equipment shall not be installed at ground level along any portion of a building facing a public or internal street unless such location is necessitated by the nature and design of the building it serves. Such equipment shall be screened by a solid fence or wall and native plants, such as wax myrtle or leyland cypress, having good screening characteristics. Shrubs shall be at least three (3) feet high, and trees shall be at least six (6) feet high, at planting. Plants shall be spaced as directed by the city's landscaping, screening and buffering specifications and standards, be maintained at all times in good condition and shall not be trimmed to a height lower than the mechanical equipment they screen. 
(f)  Lighting: 
(1)  Outdoor lighting fixtures should be coordinated as to style, material and color. Neutral and earth tone colors of lighting fixtures are encouraged. Lighting throughout the site should overlap, creating an even level of illumination throughout the parking area. The use of pedestrian level lighting should be used along pedestrian walkways. 
(Ord. No. 2607, 8-22-2000; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 246. - Site design. 
The following site design characteristics shall apply to retail establishments and shopping centers which are subject to the provisions of this part: 
(a)  Shopping center site layout: 
(1)  Buildings on shopping center outparcels shall be located so as to encourage pedestrian traffic and highlight architectural details of the buildings. No parking shall be permitted on outparcel sites between such buildings and public streets; provided, however, that on outparcels at the intersection of two (2) streets, the area between such buildings and one of the streets may have one row of parking if a berm meeting the requirements of subdivision (a)(2) is provided. 
(2)  Subject to the provisions of subdivision (b)(1), in shopping centers exceeding five (5) acres in size, there shall be no buildings, parking surfaces or other above-ground improvements, except as specified herein, within thirty (30) feet of a public street. The area within such setback shall contain a heavily-landscaped berm having a minimum height of three (3) feet measured from the level of the abutting public street. The planning director may allow a reduction in setback to no less than ten (10) feet, provided that heavy landscaping and other features, such as brick walls, are located so as to reduce the visual impact of the parking lot from the abutting public street. 
(b)  Parking: 
(1)  Except as provided in subdivision (a)(1), vehicular parking areas should be distributed around at least three (3) sides of retail buildings in order to reduce the overall scale of the paved parking surface. 
(2)  Vehicular circulation systems providing access to parking areas shall be designed to reduce the potential for vehicular conflicts to a minimum. Adequate stacking for vehicles shall be provided at the access points from parking areas. 
(3)  The use of alternative porous pavement finishes is encouraged. 
(4)  In order to encourage the provision of site amenities, in any retail establishment or shopping center containing at least eighty thousand (80,000) square feet of retail space, parking may be reduced to one space for every two hundred fifty (250) square feet if pedestrian walkways meeting the requirements of subdivision (5) are provided through the parking area. 
(5)  For any retail establishment or shopping center containing at least eighty thousand (80,000) square feet of retail space, pedestrian walkways shall provide access from the parking area to the primary building in such manner that pedestrians using walkways will be required to traverse the vehicular parking aisle to the minimum extent possible. Such walkways shall be located so that no customer entrance is farther than one hundred (100) feet from the nearest walkway. Walkways shall be landscaped and be readily distinguishable from driving aisles where they traverse such aisles through the use of durable, low-maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, scored concrete or similar architectural treatments. 
(c)  Building entrances. Where possible, multiple entrances to buildings should be utilized in order to reduce the walking distance from cars and to facilitate pedestrian and bicycle access from public streets and sidewalks. 
(d)  Pedestrian access: 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be located along public rights-of-way in accordance with the Public Works Design Standards Manual. 
(2)  Connecting internal pedestrian walkways, no less than five (5) feet in width, shall be provided from the public sidewalk or right-of-way to the principal customer entrance of all anchor tenant buildings on the site. Outparcels shall be connected to each other, to the main shopping center and to the public sidewalk system by pedestrian walkways. In addition, walkways shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, transit stops, street crossings, building and store entry points, and parking areas. The walkways should feature adjoining landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, ground cover or similar materials to enhance the appearance of the walkway areas. Such landscaping shall be credited toward the parking lot landscaping requirements of section 5A of the Site Plan Ordinance. Clear sight lines allowing for good natural surveillance and adequate lighting shall be incorporated. Landscaping along the walkways shall be maintained at no more than three (3) feet in height or limbed up to at least seven (7) feet in order to avoid visibility obstructions. 
(3)  Entrances shall include weather protection features such as awnings or arcades having a width at least double that of the doorways over which they are located. 
(4)  All internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of durable, low-maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, scored concrete or other architectural treatments to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort. 
(5)  Provision of bicycle racks is encouraged. Bicycle racks shall be in a well-lighted area and placed in a location visible from the entrance and parking area. 
(e)  Central features and community spaces: 
(1)  Shopping centers and retail establishments should offer attractive and inviting pedestrian scale features, spaces and amenities. If served by mass transit, transit stops and dropoff/pickup points shall be integrated into the site so as to provide a high degree of convenience and efficiency. Pedestrian ways should be anchored by special design features such as towers, arcades, porticos, pedestrian light fixtures, planter walls or other architectural elements that define circulation ways and outdoor spaces. 
(2)  Retail establishments containing one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more of gross square footage and shopping centers containing five (5) acres or more of land area shall provide at least two (2) of the following features: 
(A)  Patio/seating area; 
(B)  Pedestrian plaza with benches; 
(C)  Window shopping walkway; 
(D)  Outdoor playground area; 
(E)  Kiosk area; 
(F)  Water feature or stormwater management facility with amenities such as fountains, benches, walking trails, pedestrian furniture or lighting; 
(G)  Clock tower; 
(H)  Outdoor sculpture; or 
(I)  Any other focal feature or amenity which, in the judgment of the planning director, provides an equivalent benefit. 
All such features and community spaces shall connect to internal or public walkways and, if present, to the bikeway network, and shall be constructed of materials of at least equal quality to that of the principal materials of the building and landscape. 
(Ord. No. 2607, 8-22-2000; Ord. No. 3620, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 247. - Landscaping and buffering. 
The following provisions shall be in addition to all other city landscaping provisions: 
(a)  Any loading dock within view of a residential, office or apartment zoning district or a public street shall be screened by a landscaped berm or a solid wall with landscaping on the outside. 
(b)  Sites with existing trees and vegetation along street frontages should, where desirable, retain such features and integrate them into the landscape plan for the site. 
(c)  To the greatest extent possible, no less than twenty-five (25) percent of trees shall be evergreen species. 
(d)  To the greatest extent possible, planting pits shall be backfilled with thirty-six (36) inches of topsoil to provide the most conducive growing environment for new landscape planting. 
(e)  To the greatest extent possible, landscape islands shall be designed so that shrubs or trees are not located on the edges of the island. 
(Ord. No. 2607, 8-22-2000)  
Sec. 248. - Stormwater management facilities. 
(a)  On-site stormwater management ponds in a prominent location should be attractively-landscaped amenities. Wetlands benching, fountains, and the incorporation of walking trails and pedestrian benches around the perimeter of the ponds are encouraged. Lighting of such areas for purposes of enhancing safety is also encouraged. 
(b)  The use of chain link fencing to enclose stormwater management ponds is strongly discouraged. 
(c)  Where feasible, stormwater management systems shall utilize existing regional stormwater management facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2607, 8-22-2000)  
Sec. 249. - Signage. 
(a)  The style, size, color, and material of all signs on a shopping center should be coordinated to include signs for any outparcel development, on-site directional signs, and signs to be located on buildings. Colors and materials should be similar to those used on the primary building or buildings. Signs should be primarily of neutral or earth-tone colors, and primary colors should be limited to accents. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other contrary regulation, a minimum of seventy-five (75) square feet of shrubbery, flower beds, trees or other plants, consisting of at least fifty (50) percent evergreens, shall be required at the base of freestanding signs identifying shopping centers. 
(c)  As an alternative to the signs allowed pursuant to the applicable zoning district regulations, buildings having facades greater than two hundred (200) feet in length may have one identification sign no larger than one square foot in size for every linear foot of facade, to a maximum of three hundred (300) square feet, on the facade of the building having the greatest length, provided that no more than three (3) other directional or informational signs are placed on the building. Directional or informational signs shall not exceed one and one-half (1½) feet in height and shall be limited in combined area to ten (10) percent of the area of the building facade sign. 
(Ord. No. 2607, 8-22-2000)  
E. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2832, adopted July 6, 2004, repealed Art. II, E., §§ 250—253, of the zoning ordinance, in its entirety. Former Art. II, E., §§ 250—253, of the zoning ordinance pertained to open space promotion option and derived from Ord. No. 1788, adopted June 13, 1988; and Ord. No. 2045, adopted March 12, 1991. 
 
Secs. 250—253. - Reserved.  
F. - CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 260. - Permissibility generally. 
No uses or structures shall be prohibited in any zoning district, nor any zoning regulations applicable thereto altered in any way, solely on the basis of their form of ownership as a condominium.  
Sec. 261. - Density. 
In any zoning district, where density of single-family or duplex development is determined by minimum lot size, the maximum allowable density for such a condominium development shall be the same as if the property were to be subdivided.  
Sec. 262. - Minimum spacing between structures. 
In any condominium development consisting of single-family, duplex or attached dwellings, the minimum spacing between principal structures or parts thereof shall be equal to twice the distance of the required side yard in the applicable zoning district. However, if between any two (2) principal structures or parts thereof there is a facility for common vehicular ingress, egress, or storage, then the minimum spacing between those principal structures or parts thereof shall be increased by an additional fifty (50) feet.  
G. - LANDSCAPE SCREENING AND BUFFERING 
 
Sec. 270. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this section is to set forth standards for landscaping and screening materials, and the provision for buffer areas between incompatible uses to minimize the harmful impacts of noise, dust, odors, artificial light intrusion, and other objectionable impacts created as a result of incompatible abutting uses; to promote a harmonious interface between differing land uses, with the intent of protecting and preserving the best visual appearance, character and economic value of neighboring properties; to set forth guidelines for various categories of landscape screening and buffer areas in conjunction with established yard setbacks to soften the transition for one use of lesser intensity to that of another of higher intensity; and more importantly, to promote efficient land development through effective site planning with attention to landscape screening and buffering, in an effort to preserve and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public within the city.  
Sec. 271. - Applicability. 
This ordinance provides within the district regulations a requirement describing certain landscaping standards to apply where districts abut various other districts, as specified. Where the ordinance specifies a certain landscaping standard, that ordinance shall be met by installation and maintenance of plant and other material in accordance with the Virginia Beach Landscape, Screening and Buffering Specifications and Standards.  
Sec. 272. - Categories of landscape screening types. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, there shall be eight (8) categories of screening to be employed as specified in district regulations to satisfy the screening and buffering requirements of proposed uses of higher intensity to those existing of lower intensity. 
(b)  Existing screening materials. When a lot is to be developed such that screening is required and where that lot abuts an existing hedge, wall or other durable landscape barrier on an abutting property, the existing structure or hedge may be used to satisfy the screening requirements of this section, provided that the existing structure meets the minimum standards set forth herein and protection against vehicular encroachment is provided. However, the burden to provide the necessary screening remains with the use to be screened and is a continuing obligation which runs with the land so long as the original relationship exists.  
Sec. 273. - Provisions of acceptable alternatives. 
Amy person who may be required to install screening in conjunction with land development and who believes that by virtue of special consideration of site design, topography, unique relationships to other properties or existing natural vegetation, the application of the specific standards are ineffective in fulfilling the requirements of this section, may submit to the planning director a specific plan for development showing how the purposes of this section may be met by measures other than those listed above. The planning director, after consulting with appropriate city officials, may approve modifications to established standards so long as the effect and intent of the established standards are achieved. 
(Ord. No. 2152, 6-23-92)  
Sec. 274. - Maintenance responsibilities. 
The owner and tenant, if any, of any property where screening is required shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all screening materials so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and be kept free from litter and debris. Shrubs or trees planted as a part of any required screening which subsequently dies shall be replaced in accordance with the minimum standards of this section. All screening and landscape areas shall be protected from encroachment by motor vehicles or pedestrians which could damage vegetation or reduce the effectiveness of the screening.  
H. - OPTIONAL STREET SETBACKS IN STRATEGIC GROWTH AREAS 
 
Sec. 280. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this Part H is to establish interim regulations to allow the development of high-quality, urban-style development in the city's strategic growth areas (SGAs) pending the adoption of zoning regulations that provide specific direction regarding the form of development in each such SGA. 
(Ord. No. 3384, 12-2-14)  
Sec. 281. - Findings. 
The city council finds that: 
(a)  In the 2003 Comprehensive Plan, the city established strategic growth areas, as areas designed to absorb most of the city's future growth, both residential and non-residential. SGAs were planned to contain uses that are more intensive than in most other areas of the city but are integrated into compact, yet compatible mixes of uses, including office, retail, service, hotel and, where appropriate, residential, uses. 
The 2003 Plan also set forth five common planning principles applicable to all SGAs: 
(1)  Efficient use of land resources; 
(2)  Full use of urban services; 
(3)  Compatible mix of uses; 
(4)  A range of transportation opportunities; and 
(5)  Detailed human-scale design. 
(b)  The 2009 Comprehensive Plan retained the same strategy and guiding principles as are set forth hereinabove. That strategy has been refined and expanded by means of separate implementation plans that were specific to each of the city's SGAs and were adopted only after an extensive public outreach program was employed in each instance. The plans for all of those SGAs retain the five (5) basic planning principles set forth in subsection (a). In addition, the 2009 Plan noted that the city has identified SGAs as: 
(1)  Providing opportunities for continued physical and economic growth; 
(2)  Helping to prevent urban sprawl; 
(3)  Protecting our established residential neighborhoods and rural areas from incompatible development due to growth pressures; 
(4)  Maximizing infrastructure efficiency; and 
(5)  Creating unique and exciting urban destinations. 
(c)  Traditional suburban-style development typically lacks significant connectivity to mass transit systems and bicycle or pedestrian-oriented features, instead depending almost exclusively upon automobile traffic. Such dependence upon the automobile results in large expanses of asphalt or other impervious parking surfaces that are rarely, if ever, fully utilized, and has significant undesirable effects, including, among others: 
(1)  Inefficient use of land; 
(2)  Greater adverse environmental impacts, notwithstanding compliance with applicable regulations, than vertically-oriented, mixed-use development; 
(3)  Incompatibility, both functional and architectural, with adjacent communities; 
(4)  Increased traffic congestion; and 
(5)  A lack of uniqueness and "sense of place" differentiating Virginia Beach from other cities. 
(d)  While the city's vision for the SGAs is well-developed in the Comprehensive Plan and in the implementation plans for the SGAs, not all of the strategic growth areas contain updated development standards implementing the city council's vision. Among the development standards that contribute to the achievement of the urban form contemplated by the Comprehensive Plan are lesser setbacks from streets, as such setbacks activate the street frontage by locating building facades close to the street, thereby providing a walkable, pedestrian-oriented streetscape. However, the setback regulations currently applicable to the various zoning districts located within the remaining SGAs generally require large street setbacks, and as a result, have the effect of preventing by-right development that is consistent with the goals and objectives of the SGAs. 
(e)  In light of the foregoing considerations, it is necessary, advisable, and in the public interest for the city council to adopt optional setback regulations in order to encourage and promote development that conforms to and advances the city's vision for the SGAs. Such regulations should remain in effect until such time as individual codes and other zoning tools that are specific to each of the SGAs and responsive to the city council's vision can be developed and adopted by the city council after having received the benefit of extensive public comment. 
(Ord. No. 3384, 12-2-14)  
Sec. 282. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this Part H shall apply to property in Apartment, Hotel, Office, Business and Industrial Districts located within a strategic growth area. 
(Ord. No. 3384, 12-2-14)  
Sec. 283. - Optional by-right minimum front and front side setbacks. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any contrary provision of the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located, property that is subject to the provisions of section 282 may optionally be developed in accordance with the provisions of this section. Permitted principal, conditional and accessory uses shall be as allowed by the regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located. 
(b)  The table below shows minimum setback requirements for front and side yards adjacent to a street, as measured from the lot line adjoining the street; provided, however, that where a lot line adjoins a street having a lesser width than the right-of-way shown in Table 1 of the Major Street Network Ultimate Rights-of-Way (2010), incorporated in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan, the setback shall be measured from the ultimate right-of-way shown therein. 
Building Type 	Mixed Use 	Commercial 	Office 	Hotel 	Industrial, Flex, Institutional 	Multi-Family 
Street Type 	A 	O 	A 	O 	A 	O 	A 	O 	A 	O 	A 	O 
Burton Station 	10 	5 	10 	5 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 	15 	10 
Centerville 	10 	5 	10 	5 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 	15 	10 
Hilltop 	10 	5 	10 	5 	10 	5 	10 	5 	10 	10 	15 	10 
Lynnhaven 	10 	5 	10 	5 	10 	5 	10 	5 	10 	10 	15 	10 
Newtown 	10 	5 	10 	5 	10 	5 	10 	5 	10 	10 	15 	10 
Pembroke 	10 	5 	10 	5 	10 	5 	10 	5 	10 	10 	15 	10 
Rosemont 	10 	5 	10 	5 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 	15 	10 
 
NOTE: A (Arterial Street Type); O (Other Street Type) 
(c)  The following conditions shall apply to any development in which front or side street setbacks have been reduced pursuant to this section: 
(1)  Prohibited features. No parking, drive aisles other than those associated with drop-off areas, mechanical equipment or service areas shall be placed between the building and the street; 
(2)  Blank walls. Exterior walls on any building façade facing a street shall have a substantial material change, such as windows, doors, columns, pilasters or other articulation greater than twelve (12) inches in depth, at least every thirty (30) feet in both a vertical and horizontal direction and on both ground and upper story street-facing facades; 
(3)  Transparency. The combined area of windows and doors on a ground story street-facing façade, as measured between two (2) and eight (8) feet above the adjacent sidewalk or, if none, ground level at the building façade, shall for all building types other than multifamily, be no less than thirty (30) percent of the area of the building façade, and for upper stories, no less than fifteen (15) percent. Multifamily buildings shall have a minimum transparency of no less than fifteen (15) percent on all stories. When there is no floor above, upper-story transparency shall be measured from the top of the finished floor to the top of the wall plate on upper-story street-facing facades; and 
(4)  Building façades facing a street shall substantially conform to applicable design guidelines contained in the Special Area Design Guidelines (Building Design—Urban Areas) contained in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(5)  In lieu of any of the requirements of subdivisions (1) through (4), optional forms of development, such as courtyards, outdoor cafés, water features or, for upper stories, balconies and galleries, that significantly contribute to a walkable, active, pedestrian-oriented environment, may be utilized. 
(Ord. No. 3384, 12-2-14)  
ARTICLE 3. - PRESERVATION DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 300. - Legislative intent. 
It is the intent of the City of Virginia Beach to protect its atmosphere, lands and waters from pollution, impairment or destruction for the benefit, enjoyment and general welfare of the public. Critical areas of special concern include parklands, wilderness areas, open spaces, greenbelts, beach reserves, scenic areas, wetlands, floodplains, floodways, watersheds and water supplies; and to conserve fish and wildlife. The boundaries of these areas of critical concern shall be identified and delineated in order to provide a means of protecting and preserving them.  
Sec. 301. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Principal and conditional uses. The following chart lists those uses permitted within the P-1 Preservation District. Those uses and structures shall be permitted as either principal uses indicated by a "P" or as conditional uses indicated by a "C." No uses or structures other than as specified shall be permitted. 
Use 	P-1 
Borrow pit 	C 
Building-mounted antennas meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Building-mounted antennas other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 
Cemetery, columbarium, crematory and mausoleum 	C 
Colleges and universities, but not including dormitories or other housing facilities 	C 
Columbarium located in cemetery 	P 
Communication towers meeting the requirements of section 232(j) 	P 
Communication towers 	C 
Environmental education centers other than those operated by a governmental entity 	C 
Fish hatcheries and fish ponds 	P 
Forests and forestry; provided that the harvesting of timber shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection (a1) 	P 
Game preserves 	P 
Golf courses, private, nonilluminated, including par 3, but not including miniature, with a minimum area of 10 acres 	C 
Harvesting of timber where all requirements of subsection (a1) are not met 	C 
Marinas, noncommercial 	C 
Open agricultural and horticultural uses, provided that intensive cultivation shall not be allowed 	P 
Personal watercraft rentals 	C 
Public parks, recreational areas, botanical and zoological gardens, golf courses, marinas and other public buildings and uses 	P 
Public utility installations and substations; provided offices, storage or maintenance facilities shall not be permitted; and provided, further, that utilities substations other than individual transformers, shall be surrounded by Category V screening, solid except for entrances and exits; and provided also, transformer vaults for underground utilities and the like shall require Category I screening, solid except for access openings 	P 
Recreation and amusement facilities of an outdoor nature other than those specified as principal uses, which may be partially or temporarily enclosed on a seasonal basis, with the approval of city council. Such facilities may include permanently enclosed components, provided such components do not exceed a total of twenty (20) percent of the area encompassed by the conditional use permit and the activities conducted therein are identical to those conducted outdoors or specifically permitted by the conditional use permit. 	
Recreational campgrounds 	C 
Riding academies, horses for hire or boarding 	C 
Small wireless facilities meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Small wireless facilities not placed on existing structures 	C 
Storage and maintenance installations for public utilities 	C 
Television or other broadcasting stations 	C 
Temporary communication towers meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Temporary communication towers not meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 
Watersheds, wells, water reservoirs and water control structures 	P 
Wind energy conversion systems, freestanding 	C 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted 	C 
 
(a1)  Harvesting of timber shall be permitted as a principal use only if the following requirements are met, and otherwise shall be allowed only as a conditional use: 
(1)  Such activity is conducted in accordance with the silvicultural best management practices developed and enforced by the state forester pursuant to section 10.1-1105 of the Virginia Code; 
(2)  Such activity is conducted upon land which has been classified by the city assessor as real estate devoted to forest use; and 
(3)  The area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use. 
(a2)  Prior to commencing any timber harvesting activity, the owner of the property upon which such activity is to occur shall notify the zoning administrator, in writing, of his intent to harvest the timber on such property. Within ten (10) working days after the receipt of such notice, the zoning administrator shall notify the property owner whether the proposed activity will be allowed as a principal use or will require a conditional use permit. No harvesting of timber shall take place until the zoning administrator notifies the owner that the proposed activity is allowed as a principal use or until a conditional use permit has been granted by the city council, whichever the case may be. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to principal uses and structures; provided that roadside stands for sale of agricultural products shall not be permitted as accessory to agricultural uses in this district; provided further, that in connection with golf courses, accessory uses shall be designed and scaled to meet only the requirements of the members, guests or users of the golf course. 
(Ord. No. 2427, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2513, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 2611, 8-22-2000; Ord. No. 3046, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 3102, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 3154, 11-9-10; Ord. No. 3289, 6-11-13; Ord. No. 3403, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3477, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 3514, 7-11-17)  
Sec. 302. - Dimensional requirements. 
The following chart lists the requirements within the P-1 Preservation District for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing, maximum lot coverage and height regulations: 
Requirement     P-1   
(a)  Minimum lot area:       5 acres  
(b)  Minimum lot width:       200 feet  
Minimum lot area and lot width requirements do not apply to conditional uses or to public utility installations. 
(c)  Minimum front yard setback:       50 feet  
(d)  Minimum side yard setback:       50 feet  
(e)  Minimum rear yard setback:       50 feet  
(f)  Maximum lot coverage:       10 percent 
(g)  Any yard that adjoins a major street or right-of-way designated on the official transportation plan shall be increased by fifty (50) feet. 
(h)  There shall be no maximum height requirements in the P-1 Preservation District except that no building or other structure shall exceed the height limit established by section 202(b) regarding air navigation.  
Sec. 303. - Sign regulations. 
Within the P-1 Preservation District, except as may be permitted by the conditional use permit authorizing a specific use, only one (1) sign, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area, shall be permitted on any zoning lot in connection with any use. No sign shall be directly illuminated or located closer than ten (10) feet to the property line fronting the street or be higher than eight (8) feet above the ground elevation. 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 304. - Parking regulations. 
Parking shall be required for all uses and structures permitted in the P-1 Preservation District in accordance with section 203.  
ARTICLE 4. - AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2041, adopted March 5, 1991, amended Art. 4, §§ 400—404, relative to agricultural districts, in its entirety to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Art. 4 derived from Ord. No. 1773, adopted April 18, 1988, as amended by Ord. No. 1877, § 3, adopted May 22, 1989; Ord. No. 1936, adopted Nov. 13, 1989; Ord. No. 2001, enacted Aug. 21, 1990; and Ord. No. 2002, adopted Sept. 18, 1990. 
 
Sec. 400. - Legislative intent. 
The purpose of the AG-1 and AG-2 Agricultural Districts is to protect and preserve agricultural lands for agricultural functions, including agritourism and the direct sale of agricultural and agricultural-related products to the public, and to protect and preserve agricultural lands and activities in the rural areas of the city in harmony with reasonable levels of rural residential development and in keeping with the special rural character, environmental protection needs and limited rural infrastructure available. 
(Ord. No. 2041, 3-5-91; Ord. No. 3354, 6-17-14)  
Sec. 401. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Principal and conditional uses. The following chart lists those uses permitted within the AG-1 and AG-2 Agricultural Districts. Those uses and structures in the respective agricultural districts shall be permitted as either principal uses indicated by a "P" or as conditional uses indicated by a "C." Uses and structures indicated by an "X" shall be prohibited in the respective districts. No uses or structures other than as specified shall be permitted. 
Use 	AG-1 	AG-2 
Agricultural, aquacultural and horticultural operations, including orchards, vineyards, nurseries and the raising and grazing of livestock, poultry and swine and the keeping of bees 	P 	P 
Agricultural product sales, and sales of agricultural-related products, at buildings or structures no larger than 3,500 square feet in area, exclusive of rest rooms and hand-washing facilities, subject to the provisions of subsection (d) 	P 	P 
Agricultural product sales, and sales of agricultural-related products at buildings or structures larger than 3,500 square feet in area, exclusive of rest rooms and hand-washing facilities, subject to the provisions of subsection (d) 	C 	C 
Agritourism activities meeting the requirements of subsection (c) 	P 	P 
Agritourism activities other than those meeting the requirements of subsection (c) and held no more than three (3) times per year, subject to the issuance of a Special Events Permit pursuant to City Code section 4-1 	P 	P 
Agritourism activities other than those meeting the requirements of subsection (c) and held more than three (3) times per year 	C 	C 
Airports, heliports and helistops 	C 	C 
Animal hospitals, pounds, shelters, commercial and residential kennels 	C 	C 
Antique shops, except as provided below 	X 	X 
Antique shops within buildings listed on the Virginia Beach Historical Register 	C 	C 
Assembly uses 	C 	C 
Borrow pit 	C 	C 
Building-mounted antennas meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 	P 
Building-mounted antennas other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 	C 
Cemetery, columbarium, crematory and mausoleum 	C 	C 
Child care education centers in connection with public or private elementary schools or religious uses 	P 	P 
Child care education centers, day nurseries, other than those permitted as principal uses and structures, when not operated by a public agency 	C 	C 
Columbarium located in cemetery 	P 	P 
Communication towers meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communication towers meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 	P 
Communication towers other than those meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communication towers other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 	C 
Country inns 	C 	C 
Drive-in theaters 	C 	C 
Dwelling, single-family addition 	P 	P 
Dwellings, duplex 	X 	X 
Dwellings, single-family, except as specified in section 405(a) 	P 	P 
Dwellings, single-family, in accordance with section 405(a) 	C 	C 
Dwelling units, not to exceed one (1), located within livestock barns, to be occupied only by farm employees or persons related to the owner of the property by blood, marriage, adoption or approved foster care 	P 	P 
Family care homes, foster homes or group homes 	C 	C 
Farm wineries, farm breweries and farm distilleries, subject to the provisions of section 209.1 	P 	P 
Fiber-optics transmission facilities 	C 	C 
Firewood preparation facility 	C 	C 
Fish hatcheries and fish ponds 	P 	P 
Flex suites, subject to the provisions of section 507 	P 	P 
Forests and forestry 	P 	P 
Fraternity and sorority houses, student dormitories and student centers; provided that they be located within a one-mile radius of a college or university 	C 	C 
Game preserves 	P 	P 
Golf courses, including par 3 with a minimum area of 10 acres, and miniature golf courses 	C 	C 
Home-based wildlife rehabilitation facilities 	P 	P 
Home occupations, including those conducted outside the principal structures 	C 	C 
Home sharing meeting the requirements of section 209.6 	P 	P 
Hospitals and sanitariums 	C 	C 
Marinas, noncommercial and community boat docks 	C 	C 
Maternity homes 	C 	C 
Mulch processing facilities, subject to the provisions of section 239.02 	C 	C 
Mulch storage on lots at least five (5) acres in area on which an active farming operation is conducted, provided that no more than five hundred (500) cubic yards shall be stored at one time; no retail sales to the general public shall be conducted; no processing shall occur on the site; and no sign associated with such activity shall be allowed 	P 	P 
Museums and art galleries when not operated by a public agency 	C 	C 
Personal watercraft rentals 	C 	C 
Private schools having curriculums similar to public schools 	C 	C 
Private sewage treatment facilities 	C 	C 
Public elementary, intermediate and high schools, colleges and universities; day nurseries in connection with public or private elementary schools or religious uses 	P 	P 
Public parks, recreational areas, botanical and zoological gardens, golf courses, marinas and other public buildings and uses 	P 	P 
Public utility installations and substations; provided offices, storage or maintenance facilities shall not be permitted; and provided, further, that utilities substations other than individual transformers, shall be surrounded by Category V screening, solid except for entrances and exits; and provided also, transformer vaults for underground utilities and the like shall require Category I screening, solid except for access openings 	P 	P 
Public utility transformer stations and major transmission lines and towers (50,000 volts or more) 	C 	C 
Recreation and amusement facilities of an outdoor nature other than those specified as principal uses, which may be partially or temporarily enclosed on a seasonal basis, with the approval of city council 	C 	C 
Recreation facilities other than those of an outdoor nature 	C 	C 
Recreational and amusement activities, as specified in and subject to the provisions of subsection (c) 	P 	P 
Recreational campgrounds 	C 	C 
Recreational resort community 	C 	C 
Religious uses 	C 	C 
Repair of agricultural equipment 	C 	C 
Residential care for seniors, provided that no more than two (2) employees including a bona fide resident of the dwelling shall be permitted 	P 	P 
Retail sales of garden supplies, equipment, and material, as a subsidiary use to a plant nursery, provided that the sales are enclosed and limited to a maximum floor area of five hundred (500) square feet 	C 	C 
Riding academies and horses for hire or boarding, including incidental sales of tack, riding apparel and similar items used in the principal activity, limited to one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area within an existing barn used in conjunction with the principal activity; provided that not more than three (3) riding animals shall be kept for each acre of land within the site and that all buildings housing animals, and all corrals in which animals are kept or assembled in concentrated groups, shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from any property line. 	P 	P 
Shelter for farm employees 	C 	C 
Short term rental 	C 	C 
Short term rental within the Sandbridge Special Service District* 	P 	P 
Short term rental within a STR Overlay District 	P 	P 
Small wireless facilities meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 	P 
Small wireless facilities not placed on existing structures 	C 	C 
Storage and maintenance installations for public utilities 	C 	C 
Television or other broadcasting stations 	C 	C 
Wells, water reservoirs, and water control structures 	P 	P 
Wildlife rehabilitation centers 	C 	C 
Wind energy conversion systems, freestanding, except as provided below 	P 	P 
Wind energy conversion systems, freestanding, in excess of one (1) 	C 	C 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, except as provided below 	P 	P 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, in excess of one (1) 	C 	C 
*Sandbridge Special Service District defined in City Code section 35.1-3. 
 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to principal uses and structures, including but not limited to, an accessory activity operated for profit in a residential dwelling unit where (i) there is no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or any visible or audible evidence detectable from outside the building lot, either permanently or intermittently, of the conduct of such business except for one (1) nonilluminated sign not more than one (1) square foot in area mounted flat against the residence; (ii) no traffic is generated, including traffic by commercial delivery vehicles, by such activity in greater volumes than would normally be expected in the neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such activity is met off the street and other than in a required front yard; (iii) the activity is conducted on the premises which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner, and no person other than members of the immediate family occupying such dwelling units is employed in the activity; (iv) such activity is conducted only in the principal structure on the lot; (v) there are no sales to the general public of products or merchandise from the home, except for agricultural products, or agricultural-related products, incidental to an agricultural operation on which the dwelling unit is located; and (vi) the activity is specifically designed or conducted to permit no more than one (1) patron, customer, or pupil to be present on the premises at any one time. Notwithstanding the provisions of clauses (ii) and (vi) hereof, ministers, marriage commissioners and other persons authorized by law to perform the rites of marriage may permit a maximum of eight (8) persons on the premises at any one time in connection with the performance of such rites, provided that all other requirements of subdivision (b)(2) are met. The following are specifically prohibited as accessory activities: Convalescent or nursing homes, tourist homes, massage or tattoo parlors, body piercing establishments, radio or television repair shops, auto repair shops, or similar establishments. Rental of rooms in a dwelling or the entire dwelling thirty (30) consecutive days or more is an accessory use to the dwelling. 
(c)  Agritourism activities. Agritourism activities at which no more than two hundred fifty (250) persons, exclusive of residents of the property and employees at the activity, are in attendance at any one time shall be allowed as principal uses under the following conditions; provided, however, that activities involving the planting or harvesting of agricultural products shall not be subject to any limitation of the number of persons in attendance: 
(1)  Such activities, including all vehicular parking, shall be held on the property of an active agricultural operation, where such agricultural operation is the principal use of the property; 
(2)  Vehicular parking shall not be allowed on any public street, or within one hundred (100) feet of any residence, except a residence located on the site of the activity. There shall be a designated vehicular parking area of sufficient area to accommodate the anticipated number of motor vehicles on the site at such events; 
(3)  Such activities shall be carried on only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and sunset; 
(4)  Signs shall be nonilluminated and limited to one sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area; 
(5)  No outdoor amplified music shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of any residence, except a residence located on the site of the activity, and no such music shall be permitted at any time before 10:00 a.m. 
In the event any provision of this subsection conflicts or is otherwise inconsistent with any other provision of this ordinance, the provisions of this subsection shall control; provided, however, that no use otherwise permitted hereunder which constitutes, or requires the excavation of, a borrow pit, as defined in section 111, shall be allowed except by conditional use permit. 
(d)  Sales of agricultural products and agricultural-related products. The sale of agricultural products or agriculture-related products, other than as allowed by subsection (b), shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Such sales shall be conducted upon, and as an integral part of, an active agricultural operation owned or operated by the same person or entity conducting such sales; and 
(2)  No farm stand or other building or structure in which merchandise is offered for sale to the general public shall be: (i) greater than twelve (12) feet in height, as measured from ground level to eaves, (ii) located within fifty (50) feet of the property line abutting any street, or (iii) open for business except between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(e)  Definitions. The following terms shall be defined as set forth herein: 
(1)  "Agricultural operation" means any operation devoted to the bona fide production of crops, animals, or fowl, including the production of fruits and vegetables of all kinds, meat, dairy, and poultry products, nuts, tobacco, nursery, and floral products; and the production and harvest of products from silvicultural or aquacultural activity, but does not include the processing of agricultural products or the above-ground application of sewage sludge. 
(2)  "Agricultural product" means any produce, livestock, poultry, aquacultural, horticultural, floricultural, viticultural, silvicultural, or other farm crops. 
(3)  "Agricultural-related product" means any product that is produced as an incident of an agricultural operation. The term includes honey, maple syrup, jams, jellies, preserves, relishes, juices, cider, milk, ice cream and other dairy products, peanut butter, cheese, eggs, breads and other baked goods, fresh seafood, poultry and other meats, ornamental plants, flowers, pottery, hanging baskets, wood carvings, potholders and other hand-crafted items having an agricultural theme, and similar items. In addition, bottled water, soda and items of apparel displaying exclusively the name of the farm stand or other identifying information concerning the owner or operator of the farm stand shall be allowed, provided that the display of such apparel shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the floor area of the establishment, 
(4)  "Agritourism activity" means any activity carried out on a farm or ranch that allows members of the general public, for recreational, entertainment, or educational purposes, to view or enjoy rural activities, including farming, wineries, ranching, historical, cultural, harvest-your-own activities, equestrian events, or natural activities and attractions. 
An activity shall not be deemed an agritourism activity solely by reason of its taking place on a farm or ranch. "Agritourism activity" does not include the following types of activity, among others not specifically listed, but such activities may be allowed with a conditional use permit for outdoor recreation or amusement or as a special event as defined in section 4-1 of the City Code: (i) activities involving motor vehicle competitions or other activities involving the use of motor vehicles, other than farm vehicles; or (ii) the rental of a farm or ranch, or portion thereof, for events such as weddings, wedding receptions, parties, retreats, and other activities on a regular basis, unless such events themselves consist primarily of participation in an agritourism activity. 
(5)  "Farm" or "ranch" means one (1) or more areas of land used for the production, cultivation, growing, harvesting or processing of agricultural products, or the raising or keeping of livestock. 
(f)  Special restrictions in Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1). No use or structure shall be permitted on any property located within Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1) unless such use is designated as compatible in APZ-1 in Table 2 ("Air Installations Compatible Use Zones Land Use Compatibility in Accident Potential Zones") of section 1804; provided, however, that any use or structure not designated as compatible shall be permitted as a replacement of the same use or structure if the replacement use or structure is of equal or lesser density or intensity than the original use or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2041, 3-5-91; Ord. No. 2118, 3-24-92; Ord. No. 2221, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 2282, 6-28-94; Ord. No. 2268, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2427, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2459, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 2461, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 2495, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 2505, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 2513, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 2566, 11-23-99; Ord. No. 2582, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 2627, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 2704, 6-25-02; Ord. No. 2788, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 2883, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 2907, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2976, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 3000, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 3046, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 3102, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 3115, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 3167, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 3323, 1-14-14; Ord. No. 3331, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3354, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 3366, 8-19-14; Ord. No. 3390, 1-6-15; Ord. No. 3403, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3423, 7-7-15; Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3468, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 3477, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 3514, 7-11-17; Ord. No. 3578, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 402. - Dimensional requirements. 
The following chart lists the requirements within the AG-1 and AG-2 Agricultural Districts for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing, and height regulations for single-family dwellings. Note, however, that minimum lot area, as stated in section 402(a)(1), shall not be used to calculate density allowance. Allowable density shall be determined in accordance with section 402(b). 
(a)  For single-family dwellings: 
		Agricultural Districts 
		AG-1 	AG-2 
   (1) 	Minimum lot area: 	1 acre 	1 acre 
   (2) 	Minimum lot width: 	150 feet 	150 feet 
   (3) 	Minimum front yard setback: 	50 feet 	50 feet 
   (4) 	Minimum side yard setback: 	20 feet 	20 feet 
   (5) 	Minimum side yard adjacent to a street, except as specified in 402(a)(8) below: 	30 feet 	30 feet 
   (6) 	Minimum rear yard setback: 	20 feet 	20 feet 
   (7) 	Maximum height, except as provided in subsection (a1): 	35 feet 	35 feet 
   (8) 	Yard setback that adjoins a major street or right-of-way designated on the official transportation plan. 	50 feet 	50 feet 
 
(a1)  The maximum height for single-family dwellings in subdivisions of ten (10) or more lots created after the date of adoption of this subsection, or for single-family dwellings having side and rear yard setbacks at least five (5) feet greater than required, shall be forty-two (42) feet. 
(b)  Residential density. The allowable density on each tract of land as existing on the effective date of this ordinance [June 28, 1994] shall be one (1) dwelling unit for each fifteen (15) acres of land as described in the comprehensive plan as soil area #1 and soil area #2. Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the use by right of a lot lawfully created on or prior to the effective date of this ordinance for the purpose of constructing one (1) single-family dwelling, provided that such lot shall be connected to the public sewerage system or meet the requirements of the 1982 Onsite Sewer Regulations established by the Virginia Health Department. Such dwellings must comply with the current Health Departments regulations, and section 5B.5(b) and section 5B.5(d) of the Site Plan Ordinance. Additionally, any lot fifteen (15) acres or larger meeting the requirements of section 200(a) of this ordinance lawfully created on or prior to the effective date of this ordinance may be subdivided of right into a total of two (2) building sites provided that each lot satisfies all state and local development regulations. 
The following chart lists the requirements within the AG-1 and AG-2 Agricultural Districts for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing, maximum lot coverage and height regulations for uses and structures other than dwellings. 
(c)  For uses other than dwellings: 
		Agricultural Districts 
		AG-1 	AG-2 
   (1) 	Minimum lot area: 	  3 acres 	  3 acres 
   (2) 	Minimum lot width: 	150 feet 	150 feet 
   (3) 	Minimum front yard setback: 	 50 feet 	 50 feet 
   (4) 	The setback for roadside stands for any yard adjacent to street shall be 20 feet. 
   (5) 	Minimum side yard setback: 	 20 feet 	 20 feet 
   (6) 	Minimum rear yard setback: 	 20 feet 	 20 feet 
   (7) 	Maximum lot coverage: 	 15 percent 	 15 percent 
   (8) 	The setback for any yard that adjoins a major street or right-of-way designated on the official transportation plan shall be 50 feet. 		
   (9) 	There shall be no maximum height requirements for uses other than dwellings in the Agricultural Districts except that no building or other structure shall exceed the height limit established by section 202(b) regarding air navigation. 
 
(Ord. No. 2041, 3-5-91; Ord. No. 2282, 6-28-94; Ord. No. 2371, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 2669, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 2767, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 3572, 11-20-18) 
Editor's note— The addition of subsection (b) by Ord. No. 2282 implicitly redesignated former subsection (b) as (c). 
_____ 
Sec. 403. - Sign regulations. 
Signs within the AG-1 and AG-2 Agricultural Districts shall be permitted as follows: 
(a)  Except as may be permitted by the conditional use permit authorizing a specific use, one sign not greater than sixteen (16) square feet in area at each principal entrance or frontage of any use shall be permitted, except for religious uses, for which the maximum area per sign shall be thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(b)  A maximum of four (4) signs located on property for sale, lease or rent, provided that no such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, and that not more than one such sign shall be erected for each one hundred (100) feet of lot line adjoining a public street. Any property having less lot line adjoining a street may have one (1) sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet of surface area. 
(c)  Signs displayed on any farm or ranch engaged in the production, cultivation, growing, harvesting or processing of agricultural products, or the raising or keeping of livestock; provided that no such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, that not more than one (1) such sign shall be erected for each five hundred (500) feet of lot line adjoining a public street, and that such signs not be displayed for more than six (6) months in any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2041, 3-5-91; Ord. No. 3000, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 404. - Parking regulations. 
Parking shall be required for all uses and structures permitted in the AG-1 and AG-2 Agricultural Districts in accordance with section 203. 
(Ord. No. 2041, 3-5-91)  
Sec. 405. - Alternative residential development pursuant to conditional use permits. 
Except as provided in section 1806, as an alternative to the residential development permitted by right in the agricultural districts, the city council may grant a conditional use permit to allow residential development at a density greater than that which is permitted by right. The following regulations shall apply to residential development outside of the Interfacility Traffic Area in the AG-1 and AG-2 Agricultural Districts pursuant to this section: 
(a)  Council may attach conditions to the use permit governing the number of residential lots allowed on the tract. In so doing, council shall apply the following development criteria that are consistent with the adopted provisions of the comprehensive plan: 
(1)  On land that is nearly level well-drained or moderately well-drained soils, as described in the comprehensive plan, technical report as soil area #1, with a seasonal high-water table from one and five-tenths (1.5) feet below grade as determined by the Virginia Department of Health and meeting the density allowances in section 200(a) of this ordinance, the maximum density shall be one (1) dwelling unit for each five (5) acres of land. 
(2)  On land that is nearly level with somewhat poorly, poorly, or very poorly drained soils, as described in the comprehensive plan, technical report as soil area #2, with a seasonal high-water table ranging from zero (0) to one and five-tenths (1.5) feet below grade as determined by the Virginia Department of Health which occurs at or above an elevation of five and five-tenths (5.5) feet, based on National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 ('72 ADJ), and meeting the density allowances in section 200(a) of this ordinance, the maximum density shall be one (1) dwelling unit for each ten (10) acres of land. 
(3)  Evaluation of the soils of a parcel for the purpose of determining the density shall be conducted by a certified soil scientist with confirmation of the results provided by the director of agriculture. 
(4)  Development proposals shall be in substantial conformance with all applicable provisions of the plan's rural residential development guidelines. 
(5)  The annual rate of development shall be restricted so as to minimize burdens placed upon the rural public infrastructure. 
(6)  On land with soil compositions as described in section 405(a)(2) and which is less than five and one-half (5.5) feet above mean sea level (MSL), there shall be no development and no density credit shall be allowed. 
(7)  The density of development may be reduced below the maximum densities specified in sections 405(a)(1) and (2) if, in the council's determination, the proposed development may present an undue adverse impact on agricultural operations or if the location of the property and its proximity to public infrastructure and services is not suitable for such maximum densities. 
(8)  A flag lot may be created, in accordance with the chart below, in which the lot is connected to a public street with road frontage having a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and in which all other relevant requirements of the subdivision regulations and zoning ordinance are met. The following chart provides the maximum number of lots which may be created in such manner as part of a subdivision of lots from an existing parcel: 
Number of 
Subdivided 
Lots Created 	Maximum 
Number 
of Flag 
Lots 
 1 to 10 lots 	1 
11 to 20 lots 	2 
21 to 30 lots 	3 
More than 31 lots 	4 
 
In no case shall more than four (4) such lots be created. 
(9)  For residential subdivisions of twenty-five (25) lots or less, there shall be no more than two (2) access points on the existing public road system, including driveways and new roadways; and for subdivisions of over twenty-five (25) lots, there shall be no more than three (3) such access points. 
(Ord. No. 2041, 3-5-91; Ord. No. 2221, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 2282, 6-28-94; Ord. No. 2415, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 2669, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 3006, 1-8-08)  
ARTICLE 5. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 500. - Legislative intent. 
The purpose of the Residential Districts is to provide areas for residential housing types at a variety of densities, provide for harmonious neighborhoods located so as to create compatibility and to provide for certain other necessary and related uses within residential communities but limited as to maintain neighborhood compatibility. The R-40, R-30 and R-20 Residential Districts provide for larger minimum lot sizes for use in areas where lower residential densities are necessary to address environmental and public facilities constraints as recommended by the comprehensive plan. The R-15, R-10 and R-7.5 Residential Districts provide for medium density single-family residential development in areas where these densities are recommended by the comprehensive plan. The R-5D Residential Duplex District is created in recognition of the existence of developed areas where single-family and semidetached dwellings exist on lots averaging five thousand (5,000) square feet in area and where duplexes exist on lots of ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area. It is not the intention to create additional R-5D Districts or to enlarge the limits of existing R-5D Districts. The R-5R Residential Resort District is created in recognition of the existence of developed areas where single-family and duplex dwellings exist on lots of less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of area and where the character of the neighborhood includes both permanent yearround residents as well as seasonal residents. It is not the intention to create additional R-5R Districts or to enlarge the limits of existing R-5R Districts. The R-5S Residential Single-Family District is created in recognition of the existence of developed areas where single-family dwellings exist on lots with fifty- and sixty-foot frontages. It is not the intention to create additional R-5S Districts or to enlarge the limits of existing R-5S Districts. The R-2.5 Residential Townhouse District provides for the development of residential townhouses in areas where such development is recommended by the comprehensive plan.  
Sec. 501. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Principal and conditional uses. The following chart lists those uses permitted within the R-40 through R-2.5 Residential Districts. Those uses and structures in the respective residential districts shall be permitted as either principal uses indicated by a "P" or as conditional uses indicated by a "C." Uses and structures indicated by an "X" shall be prohibited in the respective districts. No uses or structures other than as specified shall be permitted. 
	Residential Districts 
Uses 	R-40 	R-30 	R-20 	R-15 	R-10 	R-7.5 	R-5D 	R-5R 	R-5S 	R-2.5 
Agricultural and horticultural uses except for the keeping of poultry, livestock, fish ponds and fish hatcheries 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Borrow pit 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Cemetery, columbarium, crematory and mausoleum 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Child care centers and child care education centers in conjunction with public or private elementary schools 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Colleges and universities, public 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Columbarium located in cemetery 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 
Communication towers meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communication towers meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Communication towers other than those meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communication towers other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Community centers 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Commuter or satellite parking when conducted in conjunction with another conditional use for which a minimum of thirty (30) parking spaces is required 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Day-care centers and child care education centers in religious uses 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Dormitories, student provided that they are located within a one mile radius of an established college or university 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Dwellings, attached 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 
Dwellings, duplex 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	P 	X 	X 
Dwellings, semidetached 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	P 	X 	X 
Dwellings, single-family 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 
Family day-care homes 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Foster homes 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Flex suites, subject to the provisions of section 507 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 
Fraternity and sorority houses provided that they are located within a one-mile radius of an established college or university 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Golf courses, nonilluminated, including par 3 but not miniature, with a minimum area of 10 acres, together with such uses which are incidental to golf courses, provided that such uses shall be designed and scaled to meet only the requirements of the members, guests, or users of the golf course, and no signs or other indications of such uses shall be visible from any public way 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Group homes 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Home-based wildlife rehabilitation facilities 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Home occupation 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Home sharing meeting the requirements of section 209.6 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Horse stables, including barns or other structures built for the purpose of boarding horses, provided that no stable or barn shall be located within 300 feet of a property line 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Hospitals and sanitariums 	X 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Housing for seniors and disabled persons 	X 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Kennels, residential 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Marinas, noncommercial and community boat docks 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Museums and art galleries, private 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Personal watercraft rentals 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		C 	C 
Private sewage treatment facilities 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Public parks, recreational areas, botanical and zoological gardens, and other public buildings and uses 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Public utility installations and substations; provided offices, storage or maintenance facilities shall not be permitted; and provided, further, that utilities substations other than individual transformers, shall be surrounded by Category V screening, solid except for entrances and exits; and provided also, transformer vaults for underground utilities and the like shall require Category I screening, solid except for access openings 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Recreation and amusement facilities of an outdoor nature other than those specified as principal uses, which may be partially or temporarily enclosed on a seasonal basis, with the approval of city council, except that riding academies and recreational campgrounds shall not be allowed. Such facilities may include permanently enclosed components, provided such components do not exceed a total of twenty (20) percent of the area encompassed by the conditional use permit and the activities conducted therein are identical to those conducted outdoors or specifically permitted by the conditional use permit 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Religious uses 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Residential care for seniors, provided that no more than two (2) employees including a bona fide resident of the dwelling shall be permitted 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 
Schools, private when having academic curriculums similar to public schools 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Schools, public 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Short term rental 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Short term rental within the Sandbridge Special Service District* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Short term rental within a STR Overlay District 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Small wireless facilities not placed on existing structures 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Storage or maintenance installation for public utilities 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Television or other broadcasting stations 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Theaters for live production 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Wind energy conversion systems, freestanding, except as provided below 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Wind energy conversion systems, freestanding, in excess of one (1) 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, except as provided below 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, in excess of one (1) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
*Sandbridge Special Service District defined in City Code section 35.1-3. 
 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to principal uses and structures and where such accessory structures do not exceed the height of the principal structure and, in all residential zoning districts, except for R-30 and R-40, do not exceed five hundred (500) square feet of floor area or twenty (20) percent of the floor area of the principal structure, whichever is greater. In the R-30 and R-40 residential zoning districts, accessory uses and structures shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the floor area of the principal structure. Such accessory uses and structures include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Detached guest house and limited use accessory dwelling unit within the R-40 District only; 
(2)  Bees; 
(3)  Swimming pools, boat houses, piers, etc.; 
(4)  In connection with agricultural use, no more than one roadside stand for sale of agricultural products produced on the premises; provided that no such stand shall exceed five hundred (500) square feet in floor area nor be erected within twenty (20) feet of the property line fronting any street; 
(5)  An accessory activity operated for profit in a residential dwelling unit where (i) there is no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or any visible or audible evidence detectable from outside the building lot, either permanently or intermittently, of the conduct of such business except for one (1) nonilluminated sign not more than one (1) square foot in area mounted flat against the residence; (ii) no traffic is generated, including traffic by commercial delivery vehicles, by such activity in greater volumes than would normally be expected in the neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such activity is met off the street and other than in a required front yard; (iii) the activity is conducted on the premises which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner, and no person other than members of the immediate family occupying such dwelling units is employed in the activity; (iv) such activity is conducted only in the principal structure on the lot; (v) there are no sales to the general public of products or merchandise from the home; and (vi) the activity is specifically designed or conducted to permit no more than one (1) patron, customer, or pupil to be present on the premises at any one time. Notwithstanding the provisions of clauses (ii) and (vi) hereof, ministers, marriage commissioners and other persons authorized by law to perform the rites of marriage may permit a maximum of eight (8) persons on the premises at any one time in connection with the performance of such rites, provided that all other requirements of subdivision (b)(5) are met. The following are specifically prohibited as accessory activities: Convalescent or nursing homes, tourist homes, massage or tattoo parlors, body piercing establishments, radio or television repair shops, auto repair shops, or similar establishments. 
(6)  Temporary family health care structures, in accordance with the provisions of section 209.2. 
(7)  Rental of rooms in a dwelling or the entire dwelling thirty (30) consecutive days or more is an accessory use to the dwelling. 
(c)  Special restrictions in Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1). No use or structure shall be permitted on any property located within Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1) or the Clear Zone unless such use is designated as Compatible in APZ-1 or the Clear Zone, as the case may be, in Table 2 ("Air Installations Compatible Use Zones Land Use Compatibility in Accident Potential Zones") of section 1804; provided, however, that any use or structure not designated as Compatible shall be permitted as a replacement of the same use or structure if the replacement use or structure is of equal or lesser density or intensity than the original use or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2002, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 2111, 1-14-92; Ord. No. 2161, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2268, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2368, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2459, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 2463, 12-16-97; Ord. No. 2495, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 2513, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 2566, 11-23-99; Ord. No. 2627, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 2704, 6-25-02; Ord. No. 2907, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2922, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2976, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 3000, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 3046, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 3102, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 3111, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 3137, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 3147, 7-13-10; Ord. No. 3150, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 3211, 12-6-11; Ord. No. 3403, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3441, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3468, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 3477, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 3514, 7-11-17; Ord. No. 3526, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 3578, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 502. - Dimensional requirements. 
The following chart lists the requirements within the R-40 through R-5S Residential Districts for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing and maximum lot coverage for single-family dwellings. 
(a)  For single-family dwellings: 
	Residential Districts 
	R-40 	R-30 	R-20 	R-15 	R-10 	R-7.5 	R-5D 	R-5R 	R-5S 
 (1) 
Minimum lot area in square feet: 	40,000 	30,000 	20,000 	15,000 	10,000 	7,500 	5,000 	5,000 	5,000 
 (2) 
Minimum lot area outside of water, marsh, or wetlands: 	24,000 	24,000 	20,000 	15,000 	10,000 	7,500 	5,000 	5,000 	5,000 
 (3) 
Minimum lot width in feet: 	125 	100 	100 	100 	80 	75 	50 	50 	50 
 (4) 
Minimum front yard setback in feet: 	50 	50 	50 	30 	30 	30 	20 	20 	20 
(4.1) 
Minimum front yard setback for lots fronting on the east side of Sandfiddler Road in feet: 	NA 	NA 	30 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 
 (5) 
Minimum front yard setback when adjacent to a 40-foot right-of-way created in accordance with section 4.1(m) of the subdivision ordinance in feet: 	55 	55 	55 	35 	35 	35 	25 	25 	25 
 (6) 
Except as provided in subdivision (6.1), minimum side yard setback except when adjacent to a street in feet: 	20 	15 	15 	10 	10 	5 & 10 	8 	8 	5 & 10 
(6.1) 
Minimum side yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street: 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 
 (7) 
Minimum side yard setback adjacent to a street in feet: 	30 	30 	30 	30 	30 	30 	18 	18 	15 
 (8) 
Minimum side yard setback when adjacent to a 40-foot right-of-way created in accordance with section 4.1(m) of the subdivision ordinance in feet: 	35 	35 	35 	35 	35 	35 	23 	23 	20 
 (9) 
Minimum rear yard setback except for accessory structures in feet: 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 
 (10) 
Except as provided in subdivision (10.1), minimum rear yard setback for accessory structures in feet: 	20 	15 	15 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 
(10.1) 
Minimum rear yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street: 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 
 (11) 
As an exception, the minimum setback in any yard adjacent to the public beach of the Atlantic Ocean for any structures, except in-ground swimming pools, shall be 30 feet in the R-5R District. For purpose of this section, "beach" shall include any bulkheaded area contiguous to, and any unimproved public right-of-way within, the sandy beach: 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	30 	NA 
(11.1) 
Minimum setback on through lots for accessory structures that are physically located to the rear of the principal structure in feet: 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 
 (12) 
Maximum lot coverage in percent: 	25 	25 	25 	30 	30 	35 	40 	35 	40 
 (13) 
Maximum total of building floor area and area of garages greater than 500 square feet expressed as a percentage of maximum allowable lot coverage: 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	200% 	NA 
 (14) 
Maximum area of impervious cover, as defined in 103 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance expressed as a percentage of the lot size: 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	60% 	NA 
 
The following chart lists the requirements within the R-5D Residential District for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing and maximum lot coverage for duplex and semidetached dwellings. 
(b)  For duplex and semidetached dwellings in the R-5D Residential District: 
	Duplexes 	Semidetached 
 (1) 
Minimum lot area 	10,000 square feet 	5,000 square feet 
 (2) 
Minimum lot width 	75 feet 	35 feet 
 (3) 
Minimum front yard 	20 feet 	20 feet 
 (4) 
Minimum front yard setback when adjacent to a 40-foot right-of-way created in accordance with section 4.1(m) of the subdivision ordinance 	25 feet 	25 feet 
 (5) 
Minimum side yard except when adjacent to a street 	10 feet 	10 feet 
 (6) 
Minimum side yard when adjacent to a street 	20 feet 	20 feet 
 (6.1) 
Minimum side yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street 	5 feet 	5 feet 
 (7) 
Minimum side yard setback when adjacent to a 40-foot right-of-way created in accordance with section 4.1(m) of the subdivision ordinance 	25 feet 	25 feet 
 (7.1) 
Minimum rear yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street 	5 feet 	5 feet 
 (8) 
Minimum rear yard 	10 feet 	10 feet 
 (9) 
As an exception, the setback for any yard adjacent to the public beach of the Atlantic Ocean for any structures shall be 30 feet in the R-5R District. For purpose of this section, "beach" shall include any bulkheaded area contiguous to, and any unimproved public right-of-way within, the sandy beach 		
 (10) 
Maximum lot coverage 	 35 percent 	 35 percent 
 (11) 
Maximum building floor area expressed as a percentage of maximum allowable lot coverage 	200 percent 	200 percent 
 
The following chart lists the requirements within the R-5R Residential District for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing and maximum lot coverage for duplex and semidetached dwellings. 
(b1)  For duplex and semidetached dwellings in the R-5R Residential District: 
	Duplexes 	Semidetached 
 (1) 
Minimum lot area 	10,000 square feet 	5,000 square feet 
 (2) 
Minimum lot width 	75 feet 	35 feet 
 (3) 
Minimum front yard 	20 feet 	20 feet 
 (4) 
Minimum front yard setback when adjacent to a 40-foot right-of-way created in accordance with section 4.1(m) of the subdivision ordinance 	25 feet 	25 feet 
 (5) 
Minimum side yard except when adjacent to a street 	10 feet 	10 feet 
 (6) 
Minimum side yard when adjacent to a street 	20 feet 	20 feet 
 (6.1) 
Minimum side yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street 	5 feet 	5 feet 
 (7) 
Minimum side yard setback when adjacent to a 40-foot right-of-way created in accordance with section 4.1(m) of the subdivision ordinance 	25 feet 	25 feet 
 (7.1) 
Minimum rear yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street 	5 feet 	5 feet 
 (8) 
Minimum rear yard 	20 feet 	20 feet 
 (9) 
As an exception, the minimum setback in any yard adjacent to the public beach of the Atlantic Ocean for any structures, except in-ground swimming pools, shall be 30 feet in the R-5R District. For purpose of this section, "beach" shall include any bulkheaded area contiguous to, and any unimproved public right-of-way within, the sandy beach 		
 (10) 
Maximum lot coverage 	35 percent 	35 percent 
 (11) 
Maximum total of building floor area and area of garages greater than 1,000 square feet expressed as a percentage of maximum allowable lot coverage 	200 percent 	200 percent 
 (12) 
Maximum area of impervious cover, as defined in 103 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance, expressed as a percentage of lot size 	60 percent 	60 percent 
 
The following chart lists the requirements within the R-2.5 Residential Districts for minimum lot area, average lot area, lot width, yard spacing, maximum lot coverage and maximum number of units that can be attached for attached dwellings (townhouses). 
(c)  For attached dwellings (townhouses): 
		Residential Districts 
		R-2.5 
 (1) 	Minimum lot area 	1,400 square feet 
 (2) 	Average minimum lot area 	2,500 square feet 
 (3) 	Minimum lot width, interior lots 	20 feet 
 (4) 	Minimum lot width, exterior lots 	30 feet 
 (5) 	Minimum front yard 	30 feet 
 (6) 	Minimum front yard where all required parking is provided in the rear 	15 feet 
 (7) 	Minimum side yard exterior lots when not adjacent to a street 	10 feet 
 (7.1) 	Minimum side yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street 	5 feet 
 (8) 	Minimum rear yard dwellings 	20 feet 
 (9) 	Minimum rear yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street 	5 feet 
 (10) 	Maximum lot coverage 	40 percent 
 (11) 	Maximum number of attached dwellings that may be constructed in any one (1) group, without required side yards 	6 units 
 (12) 	Any side yards adjacent to a street shall be a minimum of 30 feet, except when adjacent to a 40-foot right-of-way created in accordance with section 4.1(m) of the subdivision ordinance, then a 35-foot side yard is required 	
 
The following chart lists the requirements within the R-40 through R-2.5 Residential Districts for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing and maximum lot coverage for uses and structures other than dwellings. 
(d)  For uses other than dwellings: 
		Residential Districts 
		R-40 	R-30 	R-20 	R-15 	R-10 	R-7.5 	R-5D 	R-5R 	R-5R 	R-2.5 
 (1) 	Minimum lot area in square feet: 	40,000 	30,000 	20,000 	15,000 	10,000 	10,000 	10,000 	10,000 	10,000 	10,000 
 (2) 	Minimum lot area outside of water marsh, or wetlands: 	24,000 	24,000 	20,000 	15,000 	10,000 	10,000 	10,000 	10,000 	10,000 	10,000 
 (3) 	Minimum lot width in feet: 	125 	100 	100 	100 	100 	100 	100 	100 	100 	100 
 (4) 	Minimum front yard setback in feet: 	 50 	 50 	 50 	 30 	 30 	 30 	 30 	 30 	 30 	 30 
 (5) 	Minimum front yard setback in feet when adjacent to a 40-foot right-of-way created in accordance with section 4.1(m) of the subdivision ordinance in feet: 	 55 	 55 	 55 	 55 	 35 	 35 	 35 	 35 	 35 	 35 
 (6) 	Minimum side yard setback except when adjacent to a street in feet: 	 25 	 25 	 25 	 25 	 20 	 15 	 15 	 15 	 15 	 15 
 (7) 	Minimum rear yard setback in feet: 	 25 	 25 	 25 	 25 	 20 	 15 	 15 	 15 	 15 	 15 
 (8) 	As an exception, the setback for any yard adjacent to the public beach of the Atlantic Ocean for any structure shall be 30 feet in the R-5R District. For purposes of this section, "beach" shall include any bulkheaded area contiguous to, and any unimproved public right-of-way within, the sandy beach: 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	30 	NA 	NA 
 (9) 	Maximum lot coverage in percent: 	25 	25 	25 	30 	30 	40 	40 	40 	40 	40 
 (10) 	Any side yards adjacent to a street shall be a minimum of 30 feet. 										
 
(e)  Nonconforming lots: 
(1)  Where a lot has less than the minimum requirements for the R-5S Residential District and said lot has continuously been a lot of record, in single and separate ownership from adjacent property, prior to and since the passage of this ordinance, said lot may be developed for any purpose permitted within the R-5S Residential District. 
(2)  However, if the owner of a lot which does not meet the minimum requirements of the R-5S Residential District, is the owner of or becomes the owner of another substandard lot adjacent to it and located in the same R-5S Residential District, he is not entitled to the exception in (1) above. In this instance, the owner of the two (2) or more adjacent substandard lots must combine the two (2) or more lots to form one which will meet or more closely approximate the frontage and area requirements of the ordinance applicable within the R-5S Residential District. 
(3)  The owner of contiguous substandard lots is prohibited from conveying one (1) or more of the substandard lots with the result that both the grantors and the grantee possess lots entitled to an exception from the minimum lot requirements. 
(4)  Status as a single and separate owner may not be acquired after enactment of this ordinance by selling a parcel and reducing the remainder below the minimum lot requirements nor may an owner of several contiguous nonconforming parcels combine them so as to leave a substandard lot, and assert the right to exception in (1) above. 
For the purposes of this section, lots are not regarded as adjacent where they form an "L", part of one being contiguous to the other. 
(Ord. No. 1914, 9-11-89; Ord. No. 1977, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2096, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 2253, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 2675, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2735, 1-28-03; Ord. No. 2929, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 2937, 4-11-06; Ord. No. 3118, 3-9-10; Ord. No. 3192, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 3392, 1-20-15)  
Sec. 503. - Height regulations. 
The following shall constitute the maximum height requirements for all structures within all Residential Districts. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), the maximum height for all buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(b)  The maximum height for single-family dwellings within the R-40, R-30, R-20 or R-15 Residential District in subdivisions of ten (10) or more lots created after the date of adoption of this subsection shall be forty-two (42) feet. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the above, no building or other structure shall exceed the height limit established by section 202(b) regarding air navigation. 
(Ord. No. 2767, 6-10-03)  
Sec. 504. - Sign regulations. 
In all Residential Districts, signs shall be permitted as follows: 
(a)  For residential subdivisions, one (1) sign not greater than thirty-two (32) square feet in area at each principal entrance or frontage of any use. 
(b)  A maximum of two (2) signs located on property for sale, lease or rent, provided that no such sign shall exceed eight (8) square feet in area. 
(c)  In the case of subdivisions under construction or development, one (1) sign not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in surface area at each principal entrance or frontage for a period of two (2) years following the initiation of construction or development. Upon the expiration of such period, there shall be permitted one (1) sign not exceeding sixty-four (64) square feet in surface area for an additional period of three (3) years; provided, however, that any such sign shall be removed when ninety (90) percent of the property has been sold or leased, or upon the expiration of five (5) years following the initiation of construction or development, whichever first occurs. 
(Ord. No. 1966, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 505. - Parking regulations. 
Parking shall be required for all uses and structures permitted in the R-40 through R-2.5 Residential Districts in accordance with section 203. No area within a garage, or an enclosed or covered space shall be counted toward meeting off-street parking requirements for dwelling units in the residential districts.  
Sec. 506. - North End Overlay District. 
(a)  District boundaries. The boundaries of the North End Overlay District shall be as designated on the official zoning map of the city. 
(b)  Application of regulations. The designation of any property as lying within the North End Overlay District shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the underlying R-5R Residential Resort District classification of such property. All such property shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this section as well as to all other regulations applicable to it, and to the extent that any provision of this section conflicts with any other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this section shall control. 
(c)  Special regulations for development. Permitted uses and structures and dimensional requirements for uses and structures located within the North End Overlay District shall be as specified in sections 501 and 502, respectively; provided, however, that two single-family dwellings may be located on a single lot if the following standards are met: 
(1)  Dimensional requirements generally. Unless otherwise specified herein or in subsection (d), dimensional requirements shall be those applicable to duplex dwellings in the R-5R Residential District [section 502 (b1)]; 
(2)  Building separation. There shall be a minimum separation of sixteen (16) feet between dwellings on the lot. Such space shall be unencumbered by any structures or improvements, other than fences, greater than sixteen (16) inches in height above ground elevation; 
(3)  Height. No dwelling shall be greater than thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2½) stories in height, as measured from the lowest grade within six (6) feet of the building perimeter to the highest point of the building. Building walls shall be a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet high, as measured from the lowest grade within six (6) feet of the building perimeter to the primary roof rafter bearing point. Roof dormers, if any, shall conform to the dimensions and design shown on Building Massing Diagram (Figure 1) and Roof Dormer Diagram (Figure 2); 
(4)  Garages. Garage walls containing an overhead door facing a public street shall be set back a minimum of six (6) feet from the main wall of the dwelling facing the same street. Garage walls containing an overhead door facing a street shall have a maximum width of thirty (30) percent of the lot dimension parallel to the garage door; and 
(5)  Parking. Vehicular parking areas shall not be located between the street and the front of the dwelling or porch facing the street, other than at a front-loading garage. To facilitate on-site parking and access to rear- or side-facing garages, one side yard setback may be reduced to a minimum of eight (8) feet, provided that the opposite side yard setback is increased a like amount, such that the total of the two setbacks equals twenty (20) feet. 
FIGURE 1. BUILDING MASSING DIAGRAM
 
FIGURE 2. ROOF DORMER DIAGRAM
 
Figure 3 (Example Site Diagram A) and Figure 4 (Example Site Diagram B) illustrate the requirements of subdivisions (4) and (5) above. 
FIGURE 3. EXAMPLE SITE DIAGRAM A
 
FIGURE 4. EXAMPLE SITE DIAGRAM B
 
(d)  Design incentives. The following deviations from requirements otherwise applicable to property within the North End Overlay District shall be allowed where the dwellings conform to the provisions of subsection (c): 
(1)  Bonus porches. One-story, roofed, unenclosed porches may extend a maximum of eight (8) feet into a required front or rear yard, except where a yard faces the Atlantic Ocean. Porch roof rafter bearings shall be a maximum of ten (10) feet above the first story finished floor. A maximum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet of the floor area of such porches for each of the two dwelling units shall be excluded from the calculation of lot coverage. 
In addition, a maximum of four (4) uncovered stair treads that lead to an unenclosed porch may encroach further into a required yard, provided that the setback from the lowest tread to the nearest property line is a minimum of four (4) feet. 
(2)  Bay or bow windows. Bay or bow window elements having a rafter bearing of no more than ten (10) feet above the finished floor may encroach a maximum of eighteen (18) inches into either side yard setback, the front yard and the rear yard; provided, that (i) the total of such setback encroachments shall be no greater than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the length of the wall in which the windows are located; and (ii) a minimum side-yard setback of eight (8) feet from the face of the encroaching window is maintained. 
(Ord. No. 3431, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 3446, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 507. - Flex suites. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to enhance the opportunities for affordable housing and independent living available to senior citizens and disabled persons, while maintaining the tranquility and integrity of single-family residential neighborhoods. 
(b)  Requirements. Subject to the following provisions, flex suites shall be allowed only by permit issued pursuant to subsection (c) and only in single-family dwellings in zoning districts in which they are permitted as principal uses: 
(1)  No more than one (1) flex suite shall be permitted on any lot; 
(2)  Flex suites shall not be metered separately for water or electric service or be separately connected to the public water or sewer system; 
(3)  No flex suite may be constructed or occupied in any dwelling unless (i) the owner of record personally resides in such dwelling, (ii) the dwelling in which the flex suite is located is occupied by a person or group of persons meeting the definition of "family" set forth in section 111, or (iii) the flex suite or dwelling in which it is located is occupied by at least one (1) person who is sixty-two (62) years of age or older or disabled; 
(4)  No flex suite shall have a floor area in excess of five hundred (500) square feet or thirty (30) percent of the floor area of the remainder of the dwelling in which it is located, whichever is greater; and 
(5)  No flex suite or dwelling in which a flex suite is located shall be used for purposes of transient occupancy. For purposes of this section, the term "transient occupancy" shall mean occupancy for periods of less than ninety (90) consecutive days. 
(c)  Permits. Flex suite permits shall be valid for a period of two (2) years, and may be renewed for additional two-year periods pursuant to the procedure specified herein. Applications therefor shall be made to the department of planning, signed by at least one (1) owner of record of the property upon which the flex suite is to be located, and shall be accompanied by the following items: 
(1)  A deed to the property or current tax bill evidencing the ownership of the property; and 
(2)  A statement, on a form prescribed by the director of planning, certifying that the occupants of the dwelling in which the flex suite is to be located will be limited to those persons mentioned in subdivision (3) of subsection (b). 
A permit shall be granted if the application meets all requirements of this section and other applicable ordinances, and shall otherwise be denied. 
(Ord. No. 2459, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 2668, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 2704, 6-25-02)  
ARTICLE 6. - APARTMENT DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 600. - Legislative intent. 
The purpose of the A-12 and A-18 Apartment Districts is to provide areas for various multiple-family housing types at a variety of densities, in areas where public facilities are adequate to support these densities, and to provide for certain other necessary and related uses within multi-family communities but limited as to maintain compatibility with residential uses. The A-24 and A-36 Apartment Districts are created in recognition of the existence of developed areas where multifamily dwellings exist at densities between twenty-four (24) and thirty-six (36) dwelling units per acre. It is not the intention to create additional A-24 or A-36 Districts or to enlarge the limits of existing A-24 or A-36 Districts except in cases to promote infilling in areas that are already zoned or developed at densities between twenty-four (24) and thirty-six (36) dwelling units per acre.  
Sec. 601. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Principal and conditional uses. The following chart lists those uses permitted within the A-12 through A-36 Apartment Districts. Those uses and structures in the respective apartment districts shall be permitted as either principal uses indicated by a "P" or as conditional uses indicated by a "C." Uses and structures indicated by an "X" shall be prohibited in the respective districts. No uses or structures other than as specified shall be permitted. 
_____ 
Use 	A-12 	A-18 	A-24 	A-36 
Agricultural and horticultural uses except for the keeping of poultry, livestock, bees, fish ponds and fish hatcheries 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Assembly uses 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Bed and breakfast inns 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Borrow pits 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Building-mounted antennas meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Building-mounted antennas other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Child care education centers in conjunction with public or private elementary schools or religious uses 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Communication towers meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communications towers meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Communication towers other than those meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communication towers other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Day-care centers 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Dwellings, attached (townhouses) 	P 	P 	P 	X 
Dwellings, duplex 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Dwellings, multiple-family 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Dwellings, semidetached 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Dwellings, single-family additions 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Facilities for the production of live theater and allied purposes including education in the theater arts 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Family day-care homes, foster homes or group homes 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Fraternity and sorority houses, student centers and student dormitories 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Golf courses, nonilluminated, including par 3 but not miniature, with a minimum area of 10 acres 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Home occupation 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Home sharing meeting the requirements of section 209.6 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Hospitals and sanitariums 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Housing for seniors and disabled persons 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Marinas, noncommercial and community boat docks 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Maternity homes 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Mobile home parks 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Museums and art galleries when not operated by a public agency 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Nurse's homes and similar housing for institutional employees, monasteries and convents 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Personal watercraft rentals 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Public parks, recreational areas, botanical and zoological gardens and other public buildings and uses 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Public elementary, intermediate and high schools; colleges and universities 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Public utility installations and substations; provided offices, storage or maintenance facilities shall not be permitted; and provided, further, that utilities substation so other than individual transformers, shall be surrounded by Category V screening, solid except for entrances and exits; and provided also, transformer vaults for underground utilities and the like shall require Category I screening, solid except for access openings 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Private schools when having academic curriculums similar to public schools 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Recreation and amusement facilities of an outdoor nature other than those specified as principal uses, which may be partially or temporarily enclosed on a seasonal basis, with the approval of city council, except that riding academies and recreational campgrounds shall not be allowed 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Religious uses 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Short term rental 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Short term rental within the Sandbridge Special Service District* 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Short term rental within a STR Overlay District 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Single room occupancy facility 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Small wireless facilities meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Small wireless facilities not placed on existing structures 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Television or other broadcasting stations 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Wind energy conversion systems, freestanding 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted 	C 	C 	C 	C 
*Sandbridge Special Service District is defined in City Code section 35.1-3. 
 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to principal uses and structures, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Garages, tool sheds, greenhouses, swimming pools, barbecue facilities and tennis courts. 
(2)  An accessory activity operated for profit in a residential dwelling unit where there is no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or any visible or audible evidence detectable from outside the building lot, either permanently or intermittently, of the conduct of such business except for one (1) nonilluminated identification sign not more than one (1) square foot in area mounted flat against the residence; where no traffic is generated, including traffic by commercial delivery vehicles, by such activity in greater volumes than would normally be expected in the neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such activity is met off the street and other than in a required front yard; where the activity is conducted on the premises which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner, and no person other than members of the immediate family occupying such dwelling units is employed in the activity; where such activity is conducted only in the principal structure on the lot; where there are no sales to the general public of products or merchandise from the home; and where the activity is specifically designed or conducted to permit no more than one (1) patron, customer, or pupil to be present on the premises at any one time. The following are specifically prohibited as accessory activities: Convalescent or nursing homes, tourist homes, massage or tattoo parlors, body piercing establishments, radio or television repair shops, auto repair shops, or similar establishments. 
(3)  Rental of rooms in a dwelling or the entire dwelling thirty (30) consecutive days or more is an accessory use to the dwelling. 
(c)  Special restrictions in Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1). No use or structure shall be permitted on any property located within Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1) unless such use is designated as compatible in APZ-1 in Table 2 ("Air Installations Compatible Use Zones Land Use Compatibility in Accident Potential Zones") of section 1804; provided, however, that any use or structure not designated as compatible shall be permitted as a replacement of the same use or structure if the replacement use or structure is of equal or lesser density or intensity than the original use or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2268, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2368, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 2427, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2495, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 2513, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 2627, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 2782, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 2907, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2972, 2-27-07; Ord. No. 3000, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 3046, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 3102, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 3403, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3441, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3514, 7-11-17; Ord. No. 3578, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 602. - Dimensional requirements. 
The following chart lists the requirements within the A-12 through A-36 Apartment Districts for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing and maximum lot coverage for semidetached dwellings. 
(a)  For semidetached dwellings: 
	Apartment Districts 
	A-12 	A-18 	A-24 	A-36 
 (1) 
Minimum lot area in square feet: 	6,500 	6,500 	6,500 	6,500 
 (2) 
Minimum lot width in feet: 	60 	60 	60 	60 
 (3) 
Minimum front yard setback in feet: 	30 	30 	30 	30 
 (4) 
Minimum side yard setback in feet: 	15 	15 	15 	15 
 (4.1) 
Minimum side yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street: 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 
 (5) 
Minimum rear yard setback in feet: 	10 	10 	10 	10 
 (5.1) 
Minimum rear yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street: 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 
 (6) 
Maximum lot coverage in percent: 	30 	30 	30 	30 
 
The following chart lists the requirements within the A-12 through A-36 Apartment Districts for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing and maximum lot coverage for duplex dwellings. 
(b)  For duplex dwellings: 
	Apartment Districts 
	A-12 	A-18 	A-24 	A-36 
 (1) 
Minimum lot area in square feet: 	10,000 	20,000 	20,000 	40,000 
 (2) 
Minimum lot width in feet: 	75 	100 	100 	200 
 (3) 
Minimum front yard setback in feet: 	30 	30 	30 	30 
 (4) 
Minimum side yard setback in feet: 	10 	10 	10 	8 
 (4.1) 
Minimum side yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street: 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 
 (5) 
Minimum rear yard setback in feet: 	10 	10 	10 	10 
 (5.1) 
Minimum rear yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street: 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 
 (6) 
Maximum lot coverage in percent: 	30 	30 	30 	30 
 
The following chart lists the requirements within the A-12 through A-24 Apartment Districts for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing, maximum lot coverage, maximum density and maximum number of units constructed in a single building for single-family attached dwellings (townhouses). 
(c)  For attached dwellings (townhouses): 
	Apartment Districts 
	A-12 	A-18 	A-24 
 (1) 
Minimum lot area in square feet: 	1,400 	1,400 	1,400 
 (2) 
Minimum average lot area in square feet: 	2,500 	2,500 	2,500 
 (3) 
Minimum interior lot width in feet: 	14 	14 	14 
 (4) 
Minimum exterior lot width in feet: 	30 	30 	30 
 (5) 
Minimum front yard setback in feet: 	30 	30 	30 
 (6) 
Minimum front yard setback where all required parking is provided in the rear, in feet: 	15 	15 	15 
 (7) 
Minimum side yard setback in feet: 	10 	10 	10 
 (7.1) 
Minimum side yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street: 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 
 (8) 
Minimum rear yard setback for dwellings in feet: 	20 	20 	20 
 (9) 
Minimum rear yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street: 	5 	5 	5 
 (10) 
Maximum lot coverage in percent: 	40 	40 	40 
 (11) 
Maximum density in dwellings per acre: 	12 	18 	24 
 (12) 
Maximum number of attached dwellings in one (1) group without side yard setbacks: 	6 	6 	6 
 
The following chart lists the requirements within the A-12 through A-36 Apartment Districts for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing, maximum lot coverage and maximum density for multiple-family dwellings. 
(d)  For multiple-family dwellings: 
	Apartment Districts 
	A-12 	A-18 	A-24 	A-36 
 (1) 
Minimum lot area in square feet: 	10,000 	20,000 	20,000 	40,000 
 (2) 
Minimum lot width in feet: 	100 	100 	100 	200 
 (3) 
Minimum front yard setback in feet: 	30 	30 	30 	30 
 (4) 
Minimum side yard setback in feet: 	10 	10 	10 	8 
 (4.1) 
Minimum side yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street: 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 
 (5) 
Minimum rear yard setback in feet: 	10 	10 	10 	10 
 (5.1) 
Minimum rear yard setback for accessory structures no larger than 150 square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than 8 feet except when adjacent to a street: 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 
 (6) 
Maximum lot coverage by buildings and parking, excluding recreational buildings and surfaces in percent: 	40 	50 	60 	75 
 (7) 
Maximum density in dwellings per acre: 	12 	18 	24 	36 
 
The following chart lists the requirements within the A-12 through A-36 Apartment Districts for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing, maximum lot coverage and maximum floor area ratio for uses and structures other than dwellings. 
(e)  For uses other than dwellings: 
	Apartment Districts 
	A-12 	A-18 	A-24 	A-36 
 (1) 
Minimum lot area in square feet: 	40,000 	40,000 	40,000 	40,000 
 (2) 
Minimum lot width in feet: 	150 	150 	150 	200 
 (3) 
Minimum front yard setback in feet: 	30 	30 	30 	30 
 (4) 
Minimum side yard setback in feet: 	15 	10 	10 	8 
 (5) 
Minimum rear yard setback in feet: 	15 	10 	10 	10 
 (6) 
Maximum lot coverage in percent: 	30 	30 	30 	30 
 (7) 
Maximum floor area ratio to zoning lot area: 	0.3 	0.7 	0.7 	1.1 
 
(f)  For additions to existing single-family dwellings: 
	Apartment Districts 
	A-12 	A-18 	A-24 	A-36 
 (1) 
Minimum front yard setback in feet: 	30 	30 	30 	30 
 (2) 
Minimum side yard setback except when adjacent to a street in feet: 	8 	8 	8 	8 
 (3) 
Minimum side yard setback when adjacent to a street in feet: 	30 	30 	30 	30 
 (4) 
Minimum rear yard setback except for accessory structures in feet: 	20 	20 	20 	20 
 (5) 
Minimum rear yard setback for accessory structures in feet: 	10 	10 	10 	10 
 (6) 
Maximum lot coverage in percent: 	35 	35 	35 	35 
 
_____
(g)  Any yard adjacent to a street within the A-12 through A-36 Apartment Districts shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet. 
(h)  Front and side-yard setbacks adjacent to a street may be reduced in accordance with the provisions of Part H of Article 2. 
(Ord. No. 1978, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2268, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 3192, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 3384, 12-2-14)  
Sec. 603. - Landscape screening and buffering regulations. 
When a zoning lot within an A-12, A-18, A-24 or A-36 Apartment District adjoins a residential district without an intervening street, alley or body of water over twenty-five (25) feet in width a ten-foot minimum yard shall be required along all lot lines adjoining the residential district. Category IV landscape screening shall be required within the yard area. No other uses or structures shall be permitted in such yards.  
Sec. 604. - Height regulations. 
(a)  For the A-12 and A-18 Apartment Districts, the maximum-height for all buildings and structures is thirty-five (35) feet. 
(b)  For the A-24 Apartment District, the maximum height for all buildings and structures is forty-five (45) feet. 
(c)  For the A-36 Apartment District, the maximum height for all buildings and structures is one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the above, no building or other structure shall exceed the height limit established by section 202(b) regarding air navigation.  
Sec. 605. - Sign regulations. 
Within all Apartment Districts, signs shall be permitted as follows: 
(a)  For subdivisions there shall be permitted one (1) sign not greater than thirty-two (32) square feet in area at each principal entrance or frontage of any use. 
(b)  A maximum of two (2) signs located on property for sale, lease or rent, provided that no such sign shall exceed eight (8) square feet in area. 
(c)  In the case of new multiple-family dwellings, one (1) sign not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area at each principal entrance. Any such sign shall be removed when seventy (70) percent of the property is occupied or leased, or after a period of twenty-four (24) months from the date on which a certificate of occupancy is first issued, whichever comes first. 
(d)  Signage allowances for uses other than multiple-family dwellings shall be the same as in the most restrictive district in which the use is permitted as a principal use. 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 606. - Parking regulations. 
Parking shall be required for all uses and structures permitted in the A-12 through A-36 Apartment Districts in accordance with section 203. For single-family attached (townhouse) developments, no parking area on any lot shall extend farther than twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way line and no area within a garage, or an enclosed or covered space shall be counted toward meeting off-street parking requirements.  
ARTICLE 7. - HOTEL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 700. - Legislative intent. 
The purpose of the H-1 Hotel District is to provide medium-density hotel areas for general application in the city where such uses are desirable and where public facilities are available to meet their needs.  
Sec. 701. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Principal and conditional uses. The following chart lists those uses permitted within the H-1 Hotel District. Those uses and structures in the district shall be permitted as either principal uses indicated by a "P" or as conditional uses indicated by a "C." Uses and structures indicated by an "X" shall be prohibited in the district. No uses or structures other than as specified shall be permitted. 
Use 	H-1 
Bars or nightclubs, subject to the provisions of subsection (b)(1) 	C 
Borrow pits 	C 
Building-mounted antennas, meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Building-mounted antennas other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 
Communication towers meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communication towers meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Communication towers, other than those meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communication towers other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Heliports and helistops 	C 
Hotels and motels 	P 
Marinas, commercial 	C 
Museums and art galleries when not operated by a public agency 	C 
Offices, as a use subordinate to and in conjunction with a hotel or motel, offices in which goods, wares or merchandise are not commercially created, displayed, stored, exchanged or sold 	C 
Parks, playgrounds and community centers, botanical and zoological gardens and other public buildings and uses 	P 
Personal watercraft rentals 	C 
Public utilities installations and substations, provided offices or storage or maintenance facilities shall not be permitted; and provided, further, that utilities substations, other than individual transformers, shall be surrounded by a wall, solid except for entrances and exits, or by a fence with a screening hedge five (5) to six (6) feet in height; and provided also, transformer vaults for underground utilities and the like shall require only a landscaped screening hedge, solid except for access opening 	P 
Recreational and amusement facilities of an outdoor nature other than as accessory uses, which may be partially or temporarily enclosed on a seasonal basis with approval of city council, except that riding academies and recreational campgrounds shall not be allowed as a conditional use or otherwise 	C 
Small wireless facilities meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Small wireless facilities not placed on existing structures 	C 
Television or other broadcasting stations 	C 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, except as provided below 	P 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, in excess of one (1) per principal structure 	C 
 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to principal uses and structures, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Within the H-1 Hotel District, establishments for sale of gifts, clothing, drugs, photographic supplies, newspapers, and magazines and convenience goods, eating and drinking establishments and professional and personal service establishments; provided that such uses are accessory to hotels having fifty (50) or more dwelling or lodging units for sale or for rent; and provided further, that all such establishments shall be designed and scaled only to meet the requirements of occupants and their guests; and provided also that there shall be no evidence of the existence of such establishments from outside the property line; and provided finally that the floor area occupied by such establishments shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the floor area of the hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 2299, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 2427, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2513, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 2968, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 3046, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 3102, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 3403, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3514, 7-11-17)  
Sec. 702. - Dimensional requirements. 
(a)  The following chart lists the requirements within the H-1 Hotel District for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing, maximum lot coverage and maximum lodging unit density for all uses and structures. 
Hotel District H-1 
 (1) 
Minimum lot area: 	1 acre 
 (2) 
Minimum lot width in feet:* 	100 
 (3) 
Minimum front yard setback in feet: 	35 
 (4) 
Minimum side yard setback in feet: 	20 
 (5) 
Minimum side yard setback adjacent to a street in feet: 	20 
 (6) 
Minimum rear yard setback in feet: 	20 
 (7) 
Maximum lot coverage in percent: 	50 
 (8) 
Maximum density for lodging units per acre: 	80 
 
(9)  For each dwelling unit contained in a combination development the number of allowed lodging units shall be reduced by two (2). 
*Where applicable, newly created corner lots must also adhere to section 4.4(c) of the Subdivision Ordinance, requiring lot width on certain corner lots. 
(b)  Front and side-yard setbacks adjacent to a street may be reduced in accordance with the provisions of Part H of Article 2. 
(Ord. No. 1945, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 3384, 12-2-14)  
Sec. 703. - Landscape screening and buffering regulations. 
When a zoning lot within a H-1 Hotel District adjoins a residential or apartment district without an intervening street, alley or body of water over twenty-five (25) feet in width, a fifteen-foot minimum yard shall be required along all lot lines adjoining the residential or apartment district. Category IV landscape screening shall be required within the yard area. No other uses or structures shall be permitted in such yards.  
Sec. 704. - Height regulations. 
(a)  Where a zoning lot within the H-1 Hotel District adjoins the side or rear yard of a zoning lot in a residential or apartment district without an intervening street or alley over twenty-five (25) feet in width or body of water over fifty (50) feet in width, the following maximum height regulations shall apply on that portion of the H-1 zoning lot within one hundred (100) feet of the adjoining residential or apartment district. 
(1)  When adjacent to a Residential District, the maximum height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  When adjacent to A-12 or A-18 Apartment District, the maximum height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(3)  When adjacent to A-24 Apartment District, the maximum height shall be forty-five (45) feet. 
(4)  When adjacent to A-36 Apartment District, the maximum height shall be one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
(b)  Except as specified in item (a) hereinabove, there shall be no maximum height regulations in the H-1 Hotel District. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the above, no building or other structure shall exceed the height limit established by section 202(b) regarding air navigation. 
(Ord. No. 1786, 6-13-88)  
Sec. 705. - Sign regulations. 
(a)  Within the H-1 Hotel District, the same regulations that apply in the Residential Districts and the Apartment Districts shall apply, except as follows: 
(1)  For each twenty (20) feet of frontage and for each forty (40) feet of lot line adjoining a street, but not constituting frontage, not more than one (1) sign and not more than forty (40) square feet of signage shall be permitted; provided, however, that no establishment shall have more than four (4) signs, of which one (1) may be a freestanding sign; and provided further, that no establishment having a frontage of less than one hundred (100) feet shall have a freestanding sign. No establishment having a frontage of at least one hundred (100) feet but less than or equal to two hundred (200) feet shall have a freestanding sign exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face, and no establishment having a frontage of more than two hundred (200) feet shall have a freestanding sign exceeding seventy-five (75) square feet in area per face. No freestanding sign shall exceed two (2) faces, and no sign of any other type shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area. Any establishment or property having less frontage or lot line adjoining a street than required above may have one (1) sign not exceeding thirty (30) square feet in area. 
(2)  Signs located on property for sale, lease or rent shall be permitted, provided that no such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, that not more than two (2) such signs shall be erected for each one hundred (100) feet of lot line adjoining the street, and that not more than four (4) such signs shall be erected on any property. Any property having lot line adjoining a street may have one (1) sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet of surface area. 
(b)  Signage allowances for uses other than hotels and motels shall be the same as in the most restrictive district in which the use is permitted as a principal use. 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 706. - Off-street parking regulations. 
Parking shall be required for all uses and structures permitted in the H-1 Hotel District in accordance with section 203.  
ARTICLE 8. - OFFICE DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 800. - Legislative intent. 
The O-1 Office District is intended primarily for office and institutional uses. Within this district, it is intended to provide an environment appropriate to office or institutional character and compatible with residential uses which may adjoin and where public facilities are available to meet their needs. The O-2 Office District is intended for larger scale office and institutional structures and uses in areas where public facilities are available and where conflicts with residential neighborhoods can be avoided.  
Sec. 801. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Principal and conditional uses. The following chart lists those uses permitted within the O-1 and O-2 Office Districts. Those uses and structures in the respective office districts shall be permitted as either principal uses indicated by a "P" or as conditional uses indicated by a "C." Uses and structures indicated by an "X" shall be prohibited in the respective districts. No uses or structures other than as specified shall be permitted. 
Use 	O-1 	O-2 
Assembly uses 	C 	C 
Building-mounted antennas meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 	P 
Building-mounted antennas other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 	C 
Business offices of advertising, real estate, insurance, commercial or industrial establishments 	P 	P 
Business and vocational schools which do not involve the operation of woodwork shops, machine shops or other similar facilities, with a floor area greater than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet 	C 	P 
Business and vocational schools which do not involve the operation of woodwork shops, machine shops or other similar facilities, with a maximum floor area of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet 	P 	P 
Cemeteries 	C 	C 
Child care education centers in connection with public or private elementary schools or religious uses 	P 	P 
Communication towers meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communication towers meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 	P 
Communication towers other than those meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communication towers other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 	C 
Day-care centers 	P 	P 
Eating and drinking establishments, establishments for sale of convenience goods and personal service establishments other than those permitted as principal uses, provided that such uses shall be in connection with a principal use and shall in combination not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the total floor area involved in the principal use 	C 	C 
Farm stands for the sale of agricultural products, provided that: (1) the size of the stand shall be determined by the Conditional Use Permit; (2) only agricultural and agriculturally-related products, as defined in section 401(e) of the City Zoning Ordinance, shall be sold at the farm stand; (3) all portions of the property used for agricultural purposes including, but not limited to, the growing of crops or the raising of farm animals shall be identified in the Conditional Use Permit; and (4) One parking space for every 250 square feet of covered farm stand sales area shall be provided, unless special conditions warrant a modification identified in the Conditional Use Permit 	X 	C 
Fiber-optics transmission facilities 	C 	C 
Finance agency offices, banks 	P 	P 
Florists retail 	P 	P 
Funeral homes 	C 	P 
Governmental centers and offices and other public uses and structures appropriate to the character of the district, necessary to its servicing, or requiring location within the district 	P 	P 
Hair care centers including barber shops and beauty salons 	C 	C 
Home-based wildlife rehabilitation facilities 	C 	C 
Hospitals and sanitariums 	X 	C 
Housing for seniors and disabled persons 	C 	C 
Medical, optical and dental offices and clinics; legal, engineering, architectural and similar professional offices, accounting, auditing and bookkeeping service offices 	P 	P 
Museums, art galleries, historic exhibits, botanical gardens, parks, recreational facilities and the like, when operated by a public agency or not for profit 	X 	P 
Offices in which goods, wares or merchandise are not commercially created, displayed, stored, exchanged or sold 	P 	P 
Offices of miscellaneous business services such as consumer credit reporting agencies, mailing list and stenographic services, business and management consulting services 	P 	P 
Offices of nonprofit organizations, such as professional organizations, civic, social and fraternal associations, political organizations, religious organizations, and labor unions; provided, however, that no hiring halls shall be permitted in this district 	P 	P 
Off-street parking in conjunction with permitted uses in an adjoining business district, provided such parking shall be limited to that zoning lot contiguous with the business district use for which the parking is provided but in no event shall such off-street parking extend more than two hundred (200) feet into the O-2 District 	X 	C 
Public schools, colleges and universities, and private schools, colleges and universities having similar academic curriculums 	C 	C 
Public utilities installations and substations, provided storage or maintenance facilities shall not be permitted; and provided, further, that utilities substations, other than individual transformers, shall be surrounded by a wall, solid except for entrances and exits, or by a fence with a screening hedge five (5) to six (6) feet in height; and provided also, transformer vaults for underground utilities and the like shall require only a landscaped screening hedge, solid except for access opening 	P 	P 
Public utilities business offices 	X 	P 
Religious uses with a floor area greater than 4,000 square feet 	C 	C 
Religious uses with a maximum floor area of 4,000 square feet 	P 	P 
Single room occupancy facility 	C 	C 
Small wireless facilities meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 	P 
Small wireless facilities not placed on existing structures 	C 	C 
Television or other broadcasting stations 	C 	C 
Veterinary establishments, except for boarding of animals 	P 	P 
Wildlife rehabilitation centers 	C 	C 
Wind energy conversion systems, freestanding 	C 	C 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, except as provided below 	P 	P 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, in excess of one (1) 	C 	C 
 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to principal uses and structures, including but not limited to: 
(1)  As appropriate to the principal use, ethical pharmacies, dental laboratories, and the fitting and sale of eyeglasses, hearing aids, prosthetic appliances, and the like. 
(c)  Special restrictions in Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1). No use or structure shall be permitted on any property located within Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1) unless such use is designated as compatible in APZ-1 in Table 2 ("Air Installations Compatible Use Zones Land Use Compatibility in Accident Potential Zones") of section 1804; provided, however, that any use or structure not designated as compatible shall be permitted as a replacement of the same use or structure if the replacement use or structure is of equal or lesser density or intensity than the original use or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2160, 6-23-90; Ord. No. 2268, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2427, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2430, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 2495, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 2505, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 2537, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 2761, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 2907, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2972, 2-27-07; Ord. No. 2976, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 3000, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 3046, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 3102, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 3191, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 3193, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 3403, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3419, 6-16-15; Ord. No. 3436, 2-2-16; Ord. No. 3441, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3514, 7-11-17; Ord. No. 3527, 12-12-17)  
Sec. 802. - Dimensional requirements. 
(a)  The following chart lists the requirements within the O-1 and O-2 Office Districts for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing and maximum lot coverage for all uses and structures. 
	Office Districts 
	O-1 	O-2 
 (1) 
Minimum lot area in square feet: 	5,000 	43,560 
 (2) 
Minimum lot width in feet:* 	50 	100 
 (3) 
Minimum front yard setback in feet: 	30 	35 
 (4) 
Minimum side yard setback in feet, unless a greater setback is required by section 803: 	10 	20 
 (5) 
Minimum side yard setback adjacent to a street in feet: 	30 	30 
 (6) 
Minimum rear yard setback in feet, unless a greater setback is required by section 803: 	10 	20 
 (7) 
Maximum lot coverage in percent: 	25 	25 
 
*Where applicable, newly created corner lots must also adhere to section 4.4(c) of the Subdivision Ordinance, requiring additional lot width on certain corner lots. 
(b)  Front and side-yard setbacks adjacent to a street may be reduced in accordance with the provisions of Part H of Article 2. 
(Ord. No. 1946, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 3384, 12-2-14)  
Sec. 803. - Landscape screening and buffering regulations. 
For the O-1 and O-2 Office Districts, the following landscape screening and buffering regulations shall apply: 
(a)  When a zoning lot within an O-1 Office District adjoins a residential, apartment or hotel district without an intervening street or alley over twenty-five (25) feet in width, a ten-foot minimum yard shall be required along all lot lines adjoining the residential, apartment or hotel district. Category I landscape screening shall be required within the yard area. No other uses or structures shall be permitted in such yards. 
(b)  When a zoning lot within an O-2 Office District adjoins a residential or apartment district without an intervening street, alley or body of water over twenty-five (25) feet in width, a twenty-foot minimum yard shall be required along all lot lines adjoining the residential or apartment district. Category IV landscape screening shall be required within the yard area. No other uses or structures shall be permitted in such yards. 
(c)  When a zoning lot within an O-2 Office District adjoins a hotel district without an intervening street, alley or body of water over twenty-five (25) feet in width, Category I landscape screening shall be required within the yard area. No other uses or structures shall be permitted in such yards.  
Sec. 804. - Height regulations. 
(a)  No portion of any building or other structure located within an O-1 Office District shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 
(b)  No portion of any building or other structure located within an O-2 Office District shall exceed seventy-five (75) feet. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the above, no building or other structure shall exceed the height limit established by section 202(b) regarding air navigation.  
Sec. 805. - Sign regulations. 
Within the O-1 and O-2 Office Districts, the following sign regulations shall apply: 
(a)  For each forty (40) feet of frontage and for each eighty (80) feet of lot line adjoining a street, but not constituting frontage, not more than one (1) sign and not more than thirty-two (32) square feet of signage shall be permitted; provided, however, that no establishment shall have more than two (2) signs, of which one (1) may be a freestanding sign; and provided further, that no establishment having a frontage of less than one hundred (100) feet shall have a freestanding sign. No establishment having a frontage of at least one hundred (100) feet but less than or equal to two hundred (200) feet shall have a freestanding sign exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face, and no establishment having a frontage of more than two hundred (200) feet shall have a freestanding sign exceeding seventy-five (75) square feet in area per face. No sign shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area. Any establishment or property having less frontage or lot line adjoining a street than required above may have one (1) sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
(b)  Where there is an established office or institutional park containing at least five (5) establishments and a minimum of forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area, there shall be permitted at each principal entrance one (1) additional sign, no greater in area than one hundred (100) square feet per face. Where there is an established office or institutional park containing at least ten (10) establishments and a minimum of fifteen (15) acres of land, there shall be permitted at each principal entrance one (1) additional sign no greater in area than one hundred fifty (150) square feet per face. 
(c)  Signs located on property for sale, lease or rent shall be permitted, provided that no such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, that not more than two (2) such signs shall be erected for each one hundred (100) feet of lot line at the street, and that not more than four (4) such signs shall be erected on any property. Any property having less lot line adjoining a street may have one (1) sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
ARTICLE 9. - BUSINESS DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 900. - Legislative intent. 
The purpose of the B-1 Neighborhood Business District is to provide areas where a limited range of business establishments can be located near or adjacent to residential development without adversely impacting the adjacent residential area. The purpose of the B-1A Limited Community Business District is to provide areas where limited commercial development can be dispersed to support the needs of nearby residential neighborhoods. The purpose of the B-2 Community Business District is to provide land needed for community-wide business establishments. This district is intended for general application in the city. It is intended that, by the creation of this district, business uses will be geographically concentrated. The purpose of the B-3 Central Business District is to set apart that portion of the city which forms the metropolitan center for financial, commercial, professional and cultural activities, including business, professional and cultural development in a manner that complements the CBC Central Business Core District and the policies identified in the City of Virginia Beach Comprehensive Plan. It is intended that any uses likely to create friction with these proposed types of activities will be discouraged. This district is not intended for general application throughout the city. The purpose of the B-4 Mixed Use District is to provide for retail and commercial service facilities and residential uses, including high-quality workforce housing in appropriate areas within the district, including Strategic Growth Areas, in those areas of the city where a mixture of such uses is desirable and recommended by the policies of the Comprehensive Plan. The purpose of the B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District is to provide an area that complements the Central Business Core District through quality mixed use development at intensities and patterns that support multiple modes of transportation, higher residential densities, including high-quality workforce housing in appropriate areas within the district, and an integrated mix of residential and non-residential uses within the same building or on the same lot. Requests for rezonings to the B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District shall be limited to the area generally bounded by Thalia Creek on the east, Interstate 264 on the south, Aragona Boulevard on the west, and Jeanne Street and Broad Street on the north. Development within the B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District should adhere to the Comprehensive Plan's Mixed Use Development Guidelines. The purpose of the B-4K Historic Kempsville Area Mixed Use District is to provide an area that complements the adjoining residential neighborhoods through quality mixed use development at intensities and patterns that support multiple modes of transportation, higher residential densities, including high-quality workforce housing in appropriate areas within the district, including Strategic Growth Areas, and an integrated mix of residential and nonresidential uses within the same building or on the same lot. Rezonings to the B-4K Historic Kempsville Area Mixed Use District shall be limited to property within the area generally bounded by Kempsville Heights and Kempsville Lake to the north, Cedar Run Canal to the south, Kempsville Gardens and Kempsville Manor to the east, and Eastern Branch of the Elizabeth River to the west. Development within the B-4K Historic Kempsville Area Mixed Use District should conform to the Comprehensive Plan's Mixed Use Development Guidelines and the Historic Kempsville Area Master Plan or, in the event of a conflict, should conform to the Historic Kempsville Area Master Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2359, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 2843, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 2917, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 2997, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3109, 11-10-09; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 901. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Principal and conditional uses. The following chart lists those uses permitted within the B-1 through B-4K Business Districts. Those uses and structures in the respective business districts shall be permitted as either principal uses indicated by a "P" or as conditional uses indicated by a "C." Uses and structures indicated by an "X" shall be prohibited in the respective districts. No uses or structures other than as specified shall be permitted. 
Use 	B-1 	B-1A 	B-2 	B-3 	B-4 	B-4C 	B-4K 
Animal hospitals, veterinary establishments, pounds, shelters, commercial kennels, provided all animals shall be kept in soundproofed, air-conditioned buildings 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Assembly uses 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Automobile museums 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Automobile repair garages and small engine repair establishments, provided that all repair work shall be performed within a building 	X 	X 	C 	X 	C 	X 	X 
Automobile service stations; provided that, where there is an adjoining residential or apartment district without an intervening street, alley or permanent open space over twenty-five (25) feet in width and where lots separated by a district boundary have adjacent front yards, Category VI screening shall separate the automobile service station use from the adjacent residential district or apartment district and no ground sign shall be within fifty (50) feet of the residential district or apartment district 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Bakeries, confectioneries and delicatessens, provided that products prepared or processed on the premises shall be sold only at retail and only on the premises 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Bars or nightclubs 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Bed and breakfast inns 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C 	X 	C 
Beverage manufacturing shops, which shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet in floor area 	X 	X 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 
Bicycle and moped rental establishments 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 
Boat sales 	X 	X 	P 	X 	P 	X 	X 
Body piercing establishments 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Borrow pits 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Building-mounted antennas other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Bulk storage yards and building contractors yards; provided that no sale or processing of scrap, salvage or secondhand material shall be permitted in such yards; and, provided further that such storage yards shall be completely enclosed except for necessary openings in ingress and egress by a fence or wall not less than six (6) feet in height 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Business and vocational schools which do not involve the operation of woodwork shops, machine shops or other similar facilities, with a floor area greater than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Business and vocational schools which do not involve the operation of woodwork shops, machine shops or other similar facilities, with a maximum floor area of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet 	X 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Business studios, offices and clinics 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Car wash facilities, subject to the provisions of section 228.1. 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Colleges and universities, public or private 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Commercial parking lots, parking garages, parking structures and storage garages 	X 	X 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 
Commercial parking garages and storage garages which include car wash, car rental or car detailing services when wholly enclosed within a parking structure and accessory thereto 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	P 	X 
Communication towers meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communication towers meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Communication towers other than those meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communication towers other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Craft breweries, subject to the provisions of section 230 	X 	X 	C 	C 	X 	C 	C 
Craft distilleries, subject to the provisions of section 230 	X 	X 	C 	C 	X 	C 	C 
Craft wineries, subject to the provisions of section 230 	X 	X 	C 	C 	X 	C 	C 
Day-care centers and child care education centers 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 
Dormitories for marine pilots 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 
Drugstores, beauty shops and barbershops and other similar personal service establishments 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Dwellings, Attached 	X 		X 	X 	P 	X 	P 
Dwellings, Multi-family 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	C 	C 
Eating and drinking establishments without drive-through windows, when not freestanding and incorporated inside a mixed use building, except as otherwise specified in this section 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	P 
Eating and drinking establishments with drive-through windows, except as specified below 	X 	X 	P 	P 	P 	X 	C 
Eating and drinking establishments without drive-through windows, except as specified below 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	P 
Fiber-optics transmission facilities 	X 	C 	C 	C 	X 	C 	C 
Financial institutions; provided, that drive-through windows shall not be allowed in the B-4K District 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Florists, gift shops and stationery stores 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Funeral homes 	X 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 
Furniture repair and upholstering, repair services for radio and television and household appliances other than those with gasoline engines; carpet and linoleum laying; tile setting, sign shops and other small service businesses 	X 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 
Greenhouses and plant nurseries 	X 	P 	P 	X 	P 	X 	P 
Grocery stores, carry-out food stores and convenience stores all being both freestanding and in a structure with a gross floor area of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet. Within the B-4K, also including that it is not open to the public twenty-four (24) hours a day 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	X 	P 
Grocery stores, carry-out food stores and convenience stores whether or not freestanding, but in a structure of a gross floor area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet 	X 	X 	P 	P 	P 	C 	P 
Grocery stores, carry-out food stores and convenience stores any of which are not freestanding but in a structure with a gross floor area of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 
Grocery stores, carry-out food stores and convenience stores whether or not freestanding, but in a structure of more than forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet 	X 	X 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 
Group Home 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 
Heliports and helistops 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Home-based wildlife rehabilitation facilities 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Home occupations 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 
Home sharing meeting the requirements of section 209.6 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	P 	P 
Housing for seniors and disabled persons or handicapped, including convalescent or nursing; maternity homes; day-care centers other than covered under permitted principal uses hereinabove, provided that the maximum height shall not exceed one hundred sixty-five (165) feet; provided, however, that no structure shall exceed the height limit established by section 202(b) regarding air navigation 	C 	C 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 
Hospitals and sanitariums 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Hotels and motels 	X 	X 	X 	P 	P 	P 	X 
Hotels and motels with increased lodging unit density and height, provided that the maximum density shall be one hundred twenty (120) lodging units per acre, the minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre and the maximum height shall be one hundred (100) feet; notwithstanding the above, no structure shall exceed the height limit established by section 202(b) regarding air navigation 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 
Laboratories and establishments for the production and repair of eye glasses, hearing aids and prosthetic devices 	X 	X 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Laundry and dry cleaning agencies 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Liquor stores, package only 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Marinas, commercial 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Medical and dental offices and clinics 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Medical laboratories 	X 	X 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Mini-warehouses 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Mobile home sales 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Motor vehicle sales and rental, provided the minimum lot size is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; and provided further, that truck and trailer rentals shall comply with the provisions of section 242.2 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Motor vehicle sales and rental, provided such use is wholly enclosed within a building, and further provided that no outdoor use accessory to or in conjunction with the principal use shall be allowed 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	X 
Museums and art galleries 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Newspaper printing and publishing, job and commercial printing 	X 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Off-site parking facilities, subject to the provisions of subsection (d) 	X 	X 	X 	P 	X 	P 	X 
Open-air markets 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Outdoor cafes 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Outdoor plazas 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Passenger transportation terminals 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Passenger vessels permitted by U.S. Coast Guard regulations to carry more than one hundred forty-nine (149) passengers and used for commercial purposes 	X 	X 	C 	X 	C 	X 	X 
Personal service establishments, other than those listed separately 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Personal watercraft rentals 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Public buildings and grounds 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Public utilities installations and substations provided storage and maintenance facilities shall not be permitted; and provided further that utilities substations, other than individual transformers, shall be surrounded by Category IV screening solid except for entrances and exits; and provided also, transformer vaults for underground utilities and the like shall require only Category I screening, solid except for access openings 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Public utilities offices 	X 	X 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Public utility storage or maintenance installations 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Radio and television broadcasting stations 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Recreation facilities other than those of an outdoor nature, with a floor area greater than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet 	X 	X 	C 	C 	P 	C 	C 
Recreational and amusement facilities of an outdoor nature, which may be partially or temporarily enclosed on a seasonal basis with approval of city council; provided that, in the development of such properties, safeguards are provided to preserve and protect the existing character of adjacent properties, except that riding academies and recreational campgrounds shall not be allowed as a conditional use or otherwise 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Recreational facilities other than those of an outdoor nature, with a maximum floor area of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet 	X 	X 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Religious uses with a floor area greater than four thousand (4,000) square feet 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Religious uses with a maximum floor area of four thousand (4,000) square feet 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Repair and sales for radio and television and other household appliances and small business machines 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Retail establishments, other than those listed separately, including the incidental manufacturing of goods for sale only at retail on the premises; retail sales and display rooms and lots, provided that yards for storage of new or used building materials or yards for any scrap or salvage operations or for storage or display of any scrap, salvage or secondhand building materials or automobile parts shall not be allowed, further provided that adult book stores shall be prohibited from locating within five hundred (500) feet of any apartment or residential district, single- or multiple-family dwelling, church, park, or school. In B-4K also including with a floor area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or less. 	X 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Retail establishments, other than those listed separately, including the incidental manufacturing of goods for sale only at retail on the premises; retail sales and display rooms and lots, provided that yards for storage of new or used building materials or yards for any scrap or salvage operations or for storage or display of any scrap, salvage or secondhand building materials or automobile parts shall not be allowed, further provided that adult book stores shall be prohibited from locating within five hundred (500) feet of any apartment or residential district, single- or multiple-family dwelling, church, park, or school. In B-4K also including a floor area of more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet 	X 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 
Satellite wagering facility 	X 	X 	C 	C 	X 	C 	X 
Short term rental 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 
Short term rental within the Sandbridge Service District* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Short term rental within a STR Overlay District 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Single room occupancy facility 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 
Small wireless facilities meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Small wireless facilities not placed on existing structures 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Specialty shops 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Storage garages 	X 	X 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 
Tattoo parlors 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Wholesaling and distribution operations, provided that such operations do not involve the use of: (i) more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area for storage of wares to be sold at wholesale or to be distributed, or (ii) any vehicle rated at more than one and one-half (1½) tons, or (iii) a total of more than five (5) delivery vehicles 	X 	X 	P 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Wildlife rehabilitation centers 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Wind energy conversion systems, freestanding, except as provided below 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Wind energy conversion systems, freestanding, in excess of one (1) 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, except as provided below 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, in excess of one (1) per principal structure 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Wine-tasting rooms, subject to the provisions of section 209.4 	X 	P 	P 	P 	X 	P 	C 
*Sandbridge Special Service District is defined in City Code section 35.1-3. 
 
(a2)  Outdoor cafes and outdoor plazas in the B-4K Historic Kempsville Area Mixed Use District. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any contrary provision, outdoor cafes within the B-4K Historic Kempsville Area Mixed Use District shall not occupy more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of area outside of an enclosed building. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any contrary provision, outdoor plazas within the B-4K Historic Kempsville Area Mixed Use District shall be subject to the following criteria: 
(1)  Outdoor plazas should be located at the entrance to major buildings and other appropriate areas to provide safe, attractive and accessible public urban open spaces for those who live, work and visit the area. The size and configuration of outdoor plazas and attendant amenities shall be reviewed by the Planning Director to ensure conformance with these and other related objectives as set forth in the Comprehensive Plan and the Historic Kempsville Area Master Plan; and 
(2)  The architectural design shall conform to the purpose and intent of the Historic Kempsville Area Master Plan. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal uses and structures, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  An accessory activity operated for profit in a residential dwelling unit where there is no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or any visible or audible evidence detectable from outside the building lot, either permanently or intermittently, of the conduct of such business except for one non-illuminated sign not more than one square foot in area mounted flat against the residence; where no traffic is generated, including traffic by commercial delivery vehicles, by such activity in greater volumes than would normally be expected in the neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such activity is met off the street and other than in a required front yard; where the activity is conducted on the premises which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner, and no person other than members of the immediate family occupying such dwelling unit is employed in the activity; where such activity is conducted only in the principal structure on the lot; where there are no sales to the general public of products or merchandise from the home; and where the activity is specifically designed or conducted to permit no more than one patron, customer, or pupil to be present on the premises at any one time. The following are specifically prohibited as accessory activities: Convalescent or nursing homes, bars or nightclubs, tourist homes, massage or tattoo parlors, radio or television repair shops, auto repair shops, or similar establishments. 
(2)  Rental of rooms in a dwelling or the entire dwelling thirty (30) consecutive days or more is an accessory use to the dwelling. 
(c)  Special restrictions in Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1). No use or structure shall be permitted on any property located within Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1) or the Clear Zone unless such use is designated as Compatible in APZ-1 or the Clear Zone, as the case may be, in Table 2 ("Air Installations Compatible Use Zones Land Use Compatibility in Accident Potential Zones") of section 1804; provided, however, that any use or structure not designated as Compatible shall be permitted as a replacement of the same use or structure if the replacement use or structure is of equal or lesser density or intensity than the original use or structure. 
(d)  Off-site parking facilities. Off-site parking facilities shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)  B-3 and B-4C Districts. Off-site parking facilities for any use within the B-3 or B-4C Districts, shall be permitted on any zoning lot, provided all of the following requirements are met: (1) structures for parking facilities shall conform to the regulations of the district in which located; (2) off-site parking facilities shall be located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from the use they are intended to serve, but in no case shall any such facility be located opposite Virginia Beach Boulevard and Independence Boulevard unless grade-separated pedestrian access is provided; and (3) a written agreement assuring continued availability of the number of spaces indicated shall be drawn and executed, and a certified copy of such agreement shall be recorded with the clerk of the court. Such agreement shall stipulate that, if such space is not maintained or space acceptable to the planning director substituted, the use or such portion of the use as is deficient in number of parking spaces shall be discontinued. The agreement shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney. 
(2)  B-4K District. Off-site parking facilities for any use within the B-4K District may be permitted on any zoning lot within the district, provided all of the following requirements are met: (1) structures for parking facilities shall conform to the regulations of the district in which located; (2) off-site parking facilities shall be located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from the use they are intended to serve, but in no case shall any such facility be located opposite Kempsville Road, Princess Anne Road, or South Witchduck Road unless grade-separated pedestrian access is provided; and (3) a written agreement assuring continued availability of the number of spaces indicated shall be drawn and executed, and a certified copy of such agreement shall be recorded with the clerk of the court. Such agreement shall stipulate that, if such space is not maintained or space acceptable to the planning director substituted, the use or such portion of the use as is deficient in number of parking spaces shall be discontinued. The agreement shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1811, 10-10-88; Ord. No. 1906, 8-14-89; Ord. No. 1913, 9-11-89; Ord. No. 1937, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 1941, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 2095, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 2100, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 2174, 9-22-92; Ord. No. 2177, 10-22-92; Ord. No. 2261, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 2268, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2315, 4-11-95; Ord. No 2359, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 2419, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 2427, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2460, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 2495, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 2505, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 2513, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 2552, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 2570, 1-4-00; Ord. No. 2597, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 2627, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 2660, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 2693, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 2761, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 2782, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 2843, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 2907, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2917, 1-24-06; Ord. 2922, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2968, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 2972, 2-27-07; Ord. No. 2976, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 3000, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 3046, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 3050, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 3102, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 3109, 11-10-09; Ord. No. 3167, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 3191, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 3259, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 3294, 6-25-13; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3343, 4-22-14; Ord. No. 3378, 10-7-14; Ord. No. 3397, 3-17-15; Ord. No. 3403, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3412, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 3425, 8-4-15; Ord. No. 3441, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3506, 6-20-17; Ord. No. 3514, 7-11-17; Ord. No. 3527, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 3577, 1-15-19; Ord. No. 3578, 1-15-19; Ord. No. 3609, 1-21-20)  
Sec. 902. - Dimensional requirements. 
(a)  The following chart lists the requirements within the B-1, B-1A, B-2, B-3, and B-4 Business Districts for minimum lot area, width and yard spacing for all commercial uses and structures. 
		B-1 	B-1A 	B-2 	B-3 	B-4 
(1) 	Minimum lot area in square feet: 	20,000 	20,000 	20,000 	20,000 	20,000 
(2) 	Minimum lot width in feet:* 	100 	100 	100 	100 	100 
(3) 	Minimum front yard setback in feet, unless a reduced setback is allowed pursuant to subsection (f): 	30 	35 	35 	35 	35 
(4) 	Minimum side yard setback in feet, unless a greater setback is required by section 903: 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 
(5) 	Minimum side yard setback adjacent to a street in feet: 	30 	35 	35 	35 	35 
(6) 	Minimum rear yard setback in feet, unless a greater setback is required by section 903: 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 
 
*Where applicable, newly created corner lots must also adhere to section 4.4(c) of the Subdivision Ordinance, requiring additional lot width on certain corner lots. 
(b)  The following chart lists the requirements within B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District and B-4K Historic Kempsville Area Mixed Use District for minimum lot area, width, and yard spacing for all uses and structures: 
	B-4C 	B-4K 
(1) Minimum lot area in square feet. 	10,000 	10,000 
(2) Minimum lot width in feet.* 	100 	100 
(3) Minimum setback from a street in feet. 	0 	10 
(4) Maximum setback from a street in feet. There shall be no maximum setback from a street for structures where the total floor area consists of residential use. 	10 	20 
(5) Minimum side yard setback in feet, unless otherwise identified herein or a greater setback is required by section 903. 	0 	0 
(6) Minimum rear yard setback in feet, unless a greater setback is required by section 903. 	0 	0 
(7) Maximum density per acre of multifamily dwellings in the B-4C and B-4K Districts. Density shall be determined based on the area of the entire zoning lot, even if such lot is partially occupied by other principal uses or conditional uses. For every 10,000 square feet of commercial space in a given development project, an additional dwelling unit per acre beyond that allowed by the maximum density may be built. 	36 	18 
(8) Maximum density of hotels and motels. 	80 	N/A 
 
*Where applicable, newly created corner lots must also adhere to section 4.4(c) of the Subdivision Ordinance, requiring additional lot width on certain corner lots. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, setbacks affecting only the first floor of multistory buildings may be increased by no more than twenty (20) feet in order to allow the creation of covered passageways within the B-4C and B-4K Districts. In addition, building setbacks adjacent to roadway intersections may be increased to provide safe and reasonable line-of-sight clearances. 
(c)  The following chart lists the requirements within the B-3 and B-4 Business Districts for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing and maximum density for lodging uses and structure. For hotels and motels (lodging units): 
		B-3 	B-4 
(1) 	Minimum lot area in square feet: 	43,560 	20,000 
(2) 	Minimum lot width in feet:* 	100 	100 
(3) 	Minimum front yard setback in feet: 	35 	35 
(4) 	Minimum side yard setback in feet: 	20 	20 
(5) 	Minimum side yard setback adjacent to a street in feet: 	10 	35 
(6) 	Minimum rear yard setback in feet: 	20 	20 
(7) 	Maximum density for lodging units per acre: 	N/A 	80 
(8) 	For each dwelling unit contained in a combination development, the number of allowed lodging units shall be reduced by two (2). 		
 
*Where applicable, newly created corner lots must also adhere to section 4.4(c) of the Subdivision Ordinance, requiring additional lot width on certain corner lots. 
(d)  The following chart lists the requirements within the B-4 Mixed Use District for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing, maximum lot coverage, maximum density and maximum number of units constructed in a single building for single-family attached dwellings (townhouses). 
For attached dwellings (townhouses): 
		B-4 
(1) 	Minimum lot area in square feet: 	1,400 
(2) 	Minimum average lot area in square feet: 	2,500 
(3) 	Minimum interior lot width in feet:* 	14 
(4) 	Minimum exterior lot width in feet: 	30 
(5) 	Minimum front yard setback in feet: 	20 
(6) 	Minimum side yard setback in feet: 	10 
(7) 	Minimum rear yard setback for dwellings in feet: 	20 
(8) 	Minimum rear yard setback for accessory buildings of less than 100 square feet, in feet: 	5 
(9) 	Maximum lot coverage by buildings and parking, excluding recreational buildings and surfaces in percent: 	40 
(10) 	Maximum density in dwellings per acre: 	12 
(11) 	Maximum number of attached dwellings in one group without side yard setbacks: 	6 
 
*Where applicable, newly created corner lots must also adhere to section 4.4(c) of the Subdivision Ordinance, requiring additional lot width on certain corner lots. 
(e)  The following chart lists the requirements within the B-4 Mixed Use District and B-4K Historic Kempsville Area Mixed Use District for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing, maximum lot coverage and maximum density for multiple-family dwellings. 
For multiple-family dwellings: 
		B-4 	B-4K 
(1) 	Minimum lot area in square feet: 	40,000 	40,000 
(2) 	Minimum lot width in feet: 	200 	200 
(3) 	Minimum front yard setback in feet:* 	30 	10 
(4) 	Maximum front yard setback in feet:* 		20 
(5) 	Minimum side yard setback in feet: 	8 	0 
(6) 	Minimum rear yard setback in feet: 	10 	0 
(7) 	Maximum lot coverage by buildings and parking, excluding recreational buildings and surfaces in percent: 	75 	75 
(8) 	Maximum density in dwelling units per acre: 	36 	18 
 
*Where applicable, newly created corner lots must also adhere to section 4.4(c) of the Subdivision Ordinance, requiring additional lot width on certain corner lots. 
(f)  Front and side-yard setbacks adjacent to a street may be reduced in accordance with the provisions of Part H of Article 2. 
(Ord. No. 1912, 9-11-89; Ord. No. 1947, 2-12-90; Ord. No 2359, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 2597, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 2685, 2-26-02; Ord. No. 2692, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 2726, 10-29-02; Ord. No. 2843, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 2900, 11-8-05; Ord. No. 2917, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3109, 11-10-09; Ord. No. 3221, 3-13-12; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3384, 12-2-14) 
_____ 
Sec. 903. - Landscape screening and buffering regulations. 
For the B-1 through B-4 Commercial Districts, the following landscape screening and buffering regulations shall apply: 
(a)  When a zoning lot within a B-1 or B-1A Business District adjoins a residential, apartment or hotel district without an intervening street, alley or body of water over twenty-five (25) feet in width, a fifteen-foot minimum yard shall be required along all lot lines adjoining the residential, apartment or hotel district. Category I landscape screening shall be required within the yard area. No other uses or structures shall be permitted in such yards. 
(b)  When a zoning lot within the B-2, B-3, B-4, B-4C or B-4K District adjoins a residential or apartment district without an intervening street, alley or body of water over twenty-five (25) feet in width, a fifteen-foot minimum yard shall be required along all lot lines adjoining the residential or apartment district. Category IV landscape screening shall be required within the yard area. No other uses or structures shall be permitted in such yards. 
(c)  When a zoning lot within the B-2, B-3, B-4, B-4C or B-4K District adjoins an O-1 Office District without an intervening street, alley or body of water over twenty-five (25) feet in width, a ten-foot minimum yard shall be required along all lot lines adjoining the office district. Category I landscape screening shall be required within the yard area. No other uses or structures shall be permitted in such yards. 
(Ord. No 2359, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 2843, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 2917, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 904. - Height regulations. 
(a)  The maximum height for all uses and structures within the B-1 Neighborhood Business District and B-1A Limited Community Business District shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(b)  Where a zoning lot within the B-2 Community Business District, B-3 Central Business District, B-4 Mixed Use District, B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District or B-4K Historic Kempsville Area Mixed Use District adjoins the side or rear yard of a zoning lot in a residential or apartment district without an intervening street or alley over twenty-five (25) feet in width or a body of water over fifty (50) feet in width, the following maximum height regulations shall apply on that portion of the commercial zoning lot within one hundred (100) feet of the adjoining residential or apartment district. In cases where more than one (1) of the following apply, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(1)  When adjacent to residential district, the maximum height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  When adjacent to A-12 or A-18 Apartment Districts, the maximum height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(3)  When adjacent to A-24 Apartment District, the maximum height shall be forty-five (45) feet. 
(4)  When adjacent to A-36 Apartment District, the maximum height shall be one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
(c)  The maximum height for hotels and motels within the B-4 Mixed Use District is seventy-five (75) feet. 
(d)  Except as specified in items (a),(b) and (c) hereinabove, there shall be no maximum height regulations in the B-2, B-3 and B-4 Districts. In the B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District, minimum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet and the maximum building height shall be two hundred (200) feet. In the B-4K Historic Kempsville Area Mixed Use District, the minimum building height shall be twenty-five (25) feet and the maximum building height shall be fifty (50) feet. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the above, no building or other structure shall exceed the height limit established by section 202(b) regarding air navigation. 
(Ord. No. 1785, 6-13-88; Ord. No. 2359, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 2597, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 2843, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 2896, 9-13-05; Ord. No. 2917, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 905. - Sign regulations. 
(a)  In the B-1 Neighborhood Business District, signs shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)  For each forty (40) feet of frontage and for each eighty (80) feet of lot line adjoining a street, but not constituting frontage, not more than one sign and not more than thirty-two (32) square feet of signage shall be permitted; provided, however, that no establishment shall have more than three (3) signs, of which one may be a freestanding sign; and provided further that no establishment having a frontage of less than one hundred (100) feet shall have a freestanding sign. No establishment having a frontage of at least one hundred (100) feet but less than or equal to two hundred (200) feet shall have a freestanding sign exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face, and no establishment having a frontage of more than two hundred (200) feet shall have a freestanding sign exceeding seventy-five (75) square feet in area per face. No sign shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet of surface area. Any establishment or property having less frontage or lot line adjoining a street than required above may have one sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
(2)  Where there is an established neighborhood commercial center containing five (5) or more establishments and a minimum of forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area, one additional sign no greater in area than one hundred (100) square feet per face may be erected at each principal entrance. The top of the face of such sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and the top of any decorative cap on such sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. Such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in width and the face of such sign shall be surrounded by a minimum of six (6) inches of framework constructed of a material matching in color and texture the primary exterior building material of the principal structure in the center. 
(3)  Signs located on property for sale, lease or rent shall be permitted, provided that no such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, that not more than two (2) such signs shall be erected for each one hundred (100) feet of lot line adjoining the street, and that not more than four (4) such signs shall be erected on any property. Any property having less frontage or lot line adjoining a street may have one (1) sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet of surface area. 
(4)  Beacon lights or search lights may be permitted for advertising purposes for special events. 
(5)  To facilitate occupancy in a new neighborhood shopping center containing a minimum of forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area, one (1) temporary sign not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area shall be permitted. Such sign shall be removed when seventy (70) percent of the property is occupied or leased, or after a period of twenty-four (24) months from the date on which a certificate of occupancy is first issued, whichever comes first. 
(b)  In the B-1A Limited Community Business District and in the B-2 Community Business District, signs shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)  For each forty (40) feet of frontage and for each eighty (80) feet of lot line adjoining a street, but not constituting frontage, not more than one (1) sign and not more than sixty (60) square feet of signage shall be permitted; provided, however, that no establishment shall have more than three (3) signs, of which one (1) may be a freestanding sign; and provided further that no establishment having a frontage of less than one hundred (100) feet shall have a freestanding sign. No establishment having a frontage of at least one hundred (100) feet but less than or equal to two hundred (200) feet shall have a freestanding sign exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face, and no establishment having a frontage of more than two hundred (200) feet shall have a freestanding sign exceeding seventy-five (75) square feet in area per face. No sign shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area. Any establishment or property having less frontage or lot line adjoining a street than required above may have one (1) sign not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area. 
(2)  Where there is an established neighborhood commercial center containing five (5) or more establishments and a minimum of forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area, one (1) additional sign no greater in area than one hundred (100) square feet per face shall be permitted at each principal entrance. Where there is an established community or regional commercial center containing a minimum of ten (10) establishments and fifteen (15) acres of land, one (1) additional sign not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area shall be permitted at each principal entrance. The top of the face of such sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and the top of any decorative cap on such sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. Such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in width and the face of such sign shall be surrounded by a minimum of six (6) inches of framework constructed of a material matching in color and texture the primary exterior building material of the principal structure in the center. 
(3)  Signs located on property for sale, lease or rent shall be permitted; provided, that no such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, that not more than two (2) such signs shall be erected for each one hundred (100) feet of lot line adjoining the street, and that not more than four (4) such signs shall be erected on any property. Any property having less frontage or lot line adjoining a street may have one (1) sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet of surface area. 
(4)  Beacon lights or search lights may be permitted for advertising purposes for special events. 
(5)  To facilitate occupancy in a community commercial center containing a minimum of fifteen (15) and acres of land, one (1) temporary sign not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area shall be permitted. In a regional commercial center containing a minimum of thirty (30) acres of land, one (1) temporary sign not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area shall be permitted. Signs shall be removed when seventy (70) percent of the property is occupied or leased, or after a period of twenty-four (24) months from the date a certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever comes first. 
(c)  In the B-3 Central Business District, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  For each forty (40) feet of frontage and for each eighty (80) feet of lot line adjoining a street, but not constituting frontage, not more than one (1) sign and not more than sixty (60) square feet of signage shall be permitted; provided, however, that no establishment shall have more than three (3) signs of which one (1) may be a freestanding sign; and provided further that no establishment having a frontage of less than one hundred (100) feet shall have a freestanding sign. No establishment having a frontage of at least one hundred (100) feet but less than or equal to two hundred (200) feet shall have a freestanding sign exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face, and no establishment having a frontage of more than two hundred (200) feet shall have a freestanding sign exceeding seventy-five (75) square feet in area per face. No sign shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area. Any establishment or property having less frontage or lot line adjoining a street than required above may have one (1) sign not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area. 
(2)  Where there is an established neighborhood commercial center containing five (5) or more establishments and a minimum of forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area, one (1) additional sign not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in area per face shall be permitted at each principal entrance. Where there is an established community or regional commercial center containing ten (10) or more establishments and a minimum of fifteen (15) acres of land, one (1) additional sign not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area per face shall be permitted at each principal entrance. The top of the face of such sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and the top of any decorative cap on such sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. Such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in width and the face of such sign shall be surrounded by a minimum of six (6) inches of framework constructed of a material matching in color and texture the primary exterior building material of the principal structure in the center. 
(3)  Signs located on property for sale, lease or rent shall be permitted, provided that no such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, that not more than two (2) such signs shall be erected for each one hundred (100) feet of lot line adjoining the street, and that not more than four (4) such signs shall be erected on any property. Any property having less frontage or lot line adjoining a street may have one (1) sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet of surface area. 
(d)  Within the B-4C Central Business Mixed Use District, signs shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)  For each foot of occupancy frontage, an establishment shall have no more than six-tenths (0.6) of one (1) square foot of sign area. No single establishment shall have more than four (4) signs or more than two (2) signs per building facade, and no individual sign shall exceed sixty (60) square feet in area. Any establishment having less than forty (40) feet of occupancy frontage may have one (1) sign not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet in area. No such sign shall be allowed above the second story of any building. 
(2)  One additional sign at each street-level entrance to upper-floor residential dwelling units shall be permitted; provided, that no such sign shall exceed eight (8) square feet in area. 
(2.5)  Commercial buildings, including hotels and motels, of less than five (5) stories in height may have two (2) signs in addition to other allowed signage, provided that no such sign shall have an area exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet. Such signs shall be mounted on or above the fourth story of the building, but not above the roofline of such building, and only one (1) such sign per building facade shall be allowed. Two (2) additional signs, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet each, shall be allowed at each street level entrance. 
(3)  Commercial buildings, including hotels and motels, of five (5) stories to ten (10) stories may have two (2) signs in addition to other allowed signage, provided that no such sign shall have an area exceeding two hundred (200) square feet. Such signs shall be mounted on or above the top one-quarter (¼) of the building, but not above the roofline of such building, and only one (1) sign per building facade shall be allowed. Two (2) additional signs, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet each, may be allowed at each street level entrance. 
(3.5)  Commercial buildings, including hotels and motels, of more than ten (10) stories in height may have two (2) signs in addition to other allowed signage, provided that no such sign shall have an area exceeding three hundred (300) square feet. All signs shall be mounted on or above the top one-quarter (¼) of the building, but not above the roofline of such building, and only one (1) sign per building facade shall be allowed. Two (2) additional signs, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet each, may be allowed at each street level entrance. 
(3.7)  Major Tenant Sign Option. For each foot of building footage, a major tenant may have a maximum of one and two-tenths (1.2) square feet of sign area, provided that pedestrian scale features and amenities such as outdoor cafe seating, planters, kiosk areas, fountains, display windows or sculptures are provided on the facade or adjacent thereto. No major tenant shall have a total of more than four (4) signs or more than two (2) signs per building facade. 
(4)  All freestanding signs shall be subject to approval by the city council, as consistent with the general purpose and intent of the design provisions presented in the November 2009 Pembroke Strategic Growth Area 4 Implementation Plan and any applicable design standards approved by the city council. 
(5)  Signs on building awnings shall not be included in determining the number of building signs permitted, or in determining permissible sign area, if they meet the following criteria: 
a.  Such signs are uniform in font, color, size and style; 
b.  There is only one (1) sign per awning; and 
c.  Such signs are no larger than two (2) square feet. 
(6)  Public or private parking structures and parking garages may have one (1) sign per vehicle entrance and two (2) additional signs. Such signs shall be no greater in area than seventy-five (75) square feet. 
(e)  Within the B-4 Mixed Use District, signs shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)  For hotels and motels: 
a.  For each twenty (20) feet of frontage and for each forty (40) feet of lot line adjoining a street, but not constituting frontage, not more than one (1) sign and not more than forty (40) square feet of signage shall be permitted; provided, however, that no establishment shall have more than four (4) signs, of which one (1) may be a freestanding sign; and provided further that no establishment having a frontage of less than one hundred (100) feet shall have a freestanding sign. No establishment having a frontage of at least one hundred (100) feet but less than or equal to two hundred (200) feet shall have a freestanding sign exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face, and no establishment having a frontage of more than two hundred (200) feet shall have a freestanding sign exceeding seventy-five (75) square feet in area per face. No freestanding sign shall exceed two (2) faces, and no sign of any other type shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area. Any establishment or property having less frontage or lot line adjoining a street than required above may have one (1) sign not exceeding thirty (30) square feet in area. 
(2)  For all other uses and structures, the following sign regulations shall apply: 
a.  No sign located on or in any window or located behind any window in such a manner as to attract the attention of persons outside the establishment, shall have an area greater than twenty (20) percent of the surface area of such window, not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet. 
b.  Signs containing or consisting of graphic or pictorial representations shall be permitted; provided, however, that the combined surface area occupied by such graphic or pictorial representations shall not be more than twenty (20) percent of the total sign allotment of an establishment or four (4) square feet, whichever is less. 
c.  For each forty (40) feet of frontage and for each eighty (80) feet of lot line adjoining a street, but not constituting frontage, not more than one (1) sign and not more than a total of sixteen (16) square feet of signage shall be permitted; provided, however, that no establishment shall have more than two (2) signs, of which one (1) may be a freestanding sign; and provided further that no establishment having a frontage of less than one hundred (100) feet shall have a freestanding sign. No freestanding sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face, and no sign of any other type shall exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area. Any establishment having less frontage or lot line adjoining a street than is required hereinabove may have one (1) sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
d.  Sign regulations pertaining to multiple-family dwellings shall be the same as those applying in the Apartment Districts. 
e.  Where there is an established neighborhood commercial center containing at least five (5) establishments and at least forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area, one (1) additional sign shall be allowed at each principal entrance. No such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face. No such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face. The top of the face of such sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and the top of any decorative cap on such sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. Such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in width and the face of such sign shall be surrounded by a minimum of six (6) inches of framework constructed of a material matching in color and texture the primary exterior building material of the principal structure in the center. 
f.  Signs located on property for sale, lease or rent shall be permitted; provided, however, that no such sign shall exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. Not more than two (2) such signs shall be permitted for any property having more than one hundred (100) feet of lot line adjoining the street, and any property having less than one hundred (100) feet of such lot line shall have no more than one (1) sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
g.  Beacon lights or search lights may be permitted for purposes of advertisement of special events for a period not in excess of forty-eight (48) hours. 
h.  To facilitate occupancy in a new neighborhood commercial center containing at least forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area, one (1) temporary sign, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, shall be allowed. Such sign shall be removed when seventy (70) percent of the property is occupied or leased, or after a period of twenty-four (24) months from the date a certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever event first occurs. 
(f)  Within the B-4K Historic Kempsville Area Mixed Use District, signs shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)  For each foot of occupancy frontage an establishment shall have no more than six-tenths (0.6) of one square foot of area. No single establishment shall have more than four (4) signs, nor more than two (2) signs per building facade, and no individual sign shall exceed sixty (60) square feet in surface area. Any establishment having less than forty (40) feet of occupancy frontage may have one (1) sign not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet. No such sign shall be allowed above the second story of any building. 
(2)  One additional sign at each street-level entrance to upper-floor residential dwelling units shall be permitted; provided, that no such sign shall exceed eight (8) square feet in area. 
(3)  Commercial buildings of at least three stories in height may have a maximum of two (2) additional signs, neither of which shall be greater in area than one hundred fifty (150) square feet. Such signs shall be mounted on or above the third story of the building, but not above the roofline of such building, and only one (1) sign per building facade shall be allowed. Additionally, two (2) signs, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet each, shall be allowed at street level if the building has a street level entrance. 
(4)  Major Tenant Sign Option. For each foot of building footage, a major tenant may have a maximum of one and two-tenths (1.2) square feet of sign area, provided that pedestrian scale features and amenities such as outdoor cafe seating, planters, kiosk areas, fountains, display windows or sculptures are provided on the facade or adjacent thereto. No major tenant shall have a total of more than four (4) signs, nor more than two (2) signs per building facade. 
(5)  All freestanding signs shall be subject to approval by the City Council, as consistent with the general purpose and intent of the design provisions presented in the Historic Kempsville Area Master Plan and any applicable design standards approved by the City Council. 
(6)  Signs on building awnings shall not be included in determining the number of building signs permitted, or in determining permissible sign area, if they meet the following criteria: 
a.  Such signs are uniform in font, color, size and style; 
b.  There is only one (1) sign per awning; and 
c.  Such signs are no larger than two (2) square feet. 
(7)  Public or private parking structures and parking garages may have one (1) sign per vehicle entrance and two (2) additional signs. No such sign shall be greater than seventy-five (75) square feet in area. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  For all other uses and structures, the following sign regulations shall apply: 
a.  No sign located on or in any window or located behind any window in such a manner as to attract the attention of persons outside the establishment, shall have an area greater than twenty (20) percent of the area of such window, not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet. 
b.  Signs containing or consisting of graphic or pictorial representations shall be permitted; provided, however, that the combined surface area occupied by such graphic or pictorial representations shall not be more than twenty (20) percent of the total sign allotment of an establishment or four (4) square feet, whichever is less. 
c.  For each forty (40) feet of frontage and for each eighty (80) feet of lot line adjoining a street, but not constituting frontage, not more than one (1) sign and not more than a total of sixteen (16) square feet of surface area of signage shall be permitted; provided, however, that no establishment shall have more than two (2) signs of which one (1) may be a freestanding sign; and provided further that no establishment having a frontage of less than one hundred (100) feet shall have a freestanding sign. No freestanding sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face, and no sign of any other type shall exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area. Any establishment having less frontage or lot line adjoining a street than is required hereinabove may have one (1) sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
d.  Sign regulations pertaining to multiple-family dwellings shall be the same as those applying in the Apartment Districts, except that multiple-family dwellings may have a maximum of two (2) building mounted signs per development not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area per sign. 
e.  Where there is an established neighborhood commercial center containing at least five (5) establishments and at least forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area, one (1) additional sign shall be allowed at each principal entrance. No such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face. The top of the face of such sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and the top of any decorative cap on such sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. Such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in width and the face of such sign shall be surrounded by a minimum of six (6) inches of framework constructed of a material matching in color and texture the primary exterior building material of the principal structure in the center. 
f.  Signs located on property for sale, lease or rent shall be permitted; provided, however, that no such sign shall exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. A maximum of two (2) such signs shall be permitted for any property having more than one hundred (100) feet of lot line adjoining the street, and any property having less than one hundred (100) feet of such lot line shall have no more than one (1) sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
g.  Beacon lights or search lights may be permitted for purposes of advertisement of special events for a period not in excess of forty-eight (48) hours. 
h.  To facilitate occupancy in a new neighborhood commercial center containing at least forty thousand (40,000) square feet of land area, one (1) temporary sign, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, shall be allowed. Such sign shall be removed when seventy (70) percent of the property is occupied or leased, or after a period of twenty-four (24) months from the date a certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever event first occurs. 
(Ord. No 2359, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 2609, 8-22-00; Ord. No. 2722, 9-10-02; Ord. No. 2785, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 2796, 1-13-04; Ord. No. 2843, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 2917, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3109, 11-10-09; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3495, 4-4-17)  
Sec. 906. - Off-street parking regulations. 
Parking shall be required for all uses and structures permitted in the B-1 through B-4K Historic Kempsville Area Districts in accordance with section 203. For single-family attached (townhouse) developments, no parking area on any lot shall exceed farther than twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way line and no area within a garage, or an enclosed or covered space shall be counted toward meeting off-street parking requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2843, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 2917, 1-24-06)  
ARTICLE 10. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 1000. - Legislative intent. 
The purpose of the I-1 Light Industrial District is to permit light industrial uses, wholesaling, storage, packaging, distribution, and retailing restricted primarily to operations requiring bulk deliveries by truck or van in locations served by major transportation networks and in areas where employment centers close to residential concentrations will reduce traffic congestion and add to public convenience by moving places of work closer to places of residence. The purpose of the I-2 Heavy Industrial District is to permit industrial operations, wholesaling, warehousing and distribution in areas suitable for these functions.  
Sec. 1001. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Principal and conditional uses. The following chart lists those uses permitted within the I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts. Those uses and structures in the respective industrial districts shall be permitted as either principal uses indicated by a "P" or as conditional uses indicated by a "C." Uses and structures indicated by an "X" shall be prohibited in the respective districts. No uses or structures other than as specified shall be permitted. 
Use 	I-1 	I-2 
Airports, heliports and helistops 	P 	P 
Animal hospitals, veterinary establishments, pounds, shelters, and commercial kennels 	C 	C 
Automobile museums 	C 	C 
Automobile service stations, provided that where there is an adjoining residential or apartment district without an intervening street, alley or permanent open space over twenty-five (25) feet in width and where lots separated by the district boundary have adjacent front yards, a six-foot solid fence with Category VI screening shall separate the automobile service station use from the adjacent residential district and no ground sign shall be within fifty (50) feet of the residential or apartment district 	C 	C 
Automotive rental, parts and supply stores; provided that no outside storage is included (excluding operative equipment) 	P 	P 
Automotive repair garages 	C 	P 
Bars or nightclubs 	C 	C 
Borrow pits 	C 	C 
Building-mounted antennas meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 	P 
Building-mounted antennas other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 	C 
Bulk storage yards and building contractor's yards; provided that no sale or processing of scrap, salvage, or secondhand material shall be permitted in such yards; and, provided further that additional requirements as listed in section 228 are met 	C 	P 
Business, medical, financial, nonprofit, professional and similar office buildings 	P 	P 
Car wash facilities, subject to the provisions of section 228.1 	C 	X 
Collection depots for recyclable materials 	C 	X 
Commercial parking lots 	P 	P 
Communication towers meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communication towers meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 	P 
Communication towers other than those meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communication towers other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 	C 
Craft breweries, subject to the provisions of section 230 	C 	X 
Craft distilleries, subject to the provisions of section 230 	C 	X 
Craft wineries, subject to the provisions of section 230 	C 	X 
Day-care and child care education centers 	C 	C 
Eating and drinking establishments 	P 	P 
Establishments such as linen suppliers, freight movers, communication services and canteen services 	P 	P 
Establishments which deliver merchandise in bulk by truck or van 	P 	P 
Facilities for construction, maintenance and repair of boats and vessels 	C 	P 
Fiber-optics transmission facilities meeting the requirements of section 233.15 	P 	P 
Firewood preparation facility 	C 	C 
Heavy equipment sales and services 	P 	P 
High explosives manufacturing, storage and distribution 	X 	C 
Home-based wildlife rehabilitation facilities 	C 	C 
Hotels and motels, provided the following conditions are met: (i) Frontage shall be on a major or secondary street or highway; (ii) the minimum lot size shall be forty thousand (40,000) square feet and a minimum lot width of one hundred fifty (150) feet; (iii) density regulations of the H-1 Hotel District shall apply; (iv) accessory uses shall be limited to eating and drinking establishments, gift shops and travel agencies; (v) parking requirements of at least one (1) space per one (1) lodging unit shall be provided in addition to the requirements for an accessory use; (vi) front yards shall have a minimum depth of thirty (30) feet and, except for necessary driveways, shall be maintained in landscaping and shall not be used for parking; (vii) signs shall conform to the sign requirements applicable within H-1 Hotel District regulations 	C 	X 
Low explosives manufacturing and distribution 	X 	C 
Low explosives storage with a valid federal explosives permit or license from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (BATF) 	P 	P 
Manufacturing, processing, extracting, packaging or fabricating establishments; provided that the following uses shall not be allowed: (i) Explosive manufacturing, storage and distribution; (ii) petroleum processing; (iii) processing or outside storage of salvage, scrap or junk 	P 	P 
Military installations 	X 	P 
Mobile home sales 	C 	X 
Motion picture studios 	P 	P 
Passenger vessels permitted by U.S. Coast Guard regulations to carry more than one hundred forty-nine (149) passengers and used for commercial purposes 	X 	C 
Personal watercraft rentals 	C 	X 
Petroleum processing 	X 	C 
Piers, wharves and docks 	X 	P 
Printing, lithographic or publishing establishments 	P 	P 
Public buildings and grounds 	P 	P 
Public schools, colleges and universities, and private schools, colleges and universities having similar academic curriculums 	C 	X 
Public utilities installations and substations including offices; provided storage or maintenance facilities shall not be permitted; and provided, further, that utilities substations, other than individual transformers, shall be surrounded by Category VI screening solid, except for entrances and exits; and provided also, transformer vaults for underground utilities and the like shall require only Category I screening, solid except for access opening 	P 	P 
Public utility transformer stations and major transmission lines and towers (fifty thousand (50,000) volts or more) 	C 	C 
Radio or television transmission and relay stations 	C 	C 
Recreational facilities of an outdoor nature, which may be partially or temporarily enclosed on a seasonal basis with approval of city council, except that riding academies and recreational campgrounds shall not be allowed as a conditional use or otherwise 	C 	X 
Recreational facilities other than those of an outdoor nature 	P 	P 
Religious uses, except freestanding, with a floor area greater than 4,000 square feet 	C 	C 
Religious uses, except freestanding with a maximum floor area of 4,000 square feet 	P 	P 
Repair establishments; provided that no outside storage is included (excluding mobile operative equipment) 	P 	P 
Satellite wagering facility 	C 	C 
Ship supply establishments and facilities 	X 	P 
Small wireless facilities meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 	P 
Small wireless facilities not placed on existing structures 	C 	C 
Solid waste management facilities 	X 	C 
Storage or processing of salvage, scrap or junk 	X 	C 
Terminals for freight or passengers arriving or departing by ship 	X 	P 
Truck and trailer rentals, provided that they shall comply with the requirements of section 242.2 	P 	P 
Vocational, technical, industrial and trade schools 	P 	P 
Wholesale and retail establishments dealing primarily in bulk materials delivered by ship, or by ship and railroad or ship and railroad or ship and truck in combination 	X 	P 
Wholesaling, warehousing, storage or distribution establishments 	P 	P 
Wildlife rehabilitation centers 	C 	C 
Wind energy conversion systems, freestanding, except as provided below 	P 	P 
Wind energy conversion systems, freestanding, in excess of two (2) 	C 	C 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, except as provided below 	P 	P 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, in excess of one (1) per principal structure 	C 	C 
 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal uses and structures, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  An accessory activity operated for profit in a residential dwelling unit where there is no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or any visible or audible evidence detectable from outside the building lot, either permanently or intermittently, of the conduct of such business except for one non-illuminated sign not more than one square foot in area mounted flat against the residence; where no traffic is generated, including traffic by commercial delivery vehicles, by such activity in greater volumes than would normally be expected in the neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such activity is met off the street and other than in a required front yard; where the activity is conducted on the premises which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner, and no person other than members of the immediate family occupying such dwelling unit is employed in the activity; where such activity is conducted only in the principal structure on the lot; where there are no sales to the general public of products or merchandise from the home; and where the activity is specifically designed or conducted to permit no more than one patron, customer, or pupil to be present on the premises at any one time. The following are specifically prohibited as accessory activities: Convalescent or nursing homes, bars or nightclubs, tourist homes, massage or tattoo parlors, radio or television repair shops, auto repair shops, or similar establishments. 
(c)  Special restrictions in Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1). No use or structure shall be permitted on any property located within Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1) or the Clear Zone unless such use is designated as Compatible in APZ-1 or the Clear Zone, as the case may be, in Table 2 ("Air Installations Compatible Use Zones Land Use Compatibility in Accident Potential Zones") of section 1804; provided, however, that any use or structure not designated as Compatible shall be permitted as a replacement of the same use or structure if the replacement use or structure is of equal or lesser density or intensity than the original use or structure. 
(Ord. No. 1801, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 1937, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 2100, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 2119, 3-24-92; Ord. No. 2178, 9-22-92; Ord. No. 2251, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 2261, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 2268, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2427, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2460, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 2505, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 2513, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 2552, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 2563, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 2660, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 2907, 12-20-05; Ord. 2922, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2968, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 2976, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 3000, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 3026, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 3046, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 3050, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 3102, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 3112, 1-12-10; Ord. No. 3191, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 3217, 2-28-12; Ord. No. 3270, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3378, 10-7-14; Ord. No. 3397, 3-17-15; Ord. No. 3403, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3441, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3467, 11-15-16; Ord. No. 3506, 6-20-17; Ord. No. 3514, 7-11-17)  
Sec. 1002. - Dimensional requirements. 
(a)  The following chart lists the requirements within the I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing and maximum floor area ratio for all uses and structures. 
		Industrial 
I-1 	Districts 
I-2 
 (1) 	Minimum lot area in square feet: 	20,000 	20,000 
 (2) 	Minimum lot width in feet:* 	100 	100 
 (3) 	Minimum front yard setback in feet: 	 30 	 30 
 (4) 	Minimum side yard setback in feet unless a greater setback is required by section 1003: 	  0 	  0 
 (5) 	Minimum side yard setback adjacent to a street in feet: 	 30 	 30 
 (6) 	Minimum rear yard setback in feet, unless a greater setback is required by section 1003: 	  0 	  0 
 (7) 	Maximum floor area ratio: 	2.5 	2.5 
 
*Where applicable, newly created corner lots must also adhere to section 4.4(c) of the Subdivision Ordinance, requiring additional lot width on certain corner lots. 
(b)  Front and side-yard setbacks adjacent to a street may be reduced in accordance with the provisions of Part H of Article 2. 
(Ord. No. 1948, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 3384, 12-2-14)  
Sec. 1003. - Landscape screening and buffering regulations. 
For the I-1 and I-2 Commercial Districts, the following landscape screening and buffering regulations shall apply: 
(a)  When a zoning lot within an I-1 Industrial District adjoins a residential or apartment district without an intervening street, alley or body of water over twenty-five (25) feet in width, a twenty-five-foot minimum yard shall be required along all lot lines adjoining the residential or apartment district. Category II landscape screening shall be required within the yard area. No other uses or structures shall be permitted in such yards. 
(b)  When a zoning lot within an I-2 Industrial District adjoins a residential district without an intervening street, alley or body of water over twenty-five (25) feet in width, a twenty-five-foot minimum yard shall be required along all lot lines adjoining the residential or apartment district. Category VII screening shall be required within the yard area. No other uses or structures shall be permitted in such yards. 
(c)  When a zoning lot within an I-2 Industrial District adjoins an H-1 Hotel District, O-1 or O-2 Office District, B-1 or B-1A Business District without an intervening street, alley or body of water over twenty-five (25) feet in width, a fifteen-foot minimum yard shall be required along all lot lines adjoining the office district. Category IV landscape screening shall be required within the yard area. No other uses or structures shall be permitted in such yards.  
Sec. 1004. - Height regulations. 
(a)  No portion of a building or other structure located on a zoning lot which is adjacent to a street within the I-1 or I-2 Industrial District shall exceed a height equal to twice the distance from such structure to the vertical projection of the centerline of such street. 
(b)  Where a zoning lot within the I-1 or I-2 Industrial District adjoins the side or rear yard of a zoning lot in a residential, apartment or hotel district without an intervening street or alley over twenty-five (25) feet in width or body of water over fifty (50) feet in width, the following maximum height regulations shall apply on that portion of the industrial zoning lot within one hundred (100) feet of the adjoining residential, apartment or hotel district. In cases where more than one of the following apply, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(1)  When adjacent to a Residential District, the maximum height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  When adjacent to an A-12 or A-18 Apartment District, the maximum height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(3)  When adjacent to an A-24 Apartment District, the maximum height shall be forty-five (45) feet. 
(4)  When adjacent to an A-36 Apartment District, the Maximum height shall be one hundred and twenty (120) feet.  
Sec. 1005. - Sign regulations. 
In the I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts, signs shall be permitted as follows: 
(a)  One and a half (1½) square feet of signage shall be permitted for every linear foot of building frontage or occupancy frontage. No more than three (3) signs shall be permitted, per establishment, including one (1) freestanding sign. Uses with twenty-six (26) linear feet or less of building or occupancy frontage shall be allowed forty (40) square feet of signage. 
(b)  Commercial buildings of less than five (5) stories in height may have two (2) signs up to one hundred fifty (150) square feet each in addition to other allowed signage. Such signs shall be mounted on or above the fourth story of the building, but not above the roofline of such building, and only one (1) such sign per building facade shall be allowed. Two (2) additional signs, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet each, shall be allowed at each street level entrance. 
(c)  Commercial buildings of five (5) stories to ten (10) stories may have two (2) signs up to two hundred (200) square feet in addition to other allowed signage. Such signs shall be mounted on or above the top one-quarter (¼) of the building, but not above the roofline of such building, and only one (1) sign per building facade shall be allowed. Two (2) additional signs, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet each, may be allowed at each street level entrance. 
(d)  Commercial buildings of more than ten (10) stories in height may have two (2) signs up to three hundred (300) square feet each in addition to other allowed signage. Such signs shall be mounted on or above the top one-quarter (¼) of the building, but not above the roofline of such building, and only one (1) sign per building facade shall be allowed. Two (2) additional signs, not exceeding twenty (20) square feet each, may be allowed at each street level entrance. 
(e)  Establishments with a lot frontage of between one hundred (100) linear feet and two hundred (200) linear feet shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign, which shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face. Establishments with a lot frontage greater than two hundred (200) linear feet shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign, which shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area per face. 
(f)  Industrial parks containing three (3) or more establishments and a minimum of ten (10) acres of land area, shall be permitted one (1) additional sign not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet per face in area at each principal entrance or frontage. An industrial park containing three (3) or more establishments and a minimum of thirty (30) acres of land area, shall be permitted one (1) additional sign not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in area per face at each principal entrance or frontage. 
(g)  Property for sale, lease or rent, shall be permitted, no more than two (2) signs for each one hundred (100) feet of lot frontage. Such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and no more than four (4) signs shall be erected on any property. Any property having less than one hundred feet of lot frontage may have one (1) sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area. All such signs shall be separated by at least fifty (50) linear feet. 
(h)  To facilitate occupancy in new industrial parks, a temporary sign shall be permitted at each principal entrance. In an industrial park containing a minimum of ten (10) acres of land area, one (1) sign no greater in area than one hundred fifty (150) square feet may be erected at each principal entrance. In a new industrial park containing a minimum of thirty (30) acres of land, one (1) sign no greater in area than two hundred (200) square feet may be erected at each principal entrance. Such signs shall be removed when seventy (70) percent of the property is occupied or leased, or after a period of twenty-four (24) months from the date a certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever comes first. 
(Ord. No. 2268, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3518, 9-19-17)  
Sec. 1006. - Off-street parking regulations. 
Parking shall be required for all uses and structures permitted in the I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts in accordance with section 203.  
ARTICLE 11. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 1100. - General legislative intent. 
It is the intent not to create additional PD-H1 or PD-H2 Districts, or to enlarge the limits of existing PD-H1 or PD-H2 Districts. It is only the intent of this article to recognize those areas currently developed, being developed, or proposed for development under planned unit development regulations as zoned PD-H1 or PD-H2.  
A. - PD-H1 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 1110. - Land use regulation. 
(a)  The land use plan approved by city council, or as modified, for each planned unit development project shall govern the development, and all land uses shall be in accordance with it. 
(b)  Modifications to the land use plan by city council shall be in the manner of a zoning change or by conditional use permit for uses designated in subsection (d). 
(c)  Within a PD-H1 District, all of the principal uses and structures permitted within an A-12 Apartment District other than hospitals and sanitariums, together with the following enumerated uses and structures, shall be permitted: 
(1)  Fraternity and sorority houses, student dormitories and student centers; 
(2)  Housing for seniors and disabled persons, with a conditional use permit; 
(3)  Marinas; 
(4)  Private clubs or social centers provided that clubs where conduct of commercial affairs is a principal activity shall not be permitted; 
(5)  Residential care for seniors, provided that no more than two (2) employees including a bona fide resident of the dwelling shall be permitted; and 
(6)  Home sharing meeting the requirements of section 209.6; 
(7)  Short term rentals within the Sandbridge Special Service District; and 
(8)  Short term rentals within a STR Overlay District. 
(d)  Within a PD-H1 District, the following uses shall be allowed as conditional uses: 
(1)  Communication towers; 
(2)  Family day-care homes; 
(3)  Group homes; 
(4)  Kennels, residential; 
(5)  Religious uses; 
(6)  Wind energy conversion systems, free standing and roof-mounted; 
(7)  Home-based wildlife rehabilitation facilities, provided that the principal structure is a single-family dwelling and the lot is greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet; and 
(8)  Short term rentals. 
(e)  Other uses may be permitted if specifically approved as part of the plan, provided that the areas and structures occupied shall be so located and designed as to protect the character of the surrounding property and shall not, in combination, occupy more than five (5) percent of the land area of the district, and provided further that convenience establishments and shopping centers shall be subject to additional requirements as herein specified: 
(1)  Commercial areas of less than three (3) acres. 
(i)  Such establishments and their parking areas shall not occupy more than two and one-half (2.5) percent of the land area of the development. 
(ii)  Such establishments shall be limited to those principal uses permitted in the B-1A Business District. 
(iii)  Such establishments shall be so located, designed and operated as to serve primarily the needs of persons within the district and not persons residing elsewhere. 
(iv)  Off-street parking shall be required for all uses and structures permitted in accordance with section 203. Loading requirements shall be in accordance with section 204. 
(v)  No building permit for any convenience establishment shall be issued nor may any building be used for a convenience establishment before building permits for at least one hundred (100) dwelling units within a radius of one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed establishment have been issued. 
(2)  Commercial areas of three (3) acres or more. 
(i)  Such centers shall be included as an integral part of the PD-H1 District. 
(ii)  Such centers shall have direct access to no less than a secondary street and shall be located and designed without creating congestion or traffic hazards on any street. 
(iii)  Design of parking and service areas, entrances, exits, yards, courts and landscaping shall preserve the residential character of the PD-H1 District and of any adjoining residential district. 
(iv)  Shopping center parking and service areas and accessways may serve other nonresidential uses in the vicinity, if such multiple use will not lead to congestion or the creation of hazards to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(v)  No building permit for any shopping center shall be issued prior to construction of at least two hundred fifty (250) dwelling units in the PD-H1 project. 
(vi)  Off-street parking requirements shall be as specified in section 203. 
(vii)  Such centers shall be limited to those principal uses permitted in the B-2 Community Business District. 
(f)  Special restrictions in Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1). No use or structure shall be permitted on any property located within Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1) unless such use is designated as compatible in APZ-1 in Table 2 ("Air Installations Compatible Use Zones Land Use Compatibility in Accident Potential Zones") of section 1804; provided, however, that any use or structure not designated as compatible shall be permitted as a replacement of the same use or structure the replacement use or structure is of equal or lesser density or intensity than the original use or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2495, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 2907, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 3237, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 3441, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3468, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 3470, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 3496, 4-4-17; Ord. No. 3578, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 1111. - Density requirements. 
The maximum density per gross acre shall not exceed four and one-fourth (4.25) dwelling units per acre.  
Sec. 1112. - Housing requirements. 
In order to create a diversified, interesting and attractive complement to the city and provide visual satisfaction to the general public as well as to offer varying living opportunities to future residents, the following housing restrictions shall apply: 
(a)  Dwellings, single-family. A variety of lot sizes and dwelling types is desirable. Single-family dwellings shall comprise at least forty-five (45) percent of the dwelling units. 
(b)  Remaining property devoted to housing shall be divided among at least two (2) other dwelling unit types, among which may be: 
(1)  Duplex; 
(2)  Townhouses; 
(3)  Multiple-family; 
(4)  Semidetached.  
B. - PD-H2 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 
 
Secs. 1120—1122. - Reserved.  
Sec. 1123. - Minimum tract size. 
The minimum tract size for PD-H2 development shall be five (5) acres.  
Sec. 1124. - PD-H2 land use plan. 
The land use plan shall provide for development of the property within the PD-H2 District in a manner which is compatible with the development and zoning of the land adjacent to the district. The land use plan shall show how the proposed development of the property would differ from that which would otherwise be permitted in the underlying zoning district and the public benefit to be gained by developing the property in a PD-H2 District. 
The land use plan shall provide the following: 
(a)  Location of proposed streets; 
(b)  Proposed number of dwelling units; 
(c)  Total acreage of the site; 
(d)  Proposed housing types, location of areas devoted to each housing type, acreage and number of units for each such area, and the minimum lot size proposed for each area and housing type; 
(e)  Location and nature of other proposed uses; 
(f)  Location of proposed open spaces, public sites, and recreational areas, nature of recreational facilities proposed, means of maintenance of such and acreage of each site; 
(g)  Regulations governing the height, setback requirements, off-street parking requirements and sign restrictions for each area within the PD-H2 project; 
(h)  Location and acreage of floodplain, special flood hazard areas, floodway and wetlands. 
When adopted, the PD-H2 land use plan shall serve as a supplement to and, where they conflict, as a replacement for, the zoning regulations of the underlying district. The land use plan shall not, however, supplement or replace any of the requirements of the subdivision ordinance (Appendix C) or the Floodplain Ordinance (Appendix K). 
(Ord. No. 2667, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 3310, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 1125. - Allowed uses. 
Within the PD-H2 District, only the following uses and structures shall be permitted: 
(a)  Principal uses and structures. 
(1)  Dwelling units of the types specified in the land use plan; 
(2)  Public buildings, structures, and other public uses; 
(3)  Recreational facilities of the type described in the plan; 
(4)  Child care education centers, in connection with public or private elementary schools or churches, provided that such uses shall not be eligible for residential density credit; 
(5)  Day-care centers, provided that such uses shall not be eligible for residential density credit; 
(6)  Public utilities installations and substations; provided offices or storage or maintenance facilities shall not be permitted; and provided, further, that utilities substations, other than individual transformers, shall be surrounded by a wall, solid except for entrances and exists, or by a fence with a screening hedge five (5) to six (6) feet in height; and provided also, transformer vaults for underground utilities and like uses shall require only a landscaped screening hedge, solid except for access opening; 
(7)  Home sharing meeting the requirements of section 209.6; 
(8)  Short term rentals within the Sandbridge Special Service District; and 
(9)  Short term rentals within a STR Overlay District. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Uses which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal uses shall be allowed as accessory uses. 
(c)  Conditional uses. 
(1)  Religious uses, provided that such use shall not be eligible for residential density credit; 
(2)  Family day-care homes; foster homes and group homes, provided that such uses shall not be eligible for residential density credit; 
(3)  Home occupations; 
(4)  Housing for seniors and disabled persons; and 
(5)  Short term rental. 
(Ord. No. 2495, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 3000, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 3441, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3578, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 1126. - Housing types and density. 
Housing types and density for the various areas within the PD-H2 project shall be as specified on the land use plan. However, the overall density for the PD-H2 project shall not exceed that which could be achieved with conventional subdivision in the underlying district, or that indicated in the following table, whichever is greater. 
Underlying 
Zoning District 	Density 
(Dwelling Units/ 
Acres) 
R-40 	0.8 
R-30 	1.1 
R-20 	1.7 
R-15 	2.25 
R-10 	3.0 
R-7.5 	3.5 
R-5D 	6.0 
R-2.5 	9.0 
A-12 	12.0 
A-18 	18.0 
A-24 	24.0 
A-36 	36.0 
 
The overall area of the PD-H2 project shall be construed as including any areas rezoned to P-1 or dedicated as a public site in conjunction with the project.  
Sec. 1127. - Open space, public sites, and recreation areas. 
Maintenance and ownership of open space, public sites, and recreational areas in the PD-H2 District shall be as specified in the land use plan or in the accompanying documents, and shall consist of one of the following: 
(a)  Homeowners' association. If a homeowners' association is to assume ownership of the open space, then it shall bear all responsibility for maintenance of the land and all structures thereon. All landowners in the PD-H2 District shall be members of the homeowners' association. There shall be restrictive covenants recorded which prohibit use of the subject land for any purpose but recreation and open space use. Such covenants shall run with the land and be in full force and effect for a period of at least fifty (50) years. These covenants shall become part of the deed to each lot or parcel within the development. Such covenants shall be approved by the city attorney and recorded before the first building permit in the project is issued. 
(b)  Ownership by other public or private entity. Ownership of the open space may be by another public or private entity. In this event, restrictive covenants, as in (a) above, shall be recorded which prohibit use of the subject land for any purpose but recreation and open space use. Such covenants shall run with the land and be in full force and effect for a period of at least fifty (50) years. Such restrictions shall be approved by the city attorney and recorded before any subdivision plat of the property within the PD-H2 District is approved for recordation or any building permit issued. Such entity shall be responsible for all maintenance of the open space, and shall make the use and enjoyment of the open space available to all residents of the PD-H2 project. 
(c)  Dedication to the city. The open space may be dedicated to the city as a public site but only upon the concurrence of the city council. If the dedication is accepted, the public site shall be maintained by the city as open space, except that city council after having received recommendations from the city manager may designate portions of public sites for use other than as open space, provided the remaining amount of property maintained as open space is not less than fifty (50) percent of the amount of property which would have been reserved pursuant to the subdivision ordinance for recreational purposes if the property in the PD-H2 District had been developed according to the underlying zoning district. 
Except for public sites, open space shall only be used in its natural state or for recreational related uses. No structure shall be erected for maintenance or recreational purposes. The combination of open space and public sites provided shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the gross acreage of the tract of land, and shall not include lakes, floodways, or other bodies of water. 
(Ord. No. 3382, 11-18-14)  
Sec. 1128. - Changes to approved plan. 
Any changes to housing type, density, allowed uses, or location of any of the elements, or other aspects of the land use plan, where the change is not clearly in keeping with the concept of the plan as approved by city council, shall require an amendment to the PD-H2 land use plan. Such amendments shall be approved only in the manner of approval of the original land use plan. Changes which clearly are in keeping with the concept of the plan as approved by city council may be made by the planning director.  
ARTICLE 13. - HISTORIC AND CULTURAL DISTRICT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3319, adopted December 3, 2013, repealed the former Art. 13, §§ 1300—1305, and enacted a new Art. 13 as set out herein. The former Art. 13 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 1300. - Findings; intent. 
(a)  The city council finds that: 
(1)  The historical and cultural heritage of the city is embodied by buildings, structures and sites that are unique resources of high value to current and future generations of the city, the Commonwealth of Virginia, and the nation; 
(2)  The city has many historic and cultural resources that are significant by reason of the people and events that are associated with them or the special architectural character they embody; 
(3)  The historical and cultural foundations of the city should be preserved as a living part of our community life and development; 
(4)  The preservation of this irreplaceable heritage is in the public interest so that its vital legacy of cultural, educational, aesthetic, inspirational and economic energy benefits will be maintained and enriched for future generations of the city residents; 
(5)  The increased knowledge of our historic and cultural resources, the establishment of improved means of identifying and administering them, and the encouragement of their preservation will enhance the planning and execution of historic preservation projects and will enhance tourism and economic growth and development; 
(6)  The deterioration, destruction, relocation, or alteration of historic and cultural resources may cause the permanent loss of these unique resources; therefore, special measures are warranted in order to preserve the historic and cultural resources of the city; and 
(7)  The use of responsible and innovative methods for implementing the Comprehensive Plan's goal of protecting our historic and cultural resources, as allowed by applicable provisions of the Virginia Code, will encourage the recognition and protection of the architectural and cultural history of the city through the identification, preservation and enhancement of historically, culturally, architecturally or archaeologically significant buildings, structures, places and areas. 
(b)  It is the intent the city council in adopting this article to: 
(1)  Protect the historic significance and integrity of the properties within historic and cultural districts that are or may be recognized for their association with historic events that have made a significant contribution to our history; are associated with historically significant persons; possess distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction or that represent the work of a master, possess high artistic values; or have the potential to yield significant archaeological or historical information; 
(2)  Promote tourism and enhance local business and industry by protecting historical, architectural, archaeological and cultural resources; 
(3)  Encourage sound stewardship of the city's historic resources and foster a sense of place in the city's residents; 
(4)  Preserve and protect buildings, structures and properties which serve as visible reminders of the historic, cultural, and architectural or archaeological heritage of the City of Virginia Beach, the Commonwealth of Virginia, or the United States; and 
(5)  Assure that, within the city's historic and cultural districts, new structures, additions, landscaping and related elements will be in harmony with their setting and environs. 
(Ord. No. 3319, 12-3-13)  
Sec. 1301. - Establishment. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of City Code section 2-5, the historic preservation commission shall advise city council on the consideration of the need for establishing or expanding an Historic and Cultural District in a specified geographical area of the city. In rendering such advice to the city council, the commission shall give due consideration to the views of owners of property being considered for inclusion in such new or expanded district. 
(b)  Prior to the establishment or expansion of a Historic and Cultural District, the planning director shall prepare, in writing, a report containing: (i) an inventory of all landmarks, buildings and other structures, sites and objects being considered for inclusion within the proposed district, (ii) recommendations, if any, for detailed zoning and other regulations to be applied within the district, and (iii) a listing of the criteria to be used to determine which properties shall be included within the district. The planning director shall seek the advice and guidance of the historic preservation commission in preparing such report and shall give due consideration to the views of owners of property being considered for inclusion in such new or expanded district. 
(c)  No Historic and Cultural District shall be established or expanded unless the area to be encompassed thereby contains one or more places or buildings or other structures: 
(1)  Listed on the Virginia Landmarks Register, the Virginia Beach Historical Register, or the National Register of Historic Places; 
(2)  That are of significant historic, architectural, archaeological or cultural interest; 
(3)  In which historic events occurred; or 
(4)  That have special public value because of notable architectural, archaeological or other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the city that are of such significance as to warrant conservation and preservation. 
(d)  Only the geographical area in which a majority of the properties meet the criteria established in accordance with this section shall be designated as a Historic and Cultural District; provided, however, that parcels of land contiguous to arterial streets or highways found by the city council to be significant routes of tourist access to the city or to designated historic landmarks, buildings, structures, or districts therein, or in a contiguous locality, may also be included in a Historic and Cultural District. 
(e)  The planning commission shall review the report of the planning director, together with the ordinance establishing or expanding a Historic and Cultural District and any proposed zoning and other regulations to be applied within the district, and shall recommend to the city council approval in whole or in part, with or without modifications, or shall recommend rejection thereof. 
(f)  The city council may, by ordinance, establish or expand a Historic and Cultural District if it finds that the proposed district or expansion thereof meets the requirements of this section, and may adopt such zoning or other regulations pertaining to property within the district, consistent with general law, as it may deem appropriate. The city council shall give due consideration to the views of owners of property being considered for inclusion in such new or expanded district. Upon city council approval of a new or expanded Historic and Cultural District, the official zoning map shall be amended accordingly. 
(g)  The establishment or expansion of Historic and Cultural Districts shall be subject to the applicable provisions of section 107 of the city zoning ordinance and Code of Virginia, Tit. 15.2, Ch. 22, Art. 7 (Virginia Code sections 15.2-2280 et seq.), as amended, or any successor ordinances or statutes. 
(Ord. No. 3319, 12-3-13)  
Sec. 1302. - Applicability of regulations. 
In addition to the regulations set forth in the ordinance creating the Historic and Cultural District, the underlying regulations of the zoning district within which the Historic and Cultural District area is situated shall apply; provided that, except as provided in section 1306, if any conflict occurs, the more restrictive provision shall apply. In addition thereto, development within a Historic and Cultural District shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3319, 12-3-13)  
Sec. 1303. - Certificates of appropriateness. 
(a)  Requirements of certificates of appropriateness. Except as provided in subsection (e), no building or structure, including signs, within a Historic and Cultural District shall be constructed, altered, repaired, relocated or demolished, and no building or other required permit authorizing such action, shall be issued unless and until the historical review board has issued a certificate of appropriateness therefor. A certificate of appropriateness shall certify only that the requirements of this section have been met, and shall not excuse compliance with any other applicable requirements of law. 
(b)  Materials to be submitted for review. 
(1)  Required plans, etc. The historical review board may require submission of any or all of the following materials as part of an application: architectural plans, site plans, landscaping plans, proposed signs with appropriate details as to location, size, number and character, proposed exterior lighting arrangements, elevation drawings, indications as to construction materials, design of doors and windows, ornamentation and colors, photographs or perspective drawings indicating visual relationship to adjoining structures and spaces and such other exhibits and reports as are reasonably necessary in making its determination to grant or deny the certificate of appropriateness. 
(2)  Application review. Applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall be submitted to the planning director, who shall determine whether the proposed building or structure conforms to the requirements of the city zoning ordinance. No application shall be deemed complete unless it contains sufficient information for the planning director to make such determination. 
(c)  Grounds for issuance and denial of certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  Issuance. The historical review board shall issue a certificate of appropriateness only if it finds that the proposed building or structure is architecturally compatible with the historic landmarks, buildings or structures in the district. In issuing its approval, the board may attach such reasonable conditions, consistent with applicable city ordinances and development standards, as are necessary or appropriate to ensure that the proposed building or structure meets the requirements of this section. 
The board shall consider, in determining whether a proposed building or structure is architecturally compatible with the historic landmarks, buildings and structures in the district, the following factors: 
A.  The conformity with the design, development standards, and criteria established for the district pursuant to section 1301; 
B.  The appropriateness of the general overall design of the proposed building or structure in relation to the architecture of other building or structures within the historic-cultural overlay zoning district; 
C.  The extent to which the proposed building or structure will be harmonious or incompatible with the other buildings or structures in the district; 
D.  The degree to which the proposed building or structure advances the Comprehensive Plan's goals; 
E.  The impact of the proposed building or structure upon the historic context; 
F.  The degree to which the proposed building or structure conforms to applicable provisions of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, as set forth in Title 36, section 67.7 of the Code of Federal Regulations, or any successor regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Denial; appeals. The historic review board shall state the reasons for denial in writing. The applicant for the certificate of appropriateness may appeal a denial of such certificate to the city council by letter filed with the planning director stating the grounds for appeal no later than thirty (30) days after the date of the denial. 
(3)  Notice of appeal. Upon receipt of such letter, the planning director shall schedule the appeal to be heard by the city council at a regular meeting and shall give written notice of the time, date and place of the city council meeting to the applicant, or his agent, and any persons who submitted to the planning director written objections to the application, no less than twenty-one (21) days before the meeting. The applicant shall post a sign provided by the planning director on the property, which sign shall state the time and date of the city council meeting and the nature of the appeal, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the city council meeting at which the matter is scheduled. Such sign shall be posted in accordance with the provisions of section 108(a) of the city zoning ordinance. No further public notice shall be required. 
(4)  Appeals to the circuit court. The applicant, and any person appearing before the city council in opposition to the application, may appeal the decision of the city council to the circuit court by filing a petition at law, setting forth the alleged illegality of the action of the city council, provided the petition is filed within thirty (30) days after the date of the city council's decision. The filing of the petition shall stay the decision of the city council pending the outcome of the appeal to the court, unless the decision denies the right to raze or demolish a historic landmark, building or structure. The court may reverse or modify the decision of the city council, in whole or in part, if it finds upon review that such decision is contrary to law or is arbitrary and constitutes an abuse of discretion, or it may affirm the decision of the governing body. 
(5)  Time limits. The board shall approve or deny a certificate of appropriateness within ninety (90) days from the filing of a completed application. The failure to approve or deny an application shall constitute a denial thereof. 
(d)  Demolition. In the event the historical review board determines that the preservation of a building or structure is found to be physically or economically unfeasible, it shall issue the certificate of appropriateness allowing the demolition of such building or structure. If the preservation of such building or structure is physically and economically feasible, the board shall deny the application. In the event the application is denied, the applicant may: (i) appeal such decision to the city council by letter filed with the planning director stating the grounds for appeal no later than thirty (30) days after the date of the denial; or (ii) elect to proceed pursuant to the provisions of section 1304. The procedure for appeals to the city council shall be in accordance with subdivision (3). The city council may, after consultation with the board, affirm or deny the board's decision. In the event the city council affirms the decision of the board, the applicant shall have the right to appeal such decision to the circuit court in accordance with the procedures set forth in subdivision (4). 
(e)  Exceptions. The following actions shall not require the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  Repainting resulting in the same or like color, provided that the initial painting of masonry surfaces shall require a certificate of appropriateness; 
(2)  The addition or deletion of windows, storm windows, doors, and storm doors that match existing windows, storm windows, doors, storm doors and broken window panes, and the addition or removal of air conditioning units; 
(3)  The addition or deletion of television or radio antennas, skylights, solar collectors, wind energy conversion systems or satellite dishes if such structures are not visible from a public street or right-of-way; 
(4)  The repair of existing materials and features with equivalent material through stabilization, consolidation and conservation of historic materials, features and workmanship when the physical condition of a building or structure, or portion thereof, has deteriorated; 
(5)  Planting of grass, trees and shrubs, but not including landscape treatment that substantially alters the contour of a landmark site; 
(6)  Permitted outside storage in any residential, office, business, or industrial district, which is not visible from a public street; and 
(7)  Any interior changes. 
(Ord. No. 3319, 12-3-13)  
Sec. 1304. - Special rules for demolition. 
(a)  In addition to the right of appeal set forth in section 1303, the owner of a historic landmark, building or structure, the razing or demolition of which is subject to the provisions of this article, shall, as a matter of right, be entitled to raze or demolish such landmark, building or structure provided that: (i) he has applied to the city council for such right, (ii) the owner has for the period of time set forth in subsection (c) and at a price reasonably related to its fair market value, made a bona fide offer to sell the landmark, building or structure, and the land pertaining thereto, to the city or to any person, firm, corporation, government or agency thereof, or political subdivision or agency thereof, which gives reasonable assurance that it is willing to preserve and restore the landmark, building or structure and the land pertaining thereto, and (iii) no bona fide contract, binding upon all parties thereto, shall have been executed for the sale of any such landmark, building or structure, and the land pertaining thereto, prior to the expiration of the applicable time period set forth in the time schedule hereinafter contained. 
(b)  Any appeal which may be taken from the decision of the city council, whether instituted by the owner or by any other proper party, notwithstanding the provisions of section 1303 relating to a stay of the decision appealed from, shall not affect the right of the owner to make the bona fide offer to sell referred to above. No offer to sell shall be made more than one (1) year after a final decision by the city council, but thereafter the owner may renew his request to the city council to approve the razing or demolition of the historic landmark, building or structure. 
(c)  The time schedule for offers to sell shall be as follows: three (3) months when the offering price is less than $25,000; four (4) months when the offering price is $25,000 or more but less than $40,000; five (5) months when the offering price is $40,000 or more but less than $55,000; six (6) months when the offering price is $55,000 or more but less than $75,000; seven (7) months when the offering price is $75,000 or more but less than $90,000; and twelve (12) months when the offering price is $90,000 or more. 
(Ord. No. 3319, 12-3-13)  
Sec. 1305. - General certificate of appropriateness for specified classes or cases. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, if the historical review board determines that particular materials or designs or architectural or other structural characteristics are generally architecturally compatible with a district, it may issue a general certificate of appropriateness under specifications approved by the board, and building permits consistent with such general certificate of appropriateness may be issued if all other applicable requirements of law are met. 
(Ord. No. 3319, 12-3-13)  
Sec. 1306. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  In order to promote the preservation of historic structures, the following uses shall be permitted within the historic and cultural district, regardless of the underlying zoning district classification, if authorized by a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit may be granted only if the city council finds that the operation of the use will not produce adverse impacts, such as excess traffic, noise or on-street parking demand, upon the surrounding area: 
(1)  Bed and breakfast inns; 
(2)  Antique shops; 
(3)  Museums and art galleries; 
(4)  Specialty shops; and 
(5)  Offices of nonprofit organizations. 
(b)  No conditional use permit shall be required for any such use allowed as a principal use in the zoning district underlying the historic and cultural district unless living quarters are provided. 
(Ord. No. 3319, 12-3-13)  
Sec. 1307. - Historical review board; historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Historical review board. The historical review board shall have the duties set forth in this article, or any successor ordinance, and such other duties as the city council may from time to time prescribe. 
(b)  Historic preservation commission. The historic preservation commission shall have the duties set forth in City Code section 2-5, as amended June 12, 2012, and as may be amended further from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 3319, 12-3-13)  
ARTICLE 14. - WETLANDS ZONING ORDINANCE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Southern Watersheds Management ordinance, App. G. 
 
Sec. 1400. - Intent. 
The city council of the City of Virginia Beach, acting pursuant to Chapter 13 (§ 28.2-1300 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, reordains this article regulating the use and development of wetlands. 
(Ord. No. 1804, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92)  
Sec. 1401. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article: 
(a)  Commission means the Virginia Marine Resources Commission. 
(b)  Commissioner means the commissioner of marine resources. 
(c)  Person means any corporation, association, partnership, individual, company, business, trust, joint venture or other legal entity or any unit of government or agency thereof. 
(d)  Governmental activity means any or all of the services provided by the City of Virginia Beach to its citizens for the purpose of maintaining this city, and shall include, but not be limited to, such services as constructing, repairing and maintaining roads, providing sewage facilities, supplying and treating water, providing street lights, and constructing public buildings. 
(e)  Vegetated wetlands means lands lying between and contiguous to mean low water and an elevation above mean low water equal to the factor one and one-half (1½) times the mean tide range at the site of the proposed project in the City of Virginia Beach; and upon which is growing any one (1) or more of the following species: saltmarsh cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora), saltmeadow hay (Spartina patens), saltgrass (Distichlis spicata), black needlerush (Juncus roemerianus), saltwort (Salicornia spp.), sea lavender (Limonium spp.), marsh elder (Iva frutescens), groundsel bush (Baccharis halimifolia), wax myrtle (Myrica sp.), sea oxeye (Borrichia frutescens), arrow arum (Peltandra virginica), pickerelweed (Pontederia cordata), big cordgrass (Spartina cynosuroides), rice cutgrass (Leersia oryzoides), wildrice (Zizania aquatica), bulrush (Scirpus validus), spikerush (Eleocharis sp.), sea rocket (Cakile edentula), southern wildrice (Zizaniopsis miliacea), cattails (Typha spp.), three-squares (Scirpus spp.), buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), bald cypress (Taxodium distichum), black gum (Nyssa sylvatica), tupelo (Nyssa aquatica), dock (Rumex spp.), yellow pond lily (Nuphar sp.), marsh fleabane (Pluchea purpurascens), royal fern (Osmunda regalis), marsh hibiscus (Hibiscus moscheutos), beggar's tick (Bidens sp.), smartweeds (Polygonum sp.), arrowhead (Sagittaria spp.), sweet flag (Acorus calamus), water hemp (Amaranthus cannabinus), reed grass (Phragmites communis), and switch grass (Panicum virgatum). 
(f)  Vegetated wetlands of Back Bay and its tributaries or vegetated wetlands of the North Landing River and its tributaries shall mean all marshes subject to flooding by normal and wind tides, but not hurricane or tropical storm tides, and upon which is growing any of the following species: saltmarsh cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora), saltmeadow hay (Spartina patens), black needlerush (Juncus roemerianus), marsh elder (Iva frutescens), groundsel bush (Baccharis halimifolia), wax myrtle (Myrica sp.), arrow arum (Peltandra virginica), pickerelweed (Pontederia cordata), big cordgrass (Spartina cynosuroides), rice cutgrass (Leersia oryzoides), wildrice (Zizania acquatica), bulrush (Scirpus validus), spikerush (Eleocharis sp.), cattails (Typha spp.), three-squares (Scirpus spp.), dock (Rumex sp.), smartweed (Polygonum sp.), yellow pond lily (Nuphar sp.), royal fern (Osmunda regalis), marsh hibiscus (Hibiscus moscheutos), beggar's tick (Bidens sp.), arrowhead (Sagittaria sp.), water hemp (Amaranthus cannabinus), reed grass (Phragmites communis), and switch grass (Panicum virgatum). 
(g)  Wetlands board or board means the Wetlands Board of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(h)  Back Bay and its tributaries means the following, as shown on the U.S. Geological Survey Quadrangle Sheets for Virginia Beach, North Bay, and Knotts Island: Back Bay north of the Virginia-North Carolina state line; Capsies Creek north of the Virginia-North Carolina state line; Deal Creek; Devil Creek; Nawney Creek; Redhead Bay, Sand Bay, Shipps Bay, North Bay, and the waters connecting them; Beggars Bridge Creek; Muddy Creek; Ashville Bridge Creek; Hells Point Creek; Black Gut; and all coves, ponds and natural waterways adjacent to or connecting with the above-named bodies of water. 
(i)  North Landing River and its tributaries means the following, as shown on United States Geological Survey Quadrangle Sheets for Pleasant Ridge, Creeds, and Fentress: the North Landing River from the Virginia-North Carolina line to Virginia Highway 165 at North Landing Bridge; the Chesapeake and Albemarle Canal from Virginia Highway 165 at North Landing Bridge to the locks at Great Bridge; all named and unnamed streams, creeks and rivers flowing into the North Landing River and the Chesapeake and Albermarle Canal except the following: West Neck Creek north of Indian River Road; Pocaty River west of Blackwater Road; Blackwater Creek west of its forks located at a point approximately six thousand four hundred (6,400) feet due west of the point where the Blackwater Road crosses the Blackwater Creek at the village of Blackwater; and Mill Dam Creek west of Blackwater Road. 
(j)  Nonvegetated wetlands means unvegetated lands lying contiguous to mean low water and between mean low water and mean high water, including those unvegetated areas of Back Bay and its tributaries and the North Landing River and its tributaries subject to flooding by normal and wind tides but not hurricane or tropical storm tides. 
(k)  Wetlands means both vegetated and nonvegetated wetlands. 
(l)  Ordinance means the Wetlands Zoning Ordinance [this article]. 
(Ord. No. 1804, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 2268, 6-14-94)  
Sec. 1402. - Uses. 
The following uses of and activities in wetlands are authorized, if otherwise permitted by law: 
(a)  The construction and maintenance of noncommercial catwalks, piers, boathouses, boat shelters, fences, duckblinds, wildlife management shelters, footbridges, observation decks and shelters and other similar structures; provided that such structures are so constructed on pilings as to permit the reasonably unobstructed flow of the tide and preserve the natural contour of the wetlands; 
(b)  The cultivation and harvesting of shellfish, and worms for bait; 
(c)  Noncommercial outdoor recreational activities, including hiking, boating, trapping, hunting, fishing, shellfishing, horseback riding, swimming, skeet and trap shooting, and shooting on shooting preserves; provided that no structure shall be constructed except as permitted in subsection (a) of this section; 
(d)  Grazing, haying, and the cultivation and harvesting of agricultural, forestry or horticultural products; 
(e)  Conservation, repletion and research activities of the commission, the Virginia Institute of Marine Science, the Department of Game and Inland Fisheries and other conservation-related agencies; 
(f)  The construction or maintenance of aids to navigation which are authorized by governmental authority; 
(g)  Emergency measures decreed by any duly appointed health officer of a governmental subdivision acting to protect the public health; 
(h)  The normal maintenance and repair of, or addition to, presently existing roads, highways, railroad beds, or facilities abutting on or crossing wetlands, provided that no waterway is altered and no additional wetlands are covered; 
(i)  Governmental activity on wetlands owned or leased by the commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof; 
(j)  The normal maintenance of manmade drainage ditches, provided that no additional wetlands are covered; and provided further, that this subsection shall not be deemed to authorize construction of any drainage ditch; and 
(k)  Outdoor recreational activities other than those set forth in subsection (c), provided that such activities do not impair the natural functions of the wetlands or alter the natural contour of the wetlands. 
(l)  The construction of living shoreline projects authorized pursuant to a general permit developed under Va. Code § 28.2-104.1B. 
(Ord. No. 1804, 8-22-84; Ord. No. 1903, 8-14-89; Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 3360, 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1403. - Applications for permits. 
(a)  Any person who desires to use or develop any wetland within this city, other than for those activities specified in section 1402, shall first file an application for a permit with the Wetlands Board. 
(b)  An application shall be accompanied by plans and other data in reference to the proposed use or development. Plans shall be prepared, stamped and endorsed by such qualified professional licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Virginia as the planning director may require; provided, however, that this requirement may be waived if, in the judgment of the planning director, the nature of the work to be performed renders it unnecessary. An application shall include the following: The name and address of the applicant; a detailed description of the proposed activity or activities; map, drawn to an appropriate and uniform scale, showing the area of wetland directly affected, with the location of the proposed work thereon, indicating the area of existing and proposed fill and excavation, the location, width, depth and length of any proposed channel the disposal area, and the location of all existing and proposed structures, sewage collection and treatment facilities, utility installations, roadways, and other related appurtenances or facilities, including those on adjacent uplands; a description of the type of equipment to be used and the means of equipment access to the activity site; the names and addresses of owners of record of adjacent land and known claimants of water rights in or adjacent to the wetland of whom the applicant has notice; and estimate of cost; the primary purpose of the project; and secondary purposes of the project, including further projects; the public benefit to be derived from the proposed project; a complete description of measures to be taken during and after the alteration to reduce detrimental off-site effects; the completion date of the proposed work, project, or structure and such additional materials and documentation as the Wetlands Board or planning director may require. 
(c)  A nonrefundable processing fee to cover the cost of processing the application shall accompany each permit application. Such fee shall be in an amount of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00). Such fees shall include the costs of notifications and advertising. Such fees shall apply to original applications, including after-the-fact applications, and to reapplications. A fee in an amount of two hundred thirty dollars ($230.00) shall be required for deferral of an application unless waived by the Board for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 1804, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 1874, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 1883, 6-19-89; Ord. No. 2030, 2-12-91; Ord. No. 2152, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 2811, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 3278, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3544, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18)  
Sec. 1404. - Public inspection of permit applications, maps, etc. 
All applications, maps, and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection at the planning department. 
(Ord. No. 1804, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2152, 6-23-62; Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92)  
Sec. 1405. - Public hearing procedure on permit applications [wetlands permit applications]. 
Not later than sixty (60) days after receipt of a complete application, the Wetlands Board shall hold a public hearing on such application. The applicant, the city council, the commissioner, the owner of record of any land adjacent to the wetlands in question, known claimants of water rights in or adjacent to the wetlands in question, the Virginia Institute of Marine Science, the Department of Game and Inland Fisheries, the Virginia Water Control Board, the Department of Transportation and any governmental agencies expressing an interest therein shall be notified of the hearing. The Board shall mail such notices not less than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The Board shall also cause notice of the hearing to be published at least once a week for two (2) weeks prior to such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Virginia Beach. The published notice shall state that copies of the application may be examined in the planning department. The costs of such publication shall be paid by the applicant. The applicant shall also erect, on the property which is the subject of the hearing, a sign of a size, type and lettering approved by the board. One such sign shall be posted within ten (10) feet of every public street adjoining the property, and within ten (10) feet of any body of water or waterway less than five hundred (500) feet wide adjoining the property or in such alternate location or locations as may be prescribed by the planning director. Such sign shall be erected not less than thirty (30) days before the Wetlands Board hearing and shall state the nature of the application and date and time of the hearing. Such signs shall be removed no later than five (5) days thereafter. In any case in which the Wetlands Board determines that the requirements of this section have not been met, the application shall be deferred or denied. 
(Ord. No. 1804, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2152, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 2683, 1-22-02; Ord. No. 2741, 4-22-03 )  
Sec. 1406. - Action of Board on permit application. 
(a)  In acting on any application for a permit, the Board shall grant the application upon the affirmative vote of note less than four (4) members. If the application receives less than four (4) affirmative votes, the permit shall be denied. 
(b)  The chairperson of the Board, or in his or her absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Any person may appear and testify at the public hearing. Each witness at the hearing may submit a concise written statement of his testimony. The Board shall make a record of the proceeding, which shall include the application, any written statements of witnesses, a summary of statements of all witnesses, the findings and decision of the Board, and the rationale for the decision. 
(c)  The Board shall make its determination within thirty (30) days of the hearing. If the Board fails to take a vote within such time, the application shall be deemed approved. Within forty-eight (48) hours of its determination, the Board shall notify the applicant and the commissioner of such determination. If the Board has not made a determination within such thirty-day period, it shall promptly notify the applicant and the commission that the application is deemed approved. 
(d)  If the Board's decision is reviewed or appealed, the Board shall transmit the record of its hearing to the commissioner. Upon a final determination by the commission, the record shall be returned to the Board. The record shall be open for public inspection at the planning department. 
(Ord. No. 1804, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2152, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92)  
Sec. 1407. - Bonding requirements; suspension or revocation of permit. 
The Board may require a reasonable bond or letter of credit in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it, securing to the Commonwealth compliance with the conditions and limitations set forth in the permit. The Board may, after hearing as provided herein, suspend or revoke a permit if the Board finds that the applicant has failed to comply with any of the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of work described in the application. The Board, after hearing, may suspend a permit if the applicant fails to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in the application. 
(Ord. No. 1804, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92)  
Sec. 1407.1. - Duties of Board. 
In fulfilling its responsibilities under this article, the Board shall preserve, and prevent the despoliation and destruction of, wetlands within its jurisdiction while accommodating necessary economic development in a manner consistent with wetlands preservation. 
(Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92)  
Sec. 1408. - Standards for grant or denial of permit. 
(a)  In making its decision whether to grant, to grant in modified form, or to deny an application for a permit, the Board shall consider the following: 
(1)  The testimony of any person in support of or in opposition to the permit application. 
(2)  Impact of the development on the public health and welfare; and 
(3)  The proposed development's conformance with the standards prescribed in section 1408.1 of this ordinance and Code of Virginia, section 28.2-1308 and the guidelines promulgated by the commission pursuant to Code of Virginia, section 28.2-1301. 
(b)  The Board shall grant the permit if all of the following criteria have been met: 
(1)  The anticipated public and private benefit of the proposed activity exceeds its anticipated public and private detriment; 
(2)  The proposed development conforms with the standards prescribed in section 1408.1 of this ordinance and Code of Virginia, section 28.2-1308 and the guidelines promulgated by the commission pursuant to Code of Virginia, section 28.2-1301; and 
(3)  The proposed activity does not violate the purposes and intent of this article or Code of Virginia, chapter 13 (§ 28.2-1300 et seq.) of Title 28. 
If the Board finds that any of the criteria set forth in subdivisions (1), (2) and (3) of this subsection are not met, the Board shall deny the permit application with leave to the applicant to resubmit the application in modified form. 
(Ord. No. 1804, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92)  
Sec. 1408.1. - Standards for use and development of wetlands. 
(a)  The following standards shall apply to the use and development of wetlands and shall be considered by the Board in the determination of whether any permit required by this article should be granted or denied: 
(1)  Wetlands of primary ecological significance shall not be altered so that the ecological systems in the wetlands are unreasonably disturbed; and 
(2)  To the maximum extent practical, development shall be concentrated in wetlands of lesser ecological significance, in vegetated wetlands which have been irreversibly disturbed before July 1, 1972, in nonvegetated wetlands which have been irreversibly disturbed prior to January 1, 1983, and in areas outside of wetlands. 
(b)  The provisions of guidelines promulgated by the commission pursuant to Code of Virginia, section 28.2-1301 shall be considered in applying the standards set forth in subsection (a). 
(c)  When any activity authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this article is conditioned upon compensatory mitigation for adverse impacts to wetlands, the applicant may be permitted to satisfy all or part of such mitigation requirements by the purchase of credits from any wetlands mitigation bank that has been approved and is operating in accordance with applicable federal guidance for the establishment, use and operation of mitigation banks as long as: (1) the bank is in the same U.S.G.S. cataloging unit, as defined by the Hydrologic Unit Map of the United States (U.S.G.S. 1980), or an adjacent cataloging unit within the same river watershed, as the impacted site; (2) the bank is ecologically preferable to practicable on-site and off-site individual mitigation options, as defined by federal wetlands regulations; and (3) the banking instrument, if approved after July 1, 1996, has been approved by a process that included public review and comment. 
(d)  Where an agreed-upon permit condition requires the contribution of in-lieu fees to offset permitted wetland losses, the Wetlands Board shall credit the application for any in-lieu fee payments made to the Virginia Aquatic Resources Trust Fund or another decided wetlands restoration fund with reference to the same activity. 
(Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 2428, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 3360, 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1409. - Permits to be in writing, signed, and notarized. 
The permit shall be in writing, signed by the chairperson of the Board or an authorized representative and notarized. The Board shall transmit a copy of the permit to the commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 1804, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 2305, 12-13-94)  
Sec. 1409.1. - Private rights, zoning and land use ordinances not affected. 
No permit granted by the Board shall in any way affect the applicable zoning and land use ordinances of the City of Virginia Beach or the right of any person to seek compensation for any injury in fact incurred by him or her because of the proposed activity. 
(Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92)  
Sec. 1410. - Expiration date and extensions of permit. 
No permit shall be granted without an expiration date established by the Board; provided, however, that the Board may, upon proper application, extend the permit expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 1804, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92)  
Sec. 1411. - Emergency sand grading activities on nonvegetated wetlands located on the Atlantic shoreline of Virginia Beach. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 1401 through 1410, sand grading activities are permitted on nonvegetated wetlands located on the Atlantic shoreline of the City of Virginia Beach if otherwise permitted by law, and if the city manager has declared an emergency and has issued a permit for this purpose. Such activities may be conducted without advance notice and hearing; however, the city manager, upon request and after reasonable notice as to time and place, shall hold a hearing to affirm, modify, amend, or cancel such emergency permit. 
"Emergency," as used in this section, means a sudden and unforeseeable occurrence or condition, either as to its onset or as to its extent, of such disastrous severity or magnitude that governmental action beyond that authorized or contemplated by existing law is required because governmental inaction for the period required to amend the law to meet the exigency would work immediate and irrevocable harm upon the citizens of the commonwealth or some clearly defined portion or portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92)  
Sec. 1412. - Conducting activity without permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity requiring a permit under this article without first having obtained a permit authorizing such activity. 
(Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92)  
Sec. 1413. - Investigations and prosecutions. 
The Board shall have the authority to investigate all projects, whether proposed or ongoing, which alter wetlands within the City of Virginia Beach. The Board shall have the authority to prosecute violations of its orders, or any violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1804, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92)  
Sec. 1414. - Reporting, monitoring, site inspections and notice to comply; stop-work orders. 
(a)  The Board chairperson may require a permittee to implement monitoring and reporting procedures the chairperson believes are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of the permit and this article. 
(b)  The chairperson may require such on-site inspections as he or she believes are reasonably necessary to determine whether the measures required by the permit are being properly performed, or whether the provisions of this article are being violated. Prior to conducting any such inspections, notice shall be provided by the chairperson to the resident owner, occupier or operator, who shall be given an opportunity to accompany the site inspector. If it is determined that there is a failure to comply with the permit, the chairperson shall serve notice upon the permittee at the address specified in his or her application or by delivery at the site of the permitted activities to the person supervising such activities and designated in the permit to receive the notice. Such notice shall describe the measures needed for compliance and the time within which such measures shall be completed. Failure of such person to comply within the specified period, shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a substantial violation of this article from the designated enforcement officer of the Board, the Board chairperson may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in subsection (b) of this section, issue an order requiring all or part of the activities on the site to be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken. In the case of an activity not authorized by this article, or where the alleged permit noncompliance is causing, or is in imminent danger of causing, significant harm to the wetlands protected by this article, such an order may be issued without regard to whether the person has been issued a notice to comply as specified in subsection (b) of this section. Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the permittee has failed to comply with a notice to comply. The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for a period of seven (7) days from the date of service pending application by the enforcing authority, permittee, resident owner, occupier or operator for appropriate relief to the circuit court. Upon completion of corrective action, the order shall immediately be lifted. Nothing in this section shall prevent the Board chairperson from taking any other action specified in section 1413 of this ordinance. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a substantial violation of this article from a designated enforcement officer, the Board may order that the affected site be restored to predevelopment conditions if the Board finds that restoration is necessary to recover lost resources or to prevent further damage to resources. The order shall specify the restoration necessary and establish a reasonable time for its completion. The order shall be issued only after a hearing with at least thirty (30) days' notice to the affected person of the hearing's time, place and purpose, and shall become effective immediately upon issuance by the Board. The Board shall require any scientific monitoring plan it believes necessary to ensure the successful reestablishment of wetlands protected by this article and may require that a prepaid contract acceptable to the Board be in effect for the purpose of carrying out the scientific monitoring plan. The Board may also require a reasonable bond or letter of credit in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it securing to the commonwealth compliance with the conditions set forth in the restoration order. The appropriate court, upon petition by the Board, may enforce such restoration order by injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy. Failure to complete the required restoration is a violation of this article. 
(e)  The duties of the Board chairperson prescribed in this section may be delegated to his or her designees; however, such designees shall not be designated enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 1804, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92)  
Sec. 1415. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person who knowingly, intentionally, or negligently violates any order, rule or regulation of the commission or any provision of this article, or any provision of a permit granted pursuant to Chapter 13 of Title 28.2 of the Code of Virginia or this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Following a conviction, every day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1804, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92)  
Sec. 1416. - Injunctions. 
In addition to and not in lieu of the provisions of sections 1413, 1414, and 1415 of this ordinance, upon petition of the Wetlands Board to the circuit court, the court may enjoin an act which is unlawful under the provisions of this article and may order the defendant to take such steps as are necessary to restore, protect and preserve the wetlands involved. 
(Ord. No. 1804, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92)  
Sec. 1417. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— section 1417 was repealed by Ord. No. 2198, adopted Dec. 8, 1992. The section was formerly derived from Ord. No. 1804, adopted Aug. 22, 1988, and dealt with exemptions to the provisions of this article.  
Sec. 1418. - Civil penalties; civil charges. 
(a)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained under this article, any person who violates any provision of this article or who violates or fails, neglects or refuse to obey any commission or Board notice, order, rule, regulation or permit condition authorized by this article or Chapter 13 of Title 28.2 of the Code of Virginia shall, upon such finding by the circuit court, be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each day of violation. Such civil penalties may, at the discretion of the court, be directed to be paid into the treasury of the city for the purpose of abating environmental damage to or restoring wetlands in the city, in such manner as the court may, by order, direct; except that in the event the city or its agent is the violator, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(b)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained under this article, and with the consent of any person who has violated any provision of this article or Chapter 13 of Title 28.2 of the Code of Virginia, or who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any commission or Board order, rule, regulation or permit condition authorized by this article or Chapter 13 of Title 28.2 of the Code of Virginia, the Board may provide, in an order issued by the Board against such person, for the one-time payment of civil charges for each violation in specific sums, not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each violation. Civil charges shall be in lieu of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under subsection (a) of this section. Civil charges may be in addition to the cost of any restoration ordered by the commission or Board. 
(Ord. No. 2198, 12-8-92)  
ARTICLE 15. - RESORT TOURIST DISTRICTS  
A. - RT-1 RESORT TOURIST DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 1500. - Legislative intent. 
The purpose of the RT-1 Resort Tourist District is to provide areas which can accommodate high density hotels and their related needs and where a high concentration of resort facilities are desirable. This district is not intended for general application but should be limited generally to those properties contiguous to Atlantic Avenue. Development in the district should advance Resort Area land use and design goals and, as expressed in the Comprehensive Plan, conform to the Resort Area Strategic Area Plan and the Special Area Design Guidelines (Urban Areas) set forth in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan. While under the Navy's OPNAV Instruction 11010.36 C (October 9, 2008), hotels and motels in accident potential zones or in noise zones 65-70 dB DNL or higher are not deemed to be compatible with operations arising out of Naval Air Station Oceana, such uses are the historical base of the City of Virginia Beach's Resort Area. The development and enhancement of high-quality hotel and motel uses is thus encouraged, but such uses should be sensitive to their proximity to Naval Air Station Oceana and should, therefore, be compatible with air operations to the greatest extent possible. 
(Ord. No. 1983, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 2914, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 1501. - Use regulations. 
(a)  The following chart lists those uses permitted within the RT-1 Resort Tourist District as either principal uses, as indicated by a "P" or as conditional uses, as indicated by a "C." Conditional uses shall be subject to the provisions of Part C of Article 2 (section 220 et seq.). No uses or structures other than those specified shall be permitted. All uses, whether principal or conditional, should to the greatest extent possible adhere to the provisions of the Oceanfront Resort Area Design Guidelines. 
Use 	RT-1 
Subject to the provisions of subsection (b), hotels and motels, which may have in conjunction with them any combination of restaurants, outdoor cafes, retail commercial use and convention facilities, provided that uses in conjunction with hotels and motels may not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the floor area of all structures (excluding parking) located on the lot 	P 
Bars or nightclubs, except as specified below 	X 
Bars or nightclubs operated in conjunction with hotels or motels 	C 
Bicycle rental establishments in conjunction with hotels and motels, subject to the following: (i) such establishments shall be no less than two hundred (200) feet in area and shall have minimum dimensions of ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet; (ii) the area upon which bicycles are displayed shall be paved and the perimeter thereof delineated by 8" × 8" timber curbing, except at the point of ingress and egress; (iii) no more than twenty (20) bicycles shall be stored or displayed in the rental area at any one (1) time, repairs shall not be conducted in the rental area, and no rental activity shall be conducted on public property; (iv) no more than one (1) sign identifying any such establishment shall be permitted, and no such sign shall exceed four (4) square feet per face in surface area, be illuminated, or encroach into any portion of the public right-of-way; and (v) points of ingress of any such establishment located adjacent to public property shall be directly connected to the boardwalk bicycle path by means of an existing sidewalk, street or connector park 	P 
Building-mounted antennas meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Building-mounted antennas other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 
Commercial parking lots and garages 	C 
Eating and drinking establishments, whether or not operated in conjunction with a hotel or motel, where both of the following occur: (i) alcoholic beverages are served; and (ii) the establishment excludes persons on the basis of age during any part of the day 	C 
Heliports and helistops 	C 
Museums operated by non-profit organizations 	P 
Parking structures 	C 
Passenger vessels permitted by United States Coast Guard regulations to carry more than one hundred forty-nine (149) passengers and used for commercial purposes 	C 
Personal watercraft rentals 	C 
Public buildings and grounds 	P 
Public utilities installations and substations including offices; provided storage or maintenance facilities shall not be permitted; and provided further, that utilities substations, other than individual transformers, shall be surrounded by a wall, solid except for entrances and exits, or by a fence with a screening hedge five (5) to six (6) feet in height; and provided also, transformer vaults for underground utilities and the like shall require only a landscaped screening hedge, solid except for access opening. 	P 
Recreational and amusement facilities of an outdoor nature, which may be partially or temporarily enclosed on a seasonal basis with approval of city council, provided that, in the development of such properties, safeguards are provided to preserve and protect the existing character of adjacent properties 	P 
Satellite wagering facility 	C 
Small wireless facilities meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Small wireless facilities not placed on existing structures 	C 
Temporary commercial parking lots, provided that adjacent to any public right-of-way perimeter landscaping meeting the requirements of Section 5A of the Site Plan Ordinance and the Public Works Design Standards Manual shall be installed, and temporary surface treatment in accordance with the standards for temporary parking lots in Public Works Design Standards Manual shall be allowed. 	P 
Temporary communication towers meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Temporary communication towers other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, except as provided below 	P 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, in excess of one (1) per principal structure 	C 
 
(b)  Structures enclosing uses permitted in conjunction with hotels and motels shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Such structures shall be located entirely within and shall be fully enclosed at all times by solid exterior walls and roof with no exterior opening, other than passageway doors as may be required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code; 
(2)  Except with respect to boardwalk cafes as permitted by franchise agreements approved by the city council, no entrance or exit to the use shall be located on the side of any structure facing the boardwalk, unless such entrance or exit provides access to a courtyard or intervening open area, in which case such open area shall be fully fenced or walled to a height of at least four (4) feet and without any entrances or exits facing the boardwalk; and 
(3)  Parking structures shall be permitted in conjunction with hotels and motels provided that any ground level parking within the structure fronting on Atlantic Avenue, the boardwalk, or any public park or open space is prohibited except for necessary access drives and ramps. 
(c)  Proposed conditional uses shall be evaluated for consistency with the following criteria regarding general land use, transportation, and aesthetic provisions in order to further the legislative intent of the RT-1 District and the goals of the Comprehensive Plan and Resort Area Strategic Action Plan: 
(1)  Any development or redevelopment in this area should contribute to creating an attractive wholesome family resort destination; 
(2)  The use should be consistent with the resort area goal to promote a safe, day and night, year round resort destination; 
(3)  The use and structure should complement resort activity centers and corridors and advance the area's public and private investments; 
(4)  All development and other physical improvements, such as landscaping, signs, lighting, and other similar elements should strive to achieve a high level of design excellence and contribute to a quality image as expressed in the Special Area Design Guidelines (Urban Areas) set forth in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan; 
(5)  All transportation improvements should be designed to shift the dominant transportation mode in the area from vehicular to pedestrian and transit; and 
(6)  The use should be appropriate for both local residents and visitors to the area. 
(Ord. No. 1983, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 2062, 5-14-91; Ord. No. 2116, 3-24-92; Ord. No. 2261, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 2277, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2316, 4-11-95; Ord. No. 2416, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 2427, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2460, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 2513, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 2552, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 2570, 1-14-00; Ord. No. 2713, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2914, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2968, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 3046, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 3102, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3403, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3514, 7-11-17; Ord. No. 3620, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1502. - Dimensional requirements. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: Fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: Seventy (70) feet. 
(c)  Minimum yard requirements: Five (5) feet front yard, five (5) feet side yard when adjacent to a street, other than the boardwalk; provided, however, that the planning director may allow a lesser or zero setback where: 
(1)  The proposed development is of a type and quality consistent with applicable standards set forth in the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  The amenities and architectural features of the proposed development, particularly the design of building facades facing connector parks or east-west oriented streets, are provided in such manner as to create an attractive and pedestrian-scale streetscape; and 
(3)  No mechanical equipment, other than public utility facilities, or refuse receptacles are visible from grade level on the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Maximum height: One hundred (100) feet at the easternmost property line and one and one-half (1½) feet of height for each additional foot west of the easternmost property line not to exceed an overall maximum height of two hundred (200) feet. 
(e)  The height of any building or structure may be increased to a maximum height of two hundred (200) feet if permanent open space meeting the following criteria is provided on either (i) the same zoning lot as the building or structure, or (ii) on another lot under the same ownership as the lot on which the building or structure is located and separated from such lot solely by a public street of no more than one hundred (100) feet in width and by a distance no greater than the width of the public street, and: 
(1)  The open space consists of an area or areas having a total of no less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, has a total width at both the eastern and western property lines of no less than one hundred (100) feet, extends continuously from Atlantic Avenue to the nearest public property lying east of the open space, and both eastern and western property lines are no less than twenty-five (25) feet in width; 
(2)  A legal instrument conveying fee simple title or a perpetual easement to the city, in form and content acceptable to the city attorney, ensuring the permanent availability of such open space for use by the general public is admitted to record in the clerk's office of the circuit court; and 
(3)  Such open space is unobstructed by any artificial structure standing more than eighteen (18) inches above ground level, except for benches, planters or similar decorative fixtures, public art, site lighting, bandshells, public rest rooms, stages, or other public amenities approved by the planning director. The location of any such structures shall, where feasible, be located so as to preserve views of the Atlantic Ocean. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (d) and (e) hereof, no building or other structure shall exceed the height limit established by section 202(b), regarding air navigation. 
(Ord. No. 1983, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 2688, 4-9-02; Ord. No. 2856, 12-7-04)  
Sec. 1503. - Sign regulations. 
(a)  Within the RT-1 Resort Tourist District, sign regulations pertaining to hotels and motels shall be as follows: 
(1)  For each twenty (20) feet of frontage and for each forty (40) feet of lot line adjoining a street, but not constituting frontage, not more than one (1) sign and not more than forty (40) square feet of signage shall be permitted; provided, however, that no establishment shall have more than four (4) signs of which one (1) may be a freestanding sign; and provided further, that no establishment having a frontage of less than one hundred (100) feet shall have a freestanding sign. No establishment having a frontage of at least one hundred (100) feet but less than or equal to two hundred (200) feet shall have a freestanding sign exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face, and no establishment having a frontage of more than two hundred (200) feet shall have a freestanding sign exceeding seventy-five (75) square feet in area per face. No sign of any type shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area. Any establishment or property having less frontage or lot line adjoining a street than required above may have one (1) sign not exceeding thirty (30) square feet in area. 
(b)  Within the RT-1 Resort Tourist District, sign regulations pertaining to multiple-family dwellings, parks, playgrounds, community centers, botanical and zoological gardens and other public buildings and uses shall be as specified in the most restrictive district where the use is permitted as a principal use. 
(c)  Signage for boardwalk cafes permitted as part of a city council approved franchise agreement shall not be counted against the sign allowance specified elsewhere in this section. 
(d)  Signage for bicycle rental establishments, as permitted in section 1501(a)(4), shall not be counted against the sign allowance specified elsewhere in this section. 
(e)  Sign regulations pertaining to all other uses and structures shall be as specified for the building type in the SH-2 Shopping 2 frontage within the OR Oceanfront Resort District. Where the building is not of a type identified in the sign regulations applicable in the SH-2 Shopping 2 frontage, the applicable regulations shall be those pertaining to the building type determined by the zoning administrator to most closely resemble such building. 
(Ord. No. 1983, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 2062, 5-14-91; Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 1504. - Off-street parking regulations. 
Parking shall be required for hotels and motels in the RT-1 Resort Tourist District in accordance with section 203, and shall not be required for other uses or structures within the district. 
(Ord. No. 1983, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 2523, 3-23-99)  
Sec. 1505. - Off-site parking facilities. 
Off-site parking facilities in connection with hotels and motels located within the RT-1 Resort Tourist District may be permitted on zoning lots within the OR Oceanfront Resort District, RT-3 Resort Tourist District and the B-4 Mixed Use District where the required off-street parking cannot be provided on the lot with the principal building or use provided: 
(a)  Structures for parking facilities shall conform to the regulations of the district in which located. 
(b)  A written agreement assuring continued availability of the number of spaces indicated shall be drawn and executed, and a certified copy of such agreement shall be recorded with the clerk of the court. Such agreement shall stipulate that, if such space is not maintained or space acceptable to the planning director substituted, the use or such portion of the use as is deficient in number of parking spaces shall be discontinued. The agreement shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1983, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 2844, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 1506. - Density. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 1507, the maximum density of hotel and motel development shall be one hundred sixty (160) units per acre for the entire zoning lot, of which no more than fifteen (15) percent of the allowable number of units may be dwelling units, even if partially occupied by other principal uses or conditional uses. 
(Ord. No. 1983, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 2062, 5-14-91; Ord. No. 2856, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 2914, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 1507. - Performance standards and incentives. 
(a)  For uses on lots with a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and having architectural features, site design and landscaping consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, the Resort Area Strategic Action Plan, and the Special Area Design Guidelines (Urban Areas) set forth in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan, the maximum density of hotel and motel uses shall be one hundred seventy-five (175) units per acre, of which no more than fifteen (15) percent of the allowable number of units may be dwelling units, and uses in conjunction with hotels and motels may occupy a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the floor area of all structures (excluding parking) located on the lot. 
(b)  For uses on lots with a minimum area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet and having architectural features, site design and landscaping consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, the Resort Area Strategic Action Plan, and the Special Area Design Guidelines (Urban Areas) set forth in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan, the maximum density of hotel and motel uses shall be two hundred (200) units per acre, of which no more than fifteen (15) percent may be dwelling units, and uses in conjunction with hotels and motels may occupy up to but not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of all structures located on the lot. 
(c)  For uses on lots with a minimum area of eighty thousand (80,000) square feet or on separate lots under common ownership totaling at least eighty thousand (80,000) square feet in area, where: (i) such lots are separated solely by a public street of no more than one hundred (100) feet in width and by a distance not exceeding the width of the public street, (ii) at least twenty (20) percent of the floor area of the use is for convention or related facilities, (iii) the entire lot or lots are developed in a functionally integrated fashion, and (iv) the uses have architectural features, site design and landscaping consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, the, Resort Area Strategic Action Plan and the Special Area Design Guidelines (Urban Areas) set forth in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan, the following shall apply: 
(1)  The maximum density for hotel and motel uses shall be two hundred twenty-five (225) units per acre, of which no more than fifteen (15) percent may be dwelling units, for the entire accumulation of parcels 
(2)  Uses in conjunction with a hotel may occupy up to fifty (50) percent of the floor area of the structures; and 
(3)  Required parking shall be at least one (1) space per lodging or dwelling unit or one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of floor area used for uses in conjunction with the hotel, whichever is greater. 
(d)  In addition to the number of units otherwise allowed pursuant to this section, where open space meeting the criteria set forth in section 1502(e) is provided, the number of hotel or motel units may be increased by one and one-half (1.5) units, of which no more than fifteen (15) percent of the allowable number of units may be dwelling units, for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of open space provided. 
(Ord. No. 1983, 6-18-90; Ord. No. 2062, 5-14-91; Ord. No. 2688, 4-9-02; Ord. No. 2856, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 2914, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12)  
B. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3247, adopted July 10, 2012, repealed §§ 1510—1516, which pertained to XRT-2 Resort Tourist District. See Code Comparative Table for history. 
 
Secs. 1510—1516. - Reserved.  
C. - RT-3 RESORT TOURIST DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 1520. - Legislative intent. 
The purpose of the RT-3 Resort Tourist District is to provide an area for a mixture of uses primarily devoted to resort and complementary resort uses that promote convention, entertainment, residential, civic and related activities, increase the economic tax base, protect and leverage public investment with private investment, ensure land use compatibility with existing residential areas, ensure good pedestrian movement systems, and provide exceptional design quality. 
Development in this district shall advance Resort Area land use and design goals and, as expressed in the Comprehensive Plan, conform to the Resort Area Strategic Action Plan and the Special Area Design Guidelines (Urban Areas) set forth in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan, and shall be appropriate in use and design to its proximity to Naval Air Station Oceana. 
(Ord. No. 2914, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 1521. - Use regulations. 
(a)  The following chart lists those uses permitted within the RT-3 Resort Tourist District as either principal uses, as indicated by a "P" or as conditional uses, as indicated by a "C." Conditional uses shall be subject to the provisions of Part C of Article 2 (section 220 et seq.). Except for single-family, duplex, semidetached and attached dwellings, buildings within the RT-3 District may include any principal or conditional uses in combination with any other principal or conditional use. No uses or structures other than those specified shall be permitted. All uses, whether principal or conditional, should to the greatest extent possible adhere to the provisions of the Special Area Design Guidelines (Urban Areas) set forth in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan. 
Use 	RT-3 
Assembly uses 	C 
Automobile museums 	C 
Automobile and small engine repair establishments, provided that all repair work shall be performed within a building 	C 
Automobile service stations 	C 
Bars or nightclubs 	C 
Bed and breakfast inns 	C 
Boat sales 	P 
Building-mounted antennas meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Building-mounted antennas other then those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 
Business studios, offices, clinics and medical laboratories 	P 
Bicycle rental establishments, but only east of Arctic Avenue 	C 
Commercial parking lots, parking garages, parking structures and storage garages 	C 
Communication towers 	C 
Day-care and child care education centers 	P 
Dormitories for marine pilots 	C 
Drive-through facilities of financial institutions, provided the lot on which the use is located is at least one hundred (100) feet from any lot zoned Residential or Apartment 	C 
Drive-through facilities other than those associated with financial institutions, but not as a principal use within the area south of Winston Salem Avenue and provided that the lot on which the use is located is at least 100 feet from any lot zoned Residential or Apartment 	C 
Dwellings, additions to single-family, duplex, semi-detached, and attached 	P 
Dwellings, single-family and duplex, provided that such dwellings should be consistent with the provisions of the Special Area Design Guidelines (Urban Areas) set forth in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan 	P 
Dwellings, multi-family within a mixed-use development, on lots contiguous to 17th Street (Virginia Beach Boulevard), provided that said dwellings should be consistent with the provisions of the Special Area Design Guidelines (Urban Areas) set forth in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan 	P 
Dwellings, multi-family, except on lots contiguous to 17th Street (Virginia Beach Boulevard), provided that said dwellings should be consistent with the provisions of the Special Area Design Guidelines (Urban Areas) set forth in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan and may be part of a mixed-use development 	P 
Eating and drinking establishments 	P 
Financial institutions 	P 
Funeral homes 	P 
Heliports and helistops 	C 
Home occupations 	C 
Home sharing meeting the requirements of section 209.6 	P 
Hospitals and sanitariums 	C 
Housing for seniors and disabled persons; maternity homes 	C 
Marinas, including facilities for storage and repair of boats and sale of boating supplies and fuel 	C 
Mini-warehouses, provided that the yard shall be completely enclosed except for necessary openings for ingress and egress by a fence or wall not less than six (6) feet in height 	C 
Motels and hotels, on lots with a minimum lot size of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, which may have in conjunction with them any combination of restaurants, retail commercial use and convention and conference facilities, provided that uses in conjunction with hotels and motels may not occupy more than twenty (20) percent of the floor area of the floor area of all structures (excluding parking) located on the lot, and provided further that the lot on which the use is located is at least one hundred (100) feet from any lot zoned Residential or Apartment 	P 
Museums and art galleries 	P 
Off-site parking facilities in connection with any permitted or conditional use within the RT-1 or RT-3 Resort Tourist Districts, provided the requirements of section 1524 are met, the off-site parking facility is located at least one hundred (100) feet from any lot zoned Residential or Apartment District, and provided further that all of the following requirements are met: (a) Parking structures for such parking facilities shall be allowed only as a conditional use; (b) Off-site parking facilities shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet from the use they are intended to serve; (c) A written agreement assuring continued availability of the number of spaces indicated shall be drawn and executed, and a certified copy of such agreement shall be recorded with the clerk of the court. Such agreement shall stipulate that, if such space is not maintained or space acceptable to planning director substituted, the use or such portion of the use as is deficient in number of parking spaces shall be discontinued. The agreement shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney 	P 
Open-air markets 	C 
Passenger transportation terminals 	C 
Passenger vessels permitted by United States Coast Guard regulations to carry more than one hundred forty-nine (149) passengers and used for commercial purposes 	C 
Personal service establishments including barber and beauty shops, shoe repair shops, cleaning, dyeing, laundry, pressing dressmaking, tailoring and garment repair shops with processing on the premises 	P 
Personal watercraft rentals, east of Arctic Avenue and south of Winston Salem Avenue, provided the lot on which the use is located is at least one hundred (100) feet from any lot zoned Residential or Apartment 	C 
Public buildings and grounds 	P 
Public utilities installations and substations, including offices; provided storage or maintenance facilities shall not be permitted; and provided further that utilities substations, other than individual transformers, shall be surrounded by a wall, solid except for entrances and exits, or by a fence with a screening hedge five (5) to six (6) feet in height; and provided also, transformer vaults for underground utilities and the like shall require only a landscaped screening hedge, solid except for access opening 	P 
Public utility storage or maintenance installations provided the lot in which the use is located is at least one hundred (100) feet from any lot zoned Residential or Apartment 	C 
Radio and television broadcasting stations 	C 
Recreation facilities other than those of an outdoor nature, with a floor area greater than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet 	C 
Recreational and amusement facilities of an outdoor nature, which may be partially or temporarily enclosed on a seasonal basis 	C 
Recreational facilities other than those of an outdoor nature, with a maximum floor area of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet 	P 
Religious uses 	C 
Retail establishments, provided that adult bookstores shall be prohibited from locating within five hundred (500) feet of any Apartment or Residential zoning district, single- or multiple-family dwelling, church, park, or school 	P 
Satellite wagering facility 	C 
Short term rental 	C 
Short term rental within a STR Overlay District 	P 
Small wireless facilities meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Small wireless facilities not placed on existing structures 	C 
Temporary communication towers meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Temporary communication towers other than those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, except as provided below 	P 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, in excess of one (1) per principal structure 	C 
 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal uses and structures; provided, however, that drive-through facilities shall not be permitted as an accessory use: 
(1)  An accessory activity operated for profit in a residential dwelling unit where there is no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or any visible or audible evidence detectable from outside the building lot, either permanently or intermittently, of the conduct of such business except for one (1) nonilluminated sign not more than one (1) square foot in area mounted flat again against the residence; where no traffic is generated, including traffic by commercial delivery vehicles, by such activity in greater volumes than would normally be expected in the neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such activity is met off the street and other than in a required front yard; where the activity is conducted on the premises which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner, and no person other than members of the immediate family occupying such dwelling unit is employed in the activity; where such activity is conducted only in the principal structure on the lot; where there are no sales to the general public of products or merchandise from the home; and where the activity is specifically designed or conducted to permit no more than one (1) patron, customer, or pupil to be present on the premises at any one time. The following are specifically prohibited as accessory activities: Convalescent or nursing homes, bars or nightclubs, tourist homes, massage or tattoo parlors, body piercing establishments, radio or television repair shops, auto repair shops, or similar establishments. 
(2)  Rental of rooms in a dwelling or the entire dwelling thirty (30) consecutive days or more is an accessory use to the dwelling. 
(c)  Proposed conditional uses shall be evaluated for consistency with the following criteria regarding general land use, transportation, and aesthetic provisions in order to further the legislative intent of the RT-3 District and the goals of the Comprehensive Plan and Resort Area Strategic Action Plan: 
(1)  Any development or redevelopment in this area should contribute to creating an attractive wholesome family resort destination; 
(2)  The use should be consistent with the resort area goal to promote a safe, day and night, year round resort destination; 
(3)  The use and structure should complement resort activity centers and corridors and advance the area's public and private investments; 
(4)  All development and other physical improvements, such as landscaping, signs, lighting, and other similar elements should strive to achieve a high level of design excellence and contribute to a quality image as expressed in the Special Area Design Guidelines (Urban Areas) set forth in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan; 
(5)  All transportation improvements should be designed to shift the dominant transportation mode in the area from vehicular to pedestrian and transit; and 
(6)  The use should be appropriate for both local residents and visitors to the area. 
(Ord. No. 1913, 9-11-89; Ord. No. 2100, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 2176, 9-22-92; Ord. No. 2180, 9-22-92; Ord. No. 2261, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 2315, 4-11-95; Ord. No. 2316, 4-11-95; Ord. No. 2416, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 2427, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2444, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 2449, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2460, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 2495, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 2513, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 2524, 3-23-99; Ord. No. 2552, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 2570, 1-4-00; Ord. No. 2627, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 2660, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 2782, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 2914, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2968, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 3000, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 3046, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 3050, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 3102, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 3167, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3259, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 3403, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3441, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3514, 7-11-17; Ord. No. 3578, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 1522. - Dimensional requirements. 
(a)  The following chart lists the requirements within the RT-3 Resort Tourist Districts for minimum lot area, width, and yard spacing for all commercial and mixed uses and structures. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet; provided, however, that mixed use structures containing lodging units or multi-family dwellings shall meet all applicable requirements of subsection (b), pertaining to lodging units, or subsection (c), pertaining to multi-family dwellings. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: Fifty (50) feet. 
(3)  Minimum setback for any yard adjacent to a street: Zero (0) feet. 
(4)  Maximum setback for any yard adjacent to a street: Twenty (20) feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard: Zero (0) feet. 
(6)  Minimum rear yard setback: Zero (0) feet. 
(b)  The following chart lists the requirements within the RT-3 Resort Tourist District for minimum lot area, width, and yard spacing for lodging uses and structures. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: Seventy (70) feet. 
(3)  Minimum setback for any yard adjacent to a street: Ten (10) feet. 
(4)  Maximum setback for any yard adjacent to a street: Twenty (20) feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard setback except when adjacent to a street: Twenty (20) feet. 
(6)  Minimum rear yard setback except when adjacent to a street: Twenty (20) feet. 
(c)  The following chart lists the requirements within the RT-3 Resort Tourist District for minimum lot area, width, and yard spacing for multiple-family dwellings: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: Fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: Two hundred (200) feet. 
(3)  Minimum setback for any yard adjacent to a street: Zero (0) feet. 
(4)  Maximum setback for any yard adjacent to a street: Twenty (20) feet 
(5)  Minimum side yard setback except when adjacent to a street: Eight (8) feet. 
(6)  Minimum rear yard setback except when adjacent to a street: Ten (10) feet. 
(d)  The following chart lists the requirements within the RT-3 Resort Tourist District for lot area, width, setbacks and lot coverage for single-family and duplex dwellings and additions to existing semi-detached dwellings. The site and building design of such dwellings should adhere to the provisions of the Old Beach Design Guidelines as applicable to single-family and duplex dwellings: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet for single-family dwellings and ten thousand (10,000) square feet for duplex dwellings. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: Forty (40) feet for single-family dwellings and seventy-five (75) feet for duplex dwellings. 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback, and provided further that there shall be no vehicle parking in the front yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  Except as provided herein or by the provisions of sections 1526(a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5), minimum side yard setback except when adjacent to a street or driveway: Eight (8) feet. 
(5)  Except as provided in section 1526(a)(4), minimum side yard setback for any portion of a structure located adjacent to a driveway: Twelve (12) feet. 
(6)  Minimum side or rear yard setback for accessory structures no larger than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than eight (8) feet except when adjacent to a street: Five (5) feet. 
(7)  Except as provided in sections 1526(a)(3), (a)(4), and (a)(5) minimum side yard setback adjacent to a street: Twenty (20) feet. 
(8)  Minimum rear yard setback except for accessory structures: Twenty (20) feet. 
(9)  Except as provided in subdivision (6), minimum rear yard setback for accessory structures, including garages and carports: Ten (10) feet. 
(10)  Maximum lot coverage: Forty (40) percent. 
(11)  The uppermost story or building level above the first story or building level of any new structure or addition to an existing single-family or duplex structure shall provide a stepback, wherein at least thirty-five (35) percent of the total length of the exterior wall of the uppermost story or building level is set back a minimum of three (3) feet from the exterior wall directly below it. The length of uppermost story exterior wall set back a minimum of three (3) feet to meet the requirement above may be divided into multiple sections of varying length that are not contiguous to each other. For the purposes of this section, uppermost story or building level does not include living area completely contained within the roofed area of the structure. 
(e)  The following chart lists the requirements within the RT-3 Resort Tourist District for setbacks and lot coverage for additions to existing attached dwellings: 
(1)  Minimum front yard setback: Thirty (30) feet. 
(2)  Minimum front yard where all parking is provided in the rear: Fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  Minimum side yard for exterior lots when not adjacent to a street: Ten (10) feet. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard except for accessory structures: Twenty (20) feet. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard for accessory structures: Five (5) feet. 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage: Forty (40) percent. 
(f)  Maximum height: 
(1)  The maximum height for single-family and duplex dwellings and additions to existing semi-detached or attached dwellings shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  Where a zoning lot within the RT-3 Resort Tourist District adjoins the side or rear yard of a zoning lot in a residential or apartment district without an intervening street or alley over twenty-five (25) feet in width or body of water over fifty (50) feet in width, the following maximum height regulations shall apply on that portion of the RT 3 zoning lot within one hundred (100) feet of the adjoining residential or apartment district. In cases where more than one (1) of the following apply, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(i)  When adjacent to Residential Districts, the maximum height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(ii)  When adjacent to A-12 or A-18 Apartment Districts, the maximum height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(iii)  When adjacent to A-24 Apartment District, the maximum height shall be forty-five (45) feet. 
(iv)  When adjacent to A-36 Apartment District, the maximum height shall be one hundred and twenty (120) feet. 
(3)  The maximum height for hotels and motels within the RT-3 Resort Tourist District is seventy-five (75) feet. 
(4)  Except as specified in items (1) and (2) hereinabove, there shall be no maximum height regulations in the RT-3 Resort Tourist District. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the above, no building or other structure shall exceed the height limit established by section 202(b) regarding air navigation. 
(Ord. No. 1783, 6-13-88; Ord. No. 1802, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2268, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2914, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 1523. - Sign regulations. 
In the RT-3 Resort Tourist District, signs shall be permitted as specified in the Table of Allowed Sign Types (GW-1 Gateway frontage) and Signage Allowance Table (GW-1 Gateway frontage) set forth in subsections C and D, respectively, of section 6.3.1 of the Oceanfront Resort District Form-Based Code. 
(Ord. No. 2914, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 1524. - Off-street parking regulations. 
(a)  Parking shall be required for all residential uses and structures permitted in the RT-3 Resort Tourist District in accordance with section 203 or by conditional use permit pursuant to section 1521. Parking for residential uses and structures shall not be located within any required front yard area. 
(b)  Parking shall be required for all other uses and structures in the RT-3 Resort Tourist District as follows: 
(1)  Structures wherein the entire floor area is devoted to retail use shall provide one (1) parking space for every two hundred (200) square feet of floor area; 
(2)  Structures wherein the entire floor area is devoted to office use shall provide one (1) parking space for every two hundred seventy (270) square feet of floor area; 
(3)  Structures wherein retail and office uses are mixed and where at least twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the structure is devoted to such mix shall provide three and five-tenths (3.5) parking spaces for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area devoted to such mix. If residential use is also included in the same structure, additional parking spaces shall be provided at one and seven-tenths (1.7) parking spaces per dwelling unit; 
(4)  All other uses shall provide parking as specified in section 203; 
(5)  Areas devoted to parking of vehicles shall not be located between the principal building on a lot and the street, nor shall such areas be located closer to the street than the principal building. On a lot having frontage on more than one (1) street, the provisions of this paragraph shall apply only to the frontage of the street having the wider right-of-way; and 
(6)  No driveway shall intersect the street frontage of a lot when access is available from an improved alley to serve such purpose; 
(c)  Parking requirements for uses within the RT-3 Resort Tourist District may be satisfied by any one, or a combination of, the following: 
(1)  On-site parking; 
(2)  Off-site parking facilities, as set forth in section 1521 of this ordinance; or 
(3)  Public parking, if the planning director determines (a) that there is at least a sufficient number of public parking spaces located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed use to meet public parking demands; (b) that such public parking spaces are not used to satisfy the parking requirements of any other use, and (c) that the use of such public parking spaces to satisfy the parking requirements of the proposed use, either wholly or partially, is warranted in light of the following considerations: 
a.  The extent to which the proposed use advances the goals and objectives of the RT-3 Resort Tourist District and the Resort Area Strategic Action Plan; 
b.  The extent to which the proposed use conforms to the provisions of the Special Area Design Guidelines (Urban Areas) set forth in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan; and 
c.  The amount of the projected tax revenue to be generated by the proposed use and improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2444, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 2914, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 1525. - Density. 
(a)  For purposes of determining the maximum allowed density for multifamily dwellings, hotels, and motels, in addition to the area of the zoning lot on which the use is to be located, the area of any other lot under common ownership with such zoning lot and separated from such zoning lot by a public street of no more than one hundred (100) feet in width shall be included. 
(b)  The maximum density for hotel and motel development shall be eighty (80) lodging units per acre. Density shall be established based on the entire zoning lot, even if partially occupied by other principal uses or conditional uses except that no parcel may simultaneously receive density credit for both lodging units and multifamily dwelling units. 
(c)  The maximum density for multifamily dwellings shall be twenty-four (24) dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 2914, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 1526. - Performance standards and incentives. 
(a)  Residential. To achieve compatibility and appropriateness of residential dwellings to the Resort Area, and in particular to the adjoining Old Beach, Lakewood, and Shadowlawn neighborhoods, consistent with the historic status of these neighborhoods and the Oceanfront Resort Area as an early twentieth-century beach resort community, residential structures in the RT-3 Resort Tourist District should strive to comply with the criteria provided in the Old Beach Design Guidelines, as referenced by the Oceanfront Resort Area Design Guidelines. As an incentive to develop lots within the RT-3 District in a compatible and appropriate manner, compliance with the criteria of the design guidelines shall result in allowed deviations to the dimensional and other requirements of this ordinance as specified below. Determination of compliance with the criteria provided below shall be made by the director of planning or his or her designee. Any appeal of the determination of compliance by the director of planning shall be to the city council. 
(1)  Porches. Single-family and duplex dwelling structures which provide open, unenclosed porches with a minimum depth of five (5) feet and a maximum depth of eight (8) feet, as measured from the exterior wall of the main structure to the exterior edge of the porch foundation, may have a front yard setback of thirteen (13) feet, as measured from the exterior wall of the main structure to the lot line. However, in no case shall the setback from the lot line to the exterior wall of the porch foundation be less than eight (8) feet. Further, any open, uncovered second-story porch located above the first-story porch shall be setback from the lot line a minimum of at least ten (10) feet. 
(2)  Exterior porch stairs for single-family and duplex structures. Open, unenclosed porches adjacent to streets or alleys may have exterior stairs that encroach into a front or rear setback to within three (3) feet of the lot line. In no case, shall such stairs exceed six (6) feet in width. 
(3)  Side yard setback adjacent to a street for single-family and duplex structures. For structures satisfying the criteria of the design guidelines, the minimum side yard setback adjacent to a street may be reduced to ten (10) feet. 
(4)  Side yard setbacks for projecting wall planes on single-family and duplex structures. For structures satisfying the criteria of the design guidelines, up to twenty-five (25) percent of the total length of the wall of a structure adjacent to the side lot line may project into the side yard setback. The minimum setback for such wall projection shall be five (5) feet, except that if the wall projection is adjacent to a driveway, the minimum setback shall be eleven (11) feet. If the wall projection is adjacent to a street and there is a driveway between the property line adjacent to the street and the wall projection, the minimum setback shall be eighteen (18) feet. If the wall projection is adjacent to a street and there is no driveway between the property line adjacent to the street and the wall projection, the minimum setback shall be eight (8) feet. 
(5)  Side yard setbacks for garages on lots with single-family and duplex structures. Any rear-loaded, side-loaded, or front-loaded garage recessed a minimum of forty (40) feet from the front or rear lot line and satisfying the criteria of the design guidelines may reduce the side yard setback for the garage to five (5) feet. 
(6)  Porch eave overhangs for single-family and duplex structures. For structures satisfying the criteria of the design guidelines pertaining to open, unenclosed porches fronting on streets or alleys, any wide eave overhang of such porch, not exceeding three (3) feet in length from the outside of the porch column support to the porch roof fascia shall not count toward the calculation for lot overage. 
(7)  Parking area paving. For structures satisfying the criteria of the design guidelines, parking spaces with pervious paving material, such as brick runners and open pavers, may be used to satisfy on-site parking requirements. 
(b)  Multi-family residential and hotel and motel use. To achieve the legislative intent of the RT-3 Resort Tourist District and the goals and objectives expressed in the Resort Area Strategic Action Plan, multi-family residential development and hotel and motel development within the RT-3 District should strive to comply with the criteria provided in the Special Area Design Guidelines (Urban Areas) set forth in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan. As an incentive to develop lots within the RT-3 District in a compatible and appropriate manner, compliance with the criteria of the design guidelines and to the additional provisions below shall result in allowed deviations to density requirements of this ordinance. Determination of compliance with the criteria provided below shall be made by the director of planning or his or her designee. Any appeal by the applicant of the determination of compliance by the director of planning shall be to the city council. 
(1)  Multi-family residential. 
(i)  The maximum density of multi-family dwelling use that meets the provisions of the Resort Area Design Guidelines on a zoning lot with a minimum lot size of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet shall be thirty (30) dwelling units per acre. 
(ii)  The maximum density of multi-family dwelling use that is located in a mixed use development, meets the provisions of the Resort Area Design Guidelines, and that is located on a zoning lot with a lot size of at least sixty thousand (60,000) square feet, shall be thirty-six (36) dwelling units per acre. 
(2)  Hotels and motels. 
(i)  The maximum density of hotel and motel use on a zoning lot with a minimum lot size of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet and that meets the provisions of the Resort Area Design Guidelines shall be one hundred twenty (120) units per acre. 
(ii)  The maximum density of hotel and motel uses where the lot size is at least sixty thousand (60,000) square feet, required parking is located on the same zoning lot within a parking structure, and the project is designed to meet the provisions of the Resort Area Design Guidelines shall be one hundred sixty (160) units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 2914, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12)  
D. - RT-4 RESORT TOURIST DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 1530. - Legislative intent. 
This district is intended to apply in an area of the city where there is a diverse mixture of land use and where an existing residential community is in transition to higher residential densities and to more intensive nonresidential land uses. Its purpose is to protect existing residential neighborhoods from inappropriate intrusion and to allow for an orderly transition where appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2077, 6-25-91)  
Sec. 1531. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Principal uses and structures: 
(0.5)  Building-mounted antennas meeting the requirements of section 207; 
(1)  Dwellings, single-family, duplex and semi-detached; 
(2)  Public buildings and grounds; 
(3)  Public utilities installations and substations including offices; provided storage or maintenance facilities shall not be permitted; and provided, further, that utilities substations, other than individual transformers, shall be surrounded by a wall, solid except for entrances and exits, or by a fence with a screening hedge five (5) to six (6) feet in height; and provided also, transformer vaults for underground utilities and the like shall require only a landscaped screening hedge, solid except for access opening; 
(4)  Small wireless facilities meeting the requirements of section 207. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal uses and structures: 
(1)  An accessory activity operated for profit in a residential dwelling unit where there is no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or any visible or audible evidence detectable from outside the building lot, either permanently or intermittently, of the conduct of such business except for one (1) nonilluminated sign not more than one (1) square foot in area mounted flat against the residence; where no traffic is generated, including traffic by commercial delivery vehicles, by such activity in greater volumes than would normally be expected in the neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such activity is met off the street and other than in a required front yard; where the activity is conducted on the premises which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner, and no person other than members of the immediate family occupying such dwelling unit is employed in the activity; where such activity is conducted only in the principal structure on the lot; where there are no sales to the general public of products or merchandise from the home; and where the activity is specifically designed or conducted to permit no more than one (1) patron, customer, or pupil to be present on the premises at any one time. The following are specifically prohibited as accessory activities: Convalescent or nursing homes, tourist homes, massage or tattoo parlors, body piercing establishments, radio or television repair shops, auto repair shops, or similar establishments. 
(c)  Conditional uses and structures: Uses and structures hereinafter specified, subject to compliance with the provisions of part C of article 2 hereof: 
(1)  Child care centers; 
(2)  Religious uses; 
(3)  Housing for seniors and disabled persons; maternity homes; 
(4)  Home occupations; 
(5)  Single-family attached and multifamily dwellings; 
(6)  Offices, in which goods, wares or merchandise are not commercially created, displayed, stored, exchanged or sold. Examples of such permitted offices are: 
(i)  Business offices of a public utility, transportation, advertising, real estate, insurance, commercial or industrial establishments; 
(ii)  Medical, optical and dental offices and clinics; legal, engineering, architectural and similar professional offices, accounting, auditing and bookkeeping service offices; 
(iii)  Offices of miscellaneous business services such as consumer credit reporting agencies, mailing list and stenographic services, business and management consulting services; 
(iv)  Offices of nonprofit organizations, such as professional organizations, civic, social and fraternal associations, political organizations, religious organizations, and labor unions provided, however, that no hiring halls shall be permitted in this district; 
(7)  Small wireless facilities other than those meeting the requirements of section 207. 
(Ord. No. 2077, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 2427, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2495, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 2627, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 3000, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 3403, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 1532. - Dimensional requirements. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: 
 (1) 
Single-family detached 	5,000 square feet 
 (2) 
Duplex 	10,000 square feet 
 (3) 
Semi-detached 	5,000 square feet 
 (4) 
Single-family attached (townhouse): 	
Minimum lot size 	1,400 square feet 
Minimum average lot size 	2,500 square feet 
 (5) 
Multi-family residential 	10,000 square feet 
 (6) 
All other uses 	5,000 square feet 
 
(b)  Minimum lot width: 
 (1) 
Single-family residential 	50 feet 
 (2) 
Duplex 	75 feet 
 (3) 
Semi-detached 	35 feet 
 (4) 
Single-family attached (townhouse): 	
interior- 	
Minimum lot width 	14 feet 
exterior- 	
Minimum lot width 	30 feet 
 (5) 
Multi-family Residential 	100 feet 
 (6) 
All other uses 	75 feet 
 
(c)  Minimum yard requirements: 
 (1) 
Single-family, duplex and semi-detached residential: 	
Minimum front yard 	20 feet 
Minimum side yard 	8 feet 
Minimum rear yard 	10 feet 
 (2) 
Single-family attached (townhouse): 	
Minimum front yard 	30 feet 
Minimum side yard (end units) 	10 feet 
Minimum rear yard 	20 feet 
 (3) 
Multi-family residential: 	
Minimum front yard 	15 feet 
Minimum side yard 	10 feet 
Minimum rear yard 	10 feet 
 
(d)  Height: 
(1)  The maximum height shall be 35 feet for all uses. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the above, no building or other structure shall exceed the height limit established by section 202(b) regarding air navigation. 
(Ord. No. 2077, 6-25-91)  
Sec. 1533. - Sign regulations. 
(a)  In the RT-4 Resort Tourist District, signs shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)  For each forty (40) feet of principal frontage adjacent to a street and for each eighty (80) feet of lot line adjoining a street, but not constituting frontage, not more than one (1) sign and not more than thirty-two (32) square feet in area shall be permitted; provided, however, that no establishment may have more than three (3) signs, of which one (1) may be a freestanding sign. No freestanding sign shall exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area per face, and no sign of any other type shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area. Any establishment or property having less frontage or lot line adjoining a street than required above may have one (1) sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
(2)  For multiple-family dwellings, the sign regulations applicable to the A-12 Apartment District shall apply. 
(3)  For single-family and duplex dwellings, the sign regulations applicable to residential districts shall apply. 
(4)  Signs located on property for sale, lease or rent shall be permitted, provided that no such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, that not more than two (2) such signs shall be erected for each one hundred (100) feet of lot line adjoining the street, and that not more than four (4) such signs shall be erected on any property. Any property having less frontage or lot line adjoining a street may have one (1) sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
(b)  All other uses shall be subject to the sign regulations of the most restrictive district in which the use is permitted as a principal use. 
(Ord. No. 2077, 6-25-91; Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 1534. - Off-street parking regulations. 
Parking shall be required for all uses and structures permitted in the RT-4 Resort Tourist District in accordance with section 203. 
(Ord. No. 2077, 6-25-91)  
Sec. 1535. - Maximum density ratings. 
(a)  Density shall be established based upon the area of the entire zoning lot whether or not partially occupied by other uses except that no parcel may simultaneously receive density credit for two (2) uses. 
(b)  The maximum density for multi-family residential shall be eighteen (18) dwelling units per acre, and density shall be set as a condition of the use permit after due consideration is given to the nature of the project and surrounding land use. 
(c)  The maximum density for single family attached dwellings shall be twelve (12) dwelling units per acre. The maximum number of attached dwellings constructed in one group without side yard setbacks shall be six (6); the density and other characteristics shall be set as a condition of the use permit after due consideration is given to the nature of the project and surrounding land use. 
(Ord. No. 2077, 6-25-91)  
Sec. 1536. - Screening. 
Category II screening is required at all points where office development in this district abuts single-family, semi-detached or duplex use. 
(Ord. No. 2077, 6-25-91)  
E. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3247, adopted July 10, 2012, repealed §§ 1540—1545, which pertained to RT-3(LRG) Laskin Road Gateway Overlay District and derived from Ord. No. 2838, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 2912, 12-20-05. 
 
Secs. 1540—1545. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 16. - COASTAL PRIMARY SAND DUNE ZONING ORDINANCE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Southern Watersheds Management Ordinance, App. G. 
 
Sec. 1600. - Intent. 
The City Council of the City of Virginia Beach, acting pursuant to Chapter 14 (§ 28.2-1400 et seq.) of Title 28.2 of the Code of Virginia, reordains this article regulating the use and development of coastal primary sand dunes. Whenever coastal primary sand dunes are referred to in this ordinance, such references shall also include beaches. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 1902, 8-14-89; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1601. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article: 
(a)  Beach means the shoreline zone comprised of unconsolidated sandy material upon which there is a mutual interaction of the forces of erosion, sediment transport and deposition that extends from the low-water line landward to where there is a marked change in either material composition or physiographic form such as a dune, bluff or marsh, or where no such change can be identified, to the line of woody vegetation (usually the effective limit of stormwaves), or the nearest impermeable manmade structure, such as a bulkhead, revetment or paved road. 
(b)  Commission means the Virginia Marine Resources Commission. 
(c)  Commissioner means the commissioner of marine resources. 
(d)  City means the city council of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(e)  Coastal primary sand dune or dune means a mound of unconsolidated sandy soil which is contiguous to mean high water, whose landward and lateral limits are marked by a change in grade from ten (10) percent or greater to less than ten (10) percent, and upon which is growing any of the following species: American beach grass (Ammophilla breviligulata); beach heather (Hudsonia tometosa); dune bean (Strophostylis spp.); dusty miller (Artemisia stelleriana); saltmeadow hay (Spartina patens); seabeach sandwort (Arenaria peploides); sea oats (Uniola paniculata); sea rocket (Cakile edentula); seaside goldenrod (Solidago sempervirens); Japanese sedge or Asiatic sand sedge (Carex kobomugi); Virginia pine (Pinus virginiana); broom sedge (Andropogon virginicus); and short dune grass (Panicum ararum). For purposes of this article, "coastal primary sand dune" shall not include any mound of sand, sandy soil or dredge spoil deposited by any person for the purpose of the temporary storage, beach replenishment or beach nourishment, nor shall the slopes of any such mound be used to determine the landward or lateral limits of a coastal primary sand dune. 
(f)  Governmental activity means any or all of the services provided by the City of Virginia Beach to its citizens for the purpose of maintaining public facilities, including but not limited to, such services as constructing, repairing and maintaining roads; providing street lights and sewage facilities; supplying and treating water; and constructing public buildings. 
(g)  Sand management permit is a permit granted by the local wetlands board to allow owners of property to remove sand, deposit sand and grade the dune/beach, on nourished beaches in the City of Virginia Beach, because of an excessive accumulation of sand that affects infrastructure. 
(h)  Wetlands Board or Board means the board created pursuant to section 28.2-1303 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; 1902, 8-14-89; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93; Ord. No. 2606, 8-8-2000; Ord. No. 3041, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 3458, 8-16-16)  
Sec. 1602. - Uses. 
The following uses of and activities in dunes are authorized if otherwise permitted by law: 
(a)  The construction and maintenance of noncommercial walkways which do not alter the contour of the coastal primary sand dune; 
(b)  The construction and maintenance of observation platforms which are not an integral part of any dwelling and which do not alter the contour of the coastal primary sand dune; 
(c)  The planting of beach grasses or other vegetation for the purpose of stabilizing coastal primary sand dunes; 
(d)  The placement of sand fences or other material on or adjacent to coastal primary sand dunes for the purpose of stabilizing such features, except that this provision shall not be interpreted to authorize the placement of any material which presents a public health or safety hazard; 
(e)  Sand replenishment activities of any private or public concern, provided no sand shall be removed from any coastal primary sand dune unless authorized by lawful permit; 
(f)  The normal maintenance of any groin, jetty, riprap, bulkhead or other structure designed to control beach erosion which may abut a coastal primary sand dune; 
(g)  The normal maintenance or repair of presently existing roads, highways, railroad beds and facilities of the United States, this Commonwealth or any of its counties or cities, or of any person, provided no coastal primary sand dunes are altered; 
(h)  Outdoor recreational activities, provided that the activities do not alter the natural contour of the coastal primary sand dune or destroy the vegetation growing thereon; 
(i)  The conservation and research activities of the commission, Virginia Institute of Marine Science, Department of Game and Inland Fisheries and other conservation-related agencies; 
(j)  The construction and maintenance of aids to navigation which are authorized by governmental authority; 
(k)  Activities pursuant to any emergency declaration by the city council of the City of Virginia Beach or the Governor of the Commonwealth or any public health officer for the purposes of protecting the public health and safety; 
(l)  Governmental activity in coastal primary sand dunes owned or leased by the Commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof; and 
(m)  The construction of living shoreline projects authorized pursuant to a general permit developed under Code of Virginia § 28.2-104.1B. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93; Ord. No. 3358, 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1603. - Applications for permits. 
(a)  Any person who desires to use or alter any coastal primary sand dune within this city, other than for the purpose of conducting the activities specified in section 1602 herein, shall first file an application for a permit with the Wetlands Board at the planning department. 
(b)  An application for a permit shall be accompanied by plans and other data in reference to the proposed project. Plans shall be prepared, stamped and endorsed by such qualified professional licensed to practice in the Commonwealth as the planning director may require; provided, however, that this requirement may be waived if, in the judgment of the planning director, the nature of the work to be performed renders it unnecessary. The permit application shall include the following: the name and address of the applicant; a detailed description of the proposed activities and a map, drawn to an appropriate and uniform scale, showing the area of dunes directly affected, the location of the proposed work thereon, the area of any proposed fill and excavation, the location, width, depth and length of any disposal area, and the location of all existing and proposed structures, sewage collection and treatment facilities, utility installations, roadways, and other related appurtenances or facilities, including those on adjacent uplands; a description of the type of equipment to be used and the means of equipment access to the activity site; the names and addresses of owners of record of adjacent land; an estimate of cost; the primary purpose of the project; any secondary purposes of the project, including further projects; the public benefit to be derived from the proposed project; a complete description of measures to be taken during and after the alteration to reduce detrimental offsite effects; the completion date of the proposed work, project, or structure; and such additional materials and documentation as the Wetlands Board may require. 
(c)  A nonrefundable processing fee to cover the cost of processing the application shall accompany each permit application. Such fee shall be in an amount of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00). Such fees shall include all costs of notifications and advertising. Such fees shall apply to original applications, including after-the-fact-applications, and to re-applications. The application and re-application fee for sand management permits shall be two hundred thirty dollars ($230.00). Such fee shall include all costs of notifications and advertising. No person shall be required to file two (2) separate applications for permits if the project to be undertaken will require permits under Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1302 and this article. Under those circumstances, the fee shall be established pursuant to this article. A fee in an amount of two hundred thirty dollars ($230.00) shall be required for deferral of an application unless waived by the Board for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2031, 2-12-91; Ord. No. 2152, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93; Ord. No. 2811, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 3281, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3458, 8-16-16; Ord. No. 3543, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18)  
Sec. 1604. - Public inspection of permit applications, maps, etc. 
All applications, maps, and documents submitted shall be open for public inspection at the planning department. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2152, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1605. - Public hearing procedure on permit applications [coastal primary sand dune permit applications]. 
Not later than sixty (60) days after receipt of a complete application, the Wetlands Board shall hold a public hearing on the application. The applicant, city council, commissioner, owner of record of any land adjacent to the coastal primary sand dunes in question, the Virginia Institute of Marine Science, the Department of Game and Inland Fisheries, the State Water Control Board, the Department of Transportation and any governmental agency expressing an interest in the application shall be notified of the hearing. The Board shall mail these notices not less than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The Board shall also cause notice of the hearing to be published at least once a week for two (2) weeks prior to such hearing in the newspaper having a general circulation in the City of Virginia Beach. The costs of publication shall be paid by the applicant. The applicant shall also erect, on the property which is the subject of the hearing, a sign of a size, type and lettering approved by the board. One such sign shall be posted within ten (10) feet of every public street adjoining the property, and within ten (10) feet of any body of water or waterway less than five hundred (500) feet wide adjoining the property or in such alternate location or locations as may be prescribed by the planning director. Such sign shall be erected not less than thirty (30) days before the Wetlands Board hearing and shall state the nature of the application and date and time of the hearing. Such signs shall be removed no later than five (5) days thereafter. The placement of the required signs shall not be applicable to sand management permits. In any case in which the Wetlands Board determines that the requirements of this section have not been met, the application shall be deferred or denied. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2152, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93; Ord. No. 2683, 1-22-02; Ord. No. 2741, 4-22-03; Ord. No. 3458, 8-16-16)  
Sec. 1606. - Action of Board on permit application. 
(a)  In acting on any application for a permit, the Board shall grant the application upon the affirmative vote of not less than four (4) members. If the application receives less than four (4) affirmative votes, the permit shall be denied. 
(b)  The chairperson of the Board, or in his or her absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Any person may appear and be heard at the public hearing. Each witness at the hearing may submit a concise written statement of his or her testimony. The Board shall make a record of the proceeding, which shall include the application, any written statements of witnesses, a summary of statements of all witnesses, the findings and decision of the Board, and the rationale for the decision. 
(c)  The Board shall make its determination within thirty (30) days from the hearing. If the Board fails to act within that time, the application shall be deemed approved. Within forty-eight (48) hours of its determination, the Board shall notify the applicant and the commissioner of its determination. If the Board fails to make a determination within the thirty-day period, it shall promptly notify the applicant and the commission that the application is deemed approved. 
(d)  If the Board's decision is reviewed or appealed, the Board shall transmit the record of its hearing to the commissioner. Upon a final determination by the commission, the record shall be returned to the Board. The record shall be open for public inspection at the planning department. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1607. - Bonding requirements; suspension or revocation of permit. 
The Board may require a reasonable bond or letter of credit in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it, securing to the Commonwealth compliance with the conditions and limitations set forth in the permit. The Board may, after a hearing as provided herein, suspend or revoke a permit if the Board finds that the applicant has failed to comply with any of the conditions for limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work described in the application. The Board may, after a hearing, suspend a permit if the applicant fails to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in the application. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1607.1. - Duties of Board. 
In fulfilling its responsibilities under this article, the Board shall preserve and protect coastal primary sand dunes and beaches and prevent their despoliation and destruction. However, whenever practical, the Board shall accommodate necessary economic development in a manner consistent with the protection of these features. 
(Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1608. - Review procedure; grant or denial of permit. 
(a)  In deciding whether to grant, grant in modified form, or deny an application for a permit, the Board shall consider the following: 
(1)  The testimony of any person in support of or in opposition to the permit application; 
(2)  The impact of the proposed development on the public health and welfare; and 
(3)  The proposed development's conformance with the standards prescribed in section 1608.1 of this ordinance and Section 28.2-1408 of the Code of Virginia and the guidelines promulgated by the commission pursuant to Section 28.2-1401 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  The Board shall grant the permit if all of the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The anticipated public and private benefit of the proposed activity exceeds its anticipated public and private detriment; 
(2)  The proposed development conforms with the standards prescribed in section 1608.1 of this ordinance and Section 28.2-1408 of the Code of Virginia and the guidelines promulgated by the commission pursuant to Section 28.2-1401 of the Code of Virginia; and 
(3)  The proposed activity does not violate the purposes and intent or Chapter 14 (§ 28.2-1400 et seq.) of Title 28.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  If the Board finds that any of the criteria set forth in subdivisions (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (b) are not met, the Board shall deny the permit application but allow the applicant to resubmit the application in modified form. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1608.1. - Standards for use of coastal primary sand dunes. 
No permanent alteration of or construction upon any coastal primary sand dune shall take place which would (i) impair the natural functions of the dune, (ii) physically alter the contour of the dune, or (iii) destroy vegetation growing thereon unless the Board determines that there will be no significant adverse ecological impact, or that the granting of a permit is clearly necessary and consistent with the public interest, considering all material factors. 
(Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1609. - Permits to be in writing, signed and notarized. 
The permit shall be in writing, signed by the chairperson of the Board and notarized. A copy of the permit shall be transmitted to the commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1609.1. - Private rights, zoning and land use ordinances not affected. 
No permit granted by the Board shall in any way affect the applicable zoning and land use ordinances of the City of Virginia Beach or the right of any person to seek compensation for any injury in fact incurred by him because of the permitted activity. 
(Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1610. - Expiration date and extensions of permit. 
No permit shall be granted without an expiration date, established by the Board. The Board may, upon proper application, extend the permit expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1611. - Emergency sand grading activities on sand dunes located on the Atlantic shoreline of Virginia Beach. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 1601 through 1610, sand grading activities are permitted on coastal primary sand dunes located on the Atlantic shoreline of the City of Virginia Beach if otherwise permitted by law, and if the city manager has declared an emergency and has issued a permit for this purpose. Such activities may be conducted without advance notice and hearing; however, the city manager, upon request and after reasonable notice as to time and place, shall hold a hearing to affirm, modify, amend, or cancel such emergency permit. "Emergency," as used in this section, means a sudden and unforeseeable occurrence or condition, either as to its onset or as to its extent, of such disastrous severity or magnitude that governmental action beyond that authorized or contemplated by existing law is required because governmental inaction for the period required to amend the law to meet the exigency would work immediate and irrevocable harm upon the citizens of the Commonwealth or some clearly defined portion or portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1611.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3095, adopted July 7, 2009, repealed § 1611.1, which pertained to bulkheads, etc. in the Sandbridge Beach Subdivision and derived from Ord. No. 2715, 7-9-02.  
Sec. 1612. - Conducting activity without permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity which would require a permit under this article without such a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1613. - Administrative and appellate provisions. 
In administering the provisions of this article and in order to provide appellate review, the Board shall bear all those duties and responsibilities and follow those procedures specified in Sections 28.2-1404 through 28.2-1415 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1614. - Investigations and prosecution. 
The Board shall have the authority to investigate all projects, whether proposed or ongoing, which alter dunes or beaches located within the City of Virginia Beach. The Board shall have the authority to prosecute all violations of its orders, or any violation of any of the provisions of this article.  
Sec. 1615. - Reporting, monitoring, site inspections and notice to comply; stop-work orders. 
(a)  The chairperson may require a permittee to implement monitoring and reporting procedures the chairperson believes are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of the permit and this article. 
(b)  The Board chairperson may require such on-site inspections as he or she believes are reasonably necessary to determine whether the measures required by the permit are being properly performed, or whether the provisions of this article are being violated. Prior to conducting such inspections, notice shall be provided by the chairperson to the resident owner, occupier or operator, who shall be given an opportunity to accompany the site inspector. If it is determined that there is a failure to comply with the permit, the Board chairperson shall serve notice upon the permittee at the address specified in his or her application or by delivery at the site of the permitted activities to the person supervising the activities and designated in the permit to receive the notice. The notice shall describe the measures needed for compliance and the time within which these measures shall be completed. Failure of the person to comply within the specified period, constitutes a violation of this section. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a substantial violation of this article, from the designated enforcement officer of the Board, the Board chairperson may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in subsection (b) of this section, issue an order requiring all or part of the activities on the site to be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken. In the case of an activity not authorized by this article, or where the alleged permit noncompliance is causing, or is in imminent danger of causing, significant harm to the coastal primary sand dunes protected by this article, the order may be issued without regard to whether the person has been issued a notice to comply as specified in subsection (b) of this section. Otherwise, the order may be issued only after the permittee has failed to comply with the notice to comply. The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for a period of seven (7) days from the date of service pending application by the enforcing authority, permittee, resident owner, occupier or operator for appropriate relief to the circuit court. Upon completion of corrective action, the order shall immediately be lifted. Nothing in this section shall prevent the Board chairperson from taking any other action specified in section 1614 of this ordinance. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a substantial violation of this article from a designated enforcement officer, the Board may order that the affected site be restored to predevelopment conditions if the Board finds that restoration is necessary to recover lost resources or to prevent further damage to resources. The order shall specify the restoration necessary and establish a reasonable time for its completion. The order shall be issued only after a hearing with at least thirty (30) days' notice to the affected person of the hearing's time, place, and purpose, and shall become effective immediately upon issuance by the Board. The Board shall require any scientific monitoring plan it believes is necessary to ensure the successful reestablishment of coastal primary sand dunes protected by this article and may require that a prepaid contract acceptable to the Board be in effect for the purpose of carrying out the scientific monitoring plan. The Board may also require a reasonable bond or letter of credit in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it securing to the Commonwealth compliance with the conditions set forth in the restoration order. The circuit court, upon petition by the Board, may enforce any such restoration order by injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy. Failure to complete the required restoration is a violation of this article. 
(e)  The duties of the Board chairperson prescribed in this section may be delegated to his or her designees; however, such designees shall not be designated enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1616. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person who knowingly, intentionally, or negligently violates any order, rule or regulation of the commission or of the Wetlands Board, any provision of this article or any provision of a permit granted pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 28.2 of the Code of Virginia or this article is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Following a conviction, every day the violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1617. - Injunctions. 
In addition to and not in lieu of the provisions of sections 1613, 1614, 1615 and 1616 of this article, upon petition of the Wetlands Board to the circuit court, the court may enjoin an act which is unlawful under the provisions of this article and may order the defendant to take any steps necessary to restore, protect, and preserve the dunes or beaches involved. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
Sec. 1618. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in article shall affect any project or development (i) for which a valid building permit or final site plan approval was issued prior to July 1, 1980; (ii) which, if no building permit is required for such project, including a locally approved mining operation, was commenced prior to July 1, 1980, and certified as exempt by the commission or the Wetlands Board; or (ii) approved by the city council pursuant to Ordinance No. 931, which was the coastline management ordinance in effect from March 26, 1979, to July 1, 1980. Nothing in this section excludes from regulation any activity which expands or enlarges a project already in existence or under construction. 
(b)  The board shall make an ongoing determination in the Sandbridge Beach subdivision of the area bounded on the north by Dam Neck Naval Base, on the west by Sandpiper Road, and on the south by Little Island Park, to determine which structures or properties are in clear and imminent danger from erosion and storm damage due to severe wave action or storm surge. The owners of structures or properties so defined shall not be prohibited from erecting and maintaining protective bulkheads or other equivalent structural improvements of a type, size and configuration approved by the board. The board shall not impose arbitrary or unreasonable conditions upon its approval of any such bulkhead or other structural improvement but shall maintain a continuing responsibility to ensure that each bulkhead or structural improvement constructed under the authority of this section is maintained in a condition which is safe, structurally sound, and otherwise in conformity with the reasonable conditions imposed by the Wetlands Board. At the time the application is submitted, the applicant shall consent in writing to any subsequent construction which may occur whereby an adjacent property owner desires to tie in a bulkhead at no additional cost with that bulkhead proposed by the applicant. Such consent shall be considered a waiver of property line defenses relating to the bulkhead line. 
(Ord. No. 1805, 8-22-88; Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93; Ord. No. 3095, 7-7-09)  
Sec. 1619. - Civil penalties; civil charges. 
(a)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained under this article, any person who violates any provision of this article or who violates or fails, neglects, or refuses to obey any commission or Board notice, order, rule, regulation or permit condition authorized by this article or Chapter 14 of Title 28.2 of the Code of Virginia shall, upon such finding by the circuit court, be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each day of violation. Such civil penalties may, at the discretion of the circuit court, be directed to be paid into the treasury of the City of Virginia Beach for the purpose of abating environmental damage to or restoring dunes or beaches therein, in such a manner as the court may, by order, direct, except that in the event the City of Virginia Beach or its agent is the violator, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(b)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained under this article, and with the consent of any person who has violated any provision of this article, or who has violated or failed, neglected, or refused to obey any commission or Board order, rule, regulation, or permit condition authorized by this article or Chapter 14 of Title 28.2 of the Code of Virginia, the Board may provide, in an order issued by the Board against such person, for the one-time payment of civil charges for each violation in specific sums, not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each violation. Civil charges shall be in lieu of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under subsection (a) of this section. Civil charges may be in addition to the cost of any restoration ordered by the commission or Board. 
(Ord. No. 2203, 1-26-93)  
ARTICLE 17. - THE SHORE DRIVE CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 1700. - Legislative intent. 
The Shore Drive corridor is not only one of the primary routes of access to the city's oceanfront resort area, but is also the location of First Landing State Park, the site of the historic first landing of the Jamestown colonists in 1607, Joint Expeditionary Base Little Creek-Fort Story, beaches on the Chesapeake Bay, and many stable and attractive residential communities. As such, its appearance is vital to the city. The purpose of the Shore Drive Corridor Overlay District is to enhance the appearance of the area encompassed by the District and to preserve its vitality as an important gateway to the city. The Shore Drive Corridor Plan and Shore Drive Corridor Design Guidelines are provided for this District, the purpose of which is to encourage development that is appropriate to the District. 
(Ord. No. 2511, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 3422, 7-7-15)  
Sec. 1701. - District boundaries. 
The Shore Drive Overlay District boundaries shall be as designated on the official zoning map of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2511, 10-13-98)  
Sec. 1702. - Application of regulations. 
The designation of any property as lying within the Shore Drive Overlay District shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the underlying zoning district classification of such property, such that any property situated in the Shore Drive Overlay District shall also lie within one or more of the zoning districts enumerated in section 102 (a) of this ordinance. All such property shall be subject to the requirements of this article as well as to all other regulations applicable to it, and to the extent that any provision of this article conflicts with any other ordinance or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2511, 10-13-98)  
Sec. 1703. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Principal uses. Subject to general requirements and to the regulations of the underlying zoning district, all uses and structures permitted as principal uses in the underlying zoning district in which they are located shall be permitted as principal uses within the Shore Drive Corridor Overlay District, except the following: 
(1)  Hotels and motels in the B-4 (SD) Mixed Use District; 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings in the B-4 (SD) Mixed Use District; 
(3)  Attached dwellings in the B-4 (SD) Mixed Use District; 
(4)  Boat sales in the B-4 (SD) Mixed Use or B-2(SD) Community Business Districts; and 
(5)  Commercial parking lots, parking garages and storage garages located in the B-4 (SD) Mixed Use or B-2(SD) Community Business Districts. 
In addition, the following uses shall be permitted within the Shore Drive Corridor Overlay District, although not allowed as principal uses in the underlying zoning district: 
(1)  Duplex dwellings in the B-4 (SD) Mixed Use Districts. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Subject to general requirements and to the regulations of the underlying zoning district, all uses and structures permitted as accessory uses in the underlying zoning district in which they are located shall be permitted as accessory uses within the Shore Drive Corridor Overlay District. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Subject to general requirements and to the regulations of the underlying zoning district, all uses and structures permitted as conditional uses in the underlying zoning district in which they are located shall be permitted as conditional uses within the Shore Drive Corridor Overlay District, as well as the following uses and structures: 
(1)  Hotels and motels in the B-4 (SD) Mixed Use District; 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings in the B-4 (SD) Mixed Use District; 
(3)  Attached dwellings in the B-4 (SD) Mixed Use District; 
(4)  Boat sales in the B-4 (SD) Mixed Use or B-2(SD) Community Business Districts; and 
(5)  Commercial parking lots, parking garages and storage garages located in the B-4 (SD) Mixed Use or B-2(SD) Community Business Districts. 
(d)  Additions to single-family dwellings, duplexes, attached dwellings and multiple-family dwellings not increasing the number of dwelling units in any such use shall be permitted as a matter of right, provided that all other requirements of this ordinance are met. Where setbacks or other dimensional requirements pertaining to such additions are not specified in the regulations of the underlying zoning district, such requirements shall be as specified in the A-18 Apartment District. 
(Ord. No. 2511, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2679, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2844, 10-12-04)  
Sec. 1704. - Dimensional and other requirements; density; landscape screening and buffering. 
Subject to the provisions of section 1703 of this ordinance, dimensional and other requirements for uses and structures located within the Shore Drive Corridor Overlay District shall be as specified in the underlying zoning district; provided, however, that: 
(a)  The density of multiple-family dwellings shall not exceed: 
(1)  Eighteen (18) units per acre or the maximum density permitted by the regulations of the underlying zoning district, whichever is the lesser, on zoning lots having a lot area of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or less; 
(2)  Twenty-four (24) units per acre or the maximum density permitted by the regulations of the underlying zoning district, whichever is the lesser, on zoning lots having a lot area greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet and less than four (4) acres; or 
(3)  Thirty-six (36) units per acre or the maximum density permitted by the regulations of the underlying zoning district, whichever is the lesser, on zoning lots having a lot area four (4) acres or more. 
(b)  Where a zoning lot within the B-2(SD) or B-4(SD) district adjoins any district in which single-family dwellings, duplexes, attached dwellings or multiple-family dwellings are permitted as a conditional or principal use, without an intervening street, alley or body of water over twenty-five (25) feet in width, a fifteen-foot minimum yard shall be required along all lot lines adjoining such district. Category IV landscape screening shall be required, and no other uses or structures shall be permitted, within the yard. 
(c)  The following chart lists the requirements within the B-4 Mixed Use District (Shore Drive Corridor Overlay District) for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing and maximum lot coverage for duplex dwellings. For duplex dwellings in the B-4(SD) Mixed Use (Shore Drive Corridor Overlay District): 
		Duplexes 
(1) 	Minimum lot area 	10,000 square feet 
(2) 	Minimum lot width 	75 feet 
(3) 	Minimum front yard 	20 feet 
(4) 	Minimum front yard setback when adjacent to a 40-foot right-of-way created in accordance with section 4.1(m) of the subdivision ordinance 	25 feet 
(5) 	Minimum side yard 	10 feet 
(6) 	Minimum side yard setback when adjacent to a street 	15 feet 
(7) 	Minimum side yard setback when adjacent to a 40-foot right-of-way created in accordance with section 4.1(m) of the subdivision ordinance 	20 feet 
(8) 	Minimum rear yard 	20 feet 
(9) 	As an exception, the setback for any yard adjacent to the Chesapeake Bay for any structures shall be 30 feet in the B-4(SD) District 	
(10) 	Maximum lot coverage 	35 percent 
(11) 	Maximum total of building floor area and area of garages greater than 1,000 square feet expressed as a percentage of maximum allowable lot coverage 	200 percent 
(12) 	Maximum area of impervious cover, as defined in 103 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance, expressed as a percentage of lot size 	60 percent 
 
(Ord. No. 2511, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2679, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2844, 10-12-04)  
ARTICLE 18. - SPECIAL REGULATIONS IN AIR INSTALLATIONS COMPATIBLE USE ZONES (AICUZ)  
A. - OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 1800. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Air Installations Compatible Use Zones (AICUZ) Overlay Ordinance of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(Ord. No. 2905, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 1801. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate, in a manner consistent with the rights of individual property owners and the requirements of military operations at Naval Air Station (NAS) Oceana, development of uses and structures that are incompatible with military operations; to sustain the economic health of the city and Hampton Roads Region; to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare from the adverse impacts associated with high levels of noise from flight operations at NAS Oceana and the potential for aircraft accidents associated with proximity to airport operations; and to maintain the overall quality of life of those who live, work and recreate in the City of Virginia Beach. 
(Ord. No. 2905, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 1802. - Findings. 
The city council hereby finds that: 
(a)  Naval Air Station (NAS) Oceana was first established as an auxiliary airfield in 1943 and was designated as a major Navy jet air base in the 1950s. It is now one of the largest Navy air bases in the country and is the Master Jet Base for the Navy's Atlantic Fleet. NAS Oceana is a vital component in the architecture of the Defense Department's joint service method of operational planning and execution and in the newly-emerging inter-agency approach to meeting homeland defense requirements; 
(b)  NAS Oceana is the single largest employer in the City of Virginia Beach. In 2003, it had a gross annual payroll of over seven hundred fifty million dollars ($750,000,000.00) and spent another four hundred million dollars ($400,000,000.00) for goods and services. In that year, over twelve thousand (12,000) personnel, comprised of nearly nine thousand eight hundred (9,800) military and over two thousand five hundred (2,500) civilian employees, were employed there. Most of those employees live within the community, infusing additional benefits into the local economy, primarily through spending and spousal employment salaries. When considering the personal impact of the military in the community, the economic benefit exceeds one billion dollars ($1,000,000,000.00) annually; 
(c)  There are more than thirty thousand (30,000) acres of land in areas within the 70-75 dB DNL or >75 dB DNL Noise Zones and approximately 16,500 acres of land within the 65-70 dB DNL Noise Zone. Approximately four thousand, three hundred (4,300) acres of this land is encumbered by easements or restrictive covenants that limit the uses of the land to those that are not incompatible with flight operations arising out of NAS Oceana; 
(d)  Since the installation's inception, development of a type deemed incompatible under the Navy's AICUZ Program has occurred, such that the Navy has voluntarily modified flight arrival and departure procedures, thereby resulting in flight procedures and training that do not replicate actual aircraft carrier operating procedures. 
(e)  In August 2005, the Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) Commission added to the list of installations to be closed or realigned the recommendation to realign NAS Oceana by relocating the Atlantic Fleet's East Coast Master Jet Base to Cecil Field in Jacksonville, Florida if, among other things, the cities of Virginia Beach and Chesapeake fail to enact and enforce legislation to prevent further encroachment of NAS Oceana by the end of March 2006 by adopting zoning ordinances that require the governing bodies to follow Air Installations Compatibility Use Zone (AICUZ) guidelines in deciding discretionary development applications for property in noise level 70 dB day night average noise level (DNL) or greater; 
(f)  The closure or realignment of NAS Oceana would have serious adverse economic consequences to the city and the region; and 
(g)  In 2004 and 2005, the City of Virginia Beach, along with the cities of Norfolk and Chesapeake, joined with the Navy and the Hampton Roads Planning District Commission to craft a regional joint land use study (JLUS). Among the recommendations of the JLUS was that the city adopt an ordinance applicable in all noise zones greater than 65 dB DNL to help prevent encroachment at NAS Oceana. The JLUS was accepted by resolution of the city council in May of 2005 and the city council directed that appropriate ordinances implementing the recommendations of the JLUS be brought forward for its consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2905, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 3006, 1-8-08)  
Sec. 1803. - Applicability. 
(a)  Area of applicability. The provisions of this Article shall apply to discretionary development applications for any property located within an Accident Potential Zone (APZ) or 65-70 dB DNL, 70—75 dB DNL or >75 dB DNL Noise Zone, as shown on the official zoning map, that have not been approved or denied by the city council as of the date of adoption of this Article. For purposes of this Article, discretionary development applications shall include applications for: 
(1)  Rezonings, including conditional zonings; 
(2)  Conditional use permits for new uses or structures, or for alterations or enlargements of existing conditional uses where the occupant load would increase; 
(3)  Conversions or enlargements of nonconforming uses or structures, except where the application contemplates the construction of a new building or structure or expansion of an existing use or structure where the total occupant load would not increase; 
(4)  Street closures where the application contemplates the construction of a new building or structure or the expansion of a use or structure where the total occupant load is increased; and 
(5)  Special exceptions for Alternative Compliance in any zoning district listed in section 102(a)(13) where the special exception allows a use not otherwise permitted by applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2905, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2934, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 3006, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 3328, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 1804. - Discretionary development applications; city council policy. 
(a)  City council policy. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, it shall be the policy of the city council that no application included within the provisions of section 1803 shall be approved unless the uses and structures it contemplates are designated as compatible under Table 1 below and, if applicable, Table 2, unless the city council finds that no reasonable use designated as compatible under the applicable table or tables can be made of the property. In such cases, the city council shall approve the proposed use of property at the lowest density or intensity of development that is reasonable. 
(b)  Tables. The following tables show the uses designated as compatible (Y) and those designated as not compatible (N) in each listed Noise Zone (Table 1) or Accident Potential Zone (Table 2). The designation of any use as compatible shall not be construed to allow such use in any zoning district in which it is not permitted as either a principal or conditional use. 
TABLE 1 - AIR INSTALLATIONS COMPATIBLE USE ZONES 
LAND USE COMPATIBILITY IN NOISE ZONES 
Land Use 	Land Use Compatibility 
Land Use Name 	70-75 dB DNL 	>75 dB DNL 
Residential and Related 		
Single-family dwellings 	N 	N 
Semidetached dwellings 	N 	N 
Attached dwellings/townhouses 	N 	N 
Duplexes 	N 	N 
Multiple-family dwellings 	N 	N 
Dormitories and other group quarters 	N 	N 
Mobile home parks 	N 	N 
Hotels and motels 	N 	N 
Other residential uses 	N 	N 
		
Manufacturing 		
Food & kindred products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Textile mill products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Apparel and other finished products; products made from fabrics, leather and similar materials; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Lumber and wood products (except furniture); manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Furniture and fixtures; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Paper and allied products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Printing, publishing, and allied industries 	Y 	Y 
Chemicals and allied products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Petroleum refining and related industries 	Y 	Y 
Rubber and misc. plastic products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Stone, clay and glass products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Primary metal products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Fabricated metal products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Professional scientific, and controlling instruments; photographic and optical goods; watches and clocks 	Y 	Y 
Miscellaneous manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
		
Transportation, communication and utilities 		
Railroad, rapid rail transit, and street railway transportation 	Y 	Y 
Motor vehicle transportation 	Y 	Y 
Aircraft transportation 	Y 	Y 
Marine craft transportation 	Y 	Y 
Highway and street right-of-way 	Y 	Y 
Automobile parking 	Y 	Y 
Communication 	Y 	Y 
Utilities 	Y 	Y 
Other transportation, communication and utilities 	Y 	Y 
		
Trade 		
Wholesale trade 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade - building materials, hardware and farm equipment 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade - general merchandise 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade - food 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade - automotive, marine craft, aircraft and accessories 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade - apparel and accessories 	Y 	Y 
		
Services 		
Retail trade - furniture, home, furnishings and equipment 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade - eating and drinking establishments 	Y 	Y 
Other retail trade 	Y 	Y 
Finance, insurance and real estate services 	Y 	Y 
Personal services 	Y 	Y 
Cemeteries 	Y 	Y 
Business services 	Y 	Y 
Warehousing and storage 	Y 	Y 
Repair services 	Y 	Y 
Professional services 	Y 	Y 
Hospitals, other medical facilities 	Y 	N 
Nursing homes 	N 	N 
Contract construction services 	Y 	Y 
Government services 	Y 	Y 
Educational services 	Y 	N 
Miscellaneous 	Y 	Y 
		
Cultural, entertainment and recreational 		
Cultural activities 	Y 	N 
Religious uses 	Y 	N 
Nature exhibits 	N 	N 
Public assembly halls 	N 	N 
Auditoriums, concert halls 	Y 	N 
 
TABLE 1 - AIR INSTALLATIONS COMPATIBLE USE ZONES 
LAND USE COMPATIBILITY IN NOISE ZONES 
Land Use 	Land Use Compatibility 
Land Use Name 	70-75 dB DNL 	>75 dB DNL 
Outdoor music shells, amphitheaters 	N 	N 
Outdoor sports arenas, spectator sports 	Y 	N 
Other outdoor recreational facilities 	Y 	Y 
Indoor recreational facilities 	Y 	Y 
Campgrounds 	Y 	N 
Parks 	Y 	N 
Other cultural, entertainment and recreation 	Y 	N 
		
Resource Production and Extraction 		
Agriculture (except live stock) 	Y 	Y 
Livestock farming 	Y 	N 
Animal breeding 	Y 	N 
Agriculture related activities 	Y 	Y 
Forestry activities 	Y 	Y 
Fishing activities 	Y 	Y 
Mining activities 	Y 	Y 
Other resource production or extraction 	Y 	Y 
 
TABLE 2 - AIR INSTALLATIONS COMPATIBLE USE ZONES 
LAND USE COMPATIBILITY IN ACCIDENT POTENTIAL ZONES 
Land Use Name 	Clear Zone 	APZ-I 	APZ-II 
Residential 			
Single-family dwellings 	N 	N 	Y 
Semidetached dwellings 	N 	N 	N 
Attached dwellings/townhouses 	N 	N 	N 
Multiple-family dwellings 	N 	N 	N 
Dormitories and other group quarters 	N 	N 	N 
Hotels and motels 	N 	N 	N 
Mobile home parks 	N 	N 	N 
Other residential 	N 	N 	N 
			
Manufacturing 			
Food & kindred products; manufacturing 	N 	Y 	Y 
Textile mill products; manufacturing 	N 	Y 	Y 
Apparel and other finished products; products made from fabrics, leather and similar materials; manufacturing 	N 	Y 	Y 
Lumber and wood products (except furniture); manufacturing 	N 	Y 	Y 
Furniture and fixtures; manufacturing 	N 	Y 	Y 
Paper and allied products; manufacturing 	N 	Y 	Y 
Printing, publishing, and allied industries 	N 	Y 	Y 
Chemicals and allied products; manufacturing 	N 	N 	N 
Petroleum refining and related industries 	N 	N 	N 
Rubber and misc. plastic products; manufacturing 	N 	N 	N 
Stone, clay and glass products; manufacturing 	N 	Y 	Y 
Primary metal products; manufacturing 	N 	Y 	Y 
Fabricated metal products; manufacturing 	N 	Y 	Y 
Professional scientific, & controlling instrument; photographic and optical goods; watches & clocks 	N 	Y 	Y 
Miscellaneous manufacturing 	N 	Y 	Y 
			
Transportation, communication and utilities 			
Railroad, rapid rail transit, and street railway transportation 	N 	Y 	Y 
Motor vehicle transportation 	N 	Y 	Y 
Aircraft transportation 	N 	Y 	Y 
Marine craft transportation 	N 	Y 	Y 
Auto parking 	N 	Y 	Y 
Communication 	N 	Y 	Y 
Utilities 	N 	Y 	Y 
Solid waste disposal (landfills, incineration, etc.) 	N 	N 	N 
Other transport, comm. and utilities 	N 	Y 	Y 
			
Trade 			
Wholesale trade 	N 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade - building materials, hardware and farm equipment 	N 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade - general merchandise 	N 	N 	Y 
Retail trade - food 	N 	N 	Y 
Retail trade - automotive, marine craft, aircraft and accessories 	N 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade - apparel and accessories 	N 	N 	Y 
Retail trade - furniture, home, furnishings and equipment 	N 	N 	Y 
Retail trade - eating and drinking establishments 	N 	N 	N 
Other retail trade 	N 	N 	Y 
			
Services 			
Finance, insurance and real estate services 	N 	N 	Y 
Personal services 	N 	N 	Y 
Cemeteries 	N 	Y 	Y 
Business services (credit reporting; mail, stenographic, reproduction; advertising) 	N 	N 	Y 
Warehousing and storage services 	N 	Y 	Y 
Repair services 	N 	Y 	Y 
Professional services 	N 	N 	Y 
Hospitals, nursing homes 	N 	N 	N 
Other medical facilities 	N 	N 	N 
Contract construction services 	N 	Y 	Y 
Government services 	N 	N 	Y 
Educational services 	N 	N 	N 
Miscellaneous 	N 	N 	Y 
			
Cultural, entertainment and recreational 			
Cultural activities 	N 	N 	N 
Religious uses 	N 	N 	Y 
Nature exhibits 	N 	Y 	Y 
Public assembly 	N 	N 	N 
Auditoriums, concert halls 	N 	N 	N 
Outdoor music shells, amphitheaters 	N 	N 	N 
Outdoor sports arenas, spectator sports 	N 	N 	N 
Indoor recreational facilities 	N 	Y 	Y 
Indoor play centers 	N 	N 	Y 
Campgrounds 	N 	N 	N 
Parks 	N 	Y 	Y 
Other cultural, entertainment and recreation 	N 	Y 	Y 
Agriculture (except livestock) 	Y 	Y 	Y 
			
Resource production and extraction 			
Livestock farming and breeding 	N 	Y 	Y 
Agriculture related activities 	N 	Y 	Y 
Forestry activities 	N 	Y 	Y 
Fishing activities 	N 	Y 	Y 
Mining activities 	N 	Y 	Y 
Other resource production or extraction 	N 	Y 	
			
Other 			
Undeveloped land 	Y 	Y 	Y 
Water areas 	N 	N 	N 
 
(c)  Special regulations in the 65—70 dB DNL Noise Zone. The following regulations shall apply to discretionary development applications for residential uses on property within the 65—70 dB DNL Noise Zone. Residential uses shall include all of the uses listed under the heading of "Residential and Related" in Table 1 of this section. 
(1)  For property within Sub-area 1 of the 65—70 dB DNL Noise Zone, discretionary development applications for residential uses may be granted only if the city council finds that the proposed development: 
(i)  Conforms to the applicable provisions of the city zoning ordinance, including all requirements of the zoning district; and 
(ii)  Conforms to the applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, including, without limitation, the Resort Area Strategic Action Plan, Old Beach Design Guidelines or Special Area Design Guidelines (Urban Areas) set forth in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  For property within Sub-area 2 of the 65—70 dB DNL Noise Zone, discretionary development applications for residential uses may be approved only if the city council finds that the proposed development: 
(i)  Is at a density similar to or lower than that of surrounding properties having a similar use and no greater than recommended by the Comprehensive Plan; and 
(ii)  Conforms to the applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, including, without limitation, the Princess Anne Corridor Study, Princess Anne Commons Design Guidelines, or Mixed Use Development Guidelines. 
(3)  For property within Sub-area 3 of the 65—70 dB DNL Noise Zone, it shall be the policy of the city council that no application for a residential use shall be approved unless the city council finds that no reasonable non-residential use can be made of the property, in which event the city council may allow the proposed residential use of such property at the lowest density that is reasonable. 
(d)  Redevelopment. The provisions of this section shall not apply to discretionary development applications for the redevelopment of property where the proposed dwelling unit density is the same as or lower than the actual dwelling unit density existing at the time the application is submitted. 
(Ord. No. 2905, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 3006, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 3227, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 3247, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 1805. - Sound attenuation. 
Sound attenuation measures shall be incorporated in any use or structure located in the 65—70 dB DNL, 70—75 dB DNL or >75 dB DNL Noise Zones in accordance with the requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2905, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 3006, 1-8-08)  
Sec. 1806. - Allowable residential density in Interfacility Traffic Area. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 402(b) and 405 (Alternative Residential Development in Agricultural Districts), residential development on property within the Interfacility Traffic Area shall be limited to single-family dwellings at a density no greater than one (1) dwelling per fifteen (15) acres of developable land. 
(Ord. No. 2905, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 3006, 1-8-08)  
Sec. 1807. - Reservation of powers; severability. 
(a)  Nothing in this Article shall be construed to require the city council to approve any application solely because it meets the requirements of this Article, it being the intention of this Article that the city council shall be entitled to exercise its authority in such applications to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
(b)  The provisions of this Article shall be severable, it being the intention of the city council that in the event one (1) or more of the provisions of this Article shall be adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the validity and enforceability of the remaining provisions of this Article shall be unaffected by such adjudication. 
(Ord. No. 2905, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2934, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 3006, 1-8-08)  
B. - ACCIDENT POTENTIAL ZONE 1 (APZ-1) 
 
Sec. 1808. - Purpose and intent. 
In addition to the purposes set forth in section 1801, the purpose of this Part shall be to encourage the development of uses and structures in APZ-1 that are compatible with flight operations at NAS Oceana by providing certain incentives for development that will protect and enhance the health, safety, welfare and quality of life of the residents in APZ-1 and not adversely impact established residential neighborhoods. The provisions of this Part allow certain uses to be located in appropriate zoning districts within APZ-1 without the need for a conditional use permit, so long as the physical and other features of those uses, such as building design and materials, parking lot and site landscaping, landscape screening, site lighting and signage are of a quality demonstrably higher than normal and the hours of operation are strictly limited so as to not interfere with the quality of life in nearby residential neighborhoods. 
It is the intention of the City Council that a use be allowed without a conditional use permit pursuant to these provisions only: (i) in zoning districts within APZ-1 where the use is appropriate; (ii) when the characteristics of the use are clearly sufficient to prevent any adverse impacts to residential or apartment uses or other property within APZ-1; and (iii) when the design features and other characteristics of the proposed use meet or exceed the standards set forth in section 1810. 
(Ord. No. 2934, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 1809. - Development incentives and permitted uses in APZ-1. 
(a)  The following uses shall be allowed as principal uses on property in Accident Potential Zone 1 (APZ-1) if all design and other features enumerated in section 1810 are provided: 
(1)  O-2 Office District: 
A.  Off-street parking in conjunction with permitted uses in an adjoining business district, where such parking: (i) is limited to the zoning lot contiguous with the business district use for which the parking is provided; and (ii) does not extend more than two hundred (200) feet into the O-2 District. 
(2)  B-2 Community Business District: 
A.  Automobile repair garages and small engine repair establishments where all repair work is performed within a building; 
B.  Automobile repair establishments dealing exclusively in minor repairs of the type provided at automobile service stations; 
C.  Automobile service stations; 
D.  Boat sales; 
E.  Commercial parking garages and storage garages which include car wash, car rental or car detailing services when wholly enclosed within a parking structure and accessory thereto; 
F.  Commercial indoor recreation facilities; 
G.  Fiber-optics transmission facilities; 
H.  Mini-warehouses; 
I.  Mobile home sales; 
J.  Motor vehicle sales on lots larger than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; 
K.  Public utility storage or maintenance installations. 
(3)  I-1 Industrial District: 
A.  Automobile service stations; 
B.  Automobile repair garages; 
C.  Fiber-optics transmission facilities; 
D.  Firewood preparation facilities; 
E.  Mobile home sales. 
(4)  I-2 Industrial District: 
A.  Automobile services stations; 
B.  Fiber-optics transmission facilities; 
C.  Firewood preparation facilities. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city council from granting a conditional use permit for any of the uses set forth herein upon proper application therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2934, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 2957, 7-11-06)  
Sec. 1810. - Design, etc., features; notice. 
(a)  Any of the uses enumerated in section 1809 shall be allowed as a principal use in the zoning districts designated therein if, in addition to all other applicable requirements of this ordinance, the Planning Director finds that the utilization of the following features is clearly sufficient to prevent any adverse impacts to residential or apartment uses or other property within APZ-1: 
(1)  The use conforms to all general and specific conditions applicable to such use under Part C of Article 2 of this ordinance; 
(2)  Enhanced site and parking lot landscaping exceeding applicable requirements, both qualitatively and quantitatively, is provided; 
(3)  Exterior lighting is of low intensity and residential in character and shielded in such manner as to direct light and glare away from residential areas; 
(4)  Hours of operation are limited so as to avoid disturbances to residential neighborhoods; 
(5)  Signage is either nonilluminated or, where freestanding, is externally illuminated from ground level, no neon lighting visible from any adjoining property is used, and freestanding signs are located as far from residential or apartment districts as is practicable; 
(6)  Storage of materials, waste containers, or merchandise, except for boats, motor vehicles, motor homes or similar items for sale, is within the interior of the building or is screened so as to not be visible from streets or adjoining properties; 
(7)  Where adjacent to residential or apartment districts, enhanced landscape buffering exceeding applicable requirements, both qualitatively and quantitatively, is provided; and 
(8)  Building design and exterior building materials substantially conform to such of General Community Appearance Guidelines, Special Area Development Guidelines and Special Purpose Guidelines, as set forth in the Comprehensive Plan Reference handbook, as well as the design recommendations of any Strategic Growth Area Plan as are applicable. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application pursuant to this Part, the Planning Director shall cause notice thereof to be sent by certified mail to the record owner of each lot adjacent to, or directly across the street from, the property that is the subject of the application, which notice shall invite comments concerning the application. The Planning Director shall give careful consideration to the comments received in determining whether to approve or disapprove the application, and shall, no less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days after the date of mailing of the required notices, either approve or disapprove the application on the basis of the criteria set forth in this Part and the comments received. Such decision shall be in writing and mailed or delivered to the applicant and all persons who provided comments. 
(Ord. No. 2934, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 3172, 5-10-11; Ord. No. 3228, 4-24-12)  
ARTICLE 19. - OLD BEACH OVERLAY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 1900. - Legislative intent. 
(a)  The purpose of the Old Beach Overlay District is to preserve and enhance the historic status of the Old Beach neighborhood as one of the first residential areas within the Oceanfront Resort Area by providing opportunities for both new and redeveloped resort residential development, characterized by single-family cottage-style homes and compatible multiple-family residential dwellings. Furthermore, the Old Beach Design Guidelines are provided for this district, the purpose of which is to encourage development that is appropriate for the district. 
(Ord. No. 2908, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 1901. - District boundaries. 
The Old Beach Overlay District boundaries shall be as designated on the official zoning map of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2908, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 1902. - Application of regulations. 
The designation of any property as lying within the Old Beach Overlay District shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the underlying zoning district classification of such property, such that any property situated in the Old Beach Overlay District shall also lie within one or more of the underlying zoning districts enumerated in section 102(a) of this ordinance. All such property shall be subject to the requirements of this article as well as to all other regulations applicable to it, and to the extent that any provision of this article conflicts with any other ordinance or regulation, the provision of this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2908, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 1903. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Principal uses and structures. Subject to general requirements and to the regulations of the underlying zoning districts, all uses and structures permitted as principal uses in the underlying zoning districts shall be permitted as principal uses within the Old Beach Overlay District. In addition, the following use shall be permitted within the Old Beach Overlay District, although not allowed as a principal use in the underlying zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Ancillary single-family dwellings, located on the same lot as a separate single-family, in the R-5D Residential Duplex District, any Apartment District, and any Resort Tourist District, subject to the requirements of sections 1904(b) and 1905, and provided further that a single lot with a single-family dwelling and an ancillary single-family dwelling shall not be subdivided to create a separate lot for each dwelling. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures. Subject to general requirements and to the regulations of the underlying zoning district, all uses and structures permitted as accessory uses in the underlying zoning district in which they are located shall be permitted as accessory uses within the Old Beach Overlay District. In addition, the following use shall be permitted within the Old Beach Overlay District, although not allowed as an accessory use in the underlying zoning district, upon a finding that the structure containing the use meets the provisions of the Old Beach Design Guidelines as specified in section 1905(a): 
(1)  Garage apartment, except that the living area shall not be less than five hundred (500) square feet of floor area nor greater than eight hundred (800) square feet, and provided further that such garage apartment shall be at least thirty (30) feet from the structure containing the principal dwelling. 
(c)  Conditional uses and structures. Subject to general requirements and to the regulations of the underlying zoning district, all uses and structures permitted as conditional uses in the underlying zoning district in which they are located shall be permitted as conditional uses within the Old Beach Overlay District. In addition, the following use shall be permitted within the Old Beach Overlay District as a conditional use, although not allowed as a conditional use in the underlying zoning district: 
(1)  Bed and breakfast inn. 
(Ord. No. 2908, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 1904. - Dimensional requirements. 
Dimensional requirements and maximum density for uses and structures located within the Old Beach Overlay District shall be as specified in the underlying zoning district; provided, however, that the following requirements shall apply notwithstanding any contrary provision in the regulations of the underlying zoning district: 
(a)  The following tables shall apply to lots with one (1) single-family dwelling and no ancillary dwelling: 
Setback requirements for principal structures (in feet): 
(1)  Minimum front yard setback .....20 
(2)  Minimum rear yard setback .....20 
(3)  Minimum side yard setback where a driveway is located within such side yard .....12 
(4)  Minimum side yard setback adjacent to a street .....20 
(5)  Minimum side yard setback except if adjacent to a street or where a driveway is located within such side yard .....8 
Setback requirements for attached or detached garages, carports and other accessory structures (in feet): 
(6)  Minimum front yard setback for garages and carports .....N/A1 
(7)  Minimum rear yard setback for garages and carports, except as provided in subdivision (8) below .....20 
(8)  Minimum rear yard setback for garages and carports if no improved alley adjacent to the rear yard .....8 
(9)  Minimum side yard setback for garages and carports where a driveway is located within such side yard .....12 
(10)  Minimum side yard setback for garages and carports adjacent to a street .....20 
(11)  Minimum side yard setback for garages and carports, except if adjacent to a street .....8 
(12)  Minimum side and rear yard setback for other accessory structures no larger than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than eight (8) feet, except when adjacent to a street: .....5 
(13)  Minimum side and rear yard setback for other accessory structures no larger than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than eight (8) feet when adjacent to a street .....8 
Notes: 
1 The garage wall containing the overhead door shall be recessed at least eight (8) feet from the front wall plane of the dwelling, excluding the porch, if any, closest to the front or rear lot line. 
Other dimensional requirements (in feet or square feet): 
(14)  Minimum lot area .....5,000 
(15)  Minimum lot area outside of water, marsh or wetlands .....5,000 
(16)  Minimum lot width .....40 
(17)  Maximum lot coverage .....40% 
(18)  Maximum area of impervious cover, as defined in section 103 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance, expressed as a percentage of the lot size .....60% 
(19)  Minimum lot area comprised of landscape plantings and ground cover, provided that such area shall be a single, contiguous portion of the required rear yard .....600 
Stepback requirements. The uppermost story or building level above the first story or building level of any new structure or addition to an existing structure shall be stepped back, such that at least thirty-five (35) percent of the total length of the exterior wall of the uppermost story or building level is set back a minimum of three (3) feet from the exterior wall directly below it. The length of wall stepped back may be comprised of multiple sections of varying length that are not contiguous to each other. For the purposes of this section, uppermost story or building level does not include living area completely contained within the roofed area of the structure. 
(b)  The following provisions shall apply to lots with one (1) principal single-family dwelling and an ancillary dwelling: 
Setback requirements for principal and ancillary structures (in feet): 
(1)  Minimum front yard setback .....20 
(2)  Minimum rear yard setback .....20 
(3)  Minimum side yard setback except when adjacent to a street or where a driveway is located within such side yard .....8 
(4)  Minimum side yard setback where a driveway is located within such side yard .....12 
(5)  Minimum side yard setback adjacent to a street .....20 
Setback requirements for attached or detached garages, carports and other accessory structures (in feet): 
(6)  Minimum front yard setback for garages and carports .....N/A1 
(7)  Minimum rear yard setback for garages and carports .....N/A1 
(8)  Minimum side yard setback for garages and carports except if adjacent to a street or where a driveway is located within such side yard .....8 
(9)  Minimum side yard setback for garages and carports if adjacent to a street .....20 
(10)  Minimum side yard setback for garages and carports where a driveway is located within such side yard .....12 
(11)  Minimum side yard setback for accessory structures no larger than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than eight (8) feet, except when adjacent to a street .....5 
(12)  Minimum side yard setback for accessory structures no larger than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area and with an eave height no greater than eight (8) feet when adjacent to a street .....8 
Notes: 
1 The garage wall containing the overhead door shall be recessed at least eight (8) feet from the front wall plane of the dwelling, excluding the front porch, if any, closest to the front or rear lot line. 
Other dimensional requirements (in feet or square feet): 
(13)  Minimum lot area .....5,000 
(14)  Minimum lot area outside of water, marsh or wetlands .....5,000 
(15)  Minimum lot width .....40 
(16)  Maximum lot coverage .....40% 
(17)  Minimum lot coverage of principal single-family dwelling, expressed as a percentage of total lot coverage, except that in no case shall the combined lot coverage of the principal and ancillary single-family dwellings on a lot exceed 100 percent of the maximum total lot coverage .....55% 
(18)  Maximum lot coverage of ancillary single-family dwelling, expressed as a percentage of total lot coverage, except that in no case shall the combined lot coverage of the principal and ancillary single-family dwellings on a lot exceed 100 percent of the maximum total lot coverage .....45% 
(19)  Maximum area of impervious cover, as defined in section 103 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance, expressed as a percentage of the lot size .....60% 
(20)  Total maximum building floor area, expressed as floor area ratio .....0.7 
(21)  Minimum floor area of principal single-family dwelling, expressed as a percentage of total floor area, except that in no case shall the combined floor area of the principal and ancillary single-family dwellings exceed 100% of the maximum total floor area .....55% 
(21)  Maximum floor area of ancillary single-family dwelling, expressed as a percentage of total floor area, except that in no case shall the combined floor area of the principal and ancillary single-family dwellings exceed one hundred 100% of the maximum total floor area .....45% 
(22)  Minimum interior yard between principal and ancillary dwellings .....30 
(23)  Minimum lot area per unit devoted to landscape plantings, including rain gardens and bioretention areas, and ground cover, in square feet, provided that a minimum of 400 square feet of such area shall be a single, contiguous portion of the required interior yard .....600 
Other requirements: 
(1)  Orientation of dwellings. Any principal or ancillary single-family dwelling located on a lot with a separate single-family dwelling shall be oriented on the lot in a manner consistent with the Old Beach Design Guidelines, such that the primary facade of the dwelling faces the street or alley, provided that if no alley exists, the primary facade of the dwelling on the rear portion of the lot shall face the required interior yard. 
(2)  Stepback requirements. The uppermost story or building level above the first story or building level of any new structure or addition to an existing structure shall be stepped back, such that at least thirty-five (35) percent of the total length of the exterior wall of the uppermost story or building level is set back a minimum of three (3) feet from the exterior wall directly below it. The length of wall stepped back may be comprised of multiple sections of varying length that are not contiguous to each other. For the purposes of this section, uppermost story or building level does not include living area completely contained within the roofed area of the structure. 
(3)  Conversions: 
(i)  In any case where an existing structure converting to either a principal or ancillary single-family dwelling does not meet the required minimum yard setbacks, such setback shall be considered conforming and shall not require a variance, provided that all new portions of the structure shall meet the required minimum yard setbacks. 
(ii)  For any lot on which an existing duplex dwelling is converted to a principal or ancillary single-family dwelling and a separate principal or ancillary single-family dwelling is on the same lot, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the director of planning or his designee certifies that the necessary modifications to preclude the use of the structure as a duplex to the building have been made. 
(Ord. No. 2908, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 3269, 4-23-13)  
Sec. 1905. - Desired design incentives. 
(a)  Old Beach Design Guidelines. Old Beach is a place where quality single-family cottage-style homes, open space, and pedestrian-oriented streets promote the neighborhood's residential character. In order to achieve compatibility with the Old Beach neighborhood, consistent with its historic status as an early twentieth century resort community, structures in the Old Beach Overlay District should comply with applicable criteria in the Old Beach Design Guidelines. As an incentive to develop lots within the Old Beach Overlay District in such a manner, the regulations set forth in this section shall supersede any contrary regulation of section 1904, so as to allow deviations from the dimensional and other requirements thereof only in cases in which a building, structure or condition of development set forth below meets the applicable criteria set forth in the Old Beach Design Guidelines. 
(b)  Porches. Single-family, ancillary single-family, and duplex dwelling structures with open, unenclosed porches with a minimum depth of five (5) feet and a maximum depth of eight (8) feet, as measured from the exterior wall of the main structure to the exterior edge of the porch foundation, may have a front yard setback of thirteen (13) feet, as measured from the exterior wall of the main structure to the lot line. However, in no case shall the setback from the lot line to the exterior wall of the porch foundation be less than eight (8) feet. Further, any open, uncovered second-story porch located above the first-story porch shall be setback from the lot line a minimum of at least 10 feet. In the case of a second single-family dwelling located on the rear portion of the lot, this deviation applies to the rear setback requirement such that the porch is oriented to the alley, if an alley exists. 
(c)  Exterior porch stairs for single-family, ancillary single-family, and duplex structures. Open, unenclosed porches adjacent to streets or alleys may have exterior stairs that encroach into a front or rear setback to within three (3) feet of the lot line. In no case shall such stairs exceed six (6) feet in width. 
(d)  Side yard setback adjacent to a street for single-family, ancillary single-family, and duplex structures. The minimum side yard setback adjacent to a street for single-family, ancillary single-family, and duplex structures shall be ten (10) feet. 
(e)  Side yard setbacks for projecting wall planes on single-family, ancillary single-family, and duplex structures. A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total length of the wall of a structure adjacent to the side lot line may project into the side yard setback. The minimum setback for such wall projection shall be five (5) feet, except that if the wall projection is adjacent to a driveway, the minimum setback shall be eleven (11) feet. If the wall projection is adjacent to a street and there is a driveway between the property line adjacent to the street and the wall projection, the minimum setback shall be eighteen (18) feet. If the wall projection is adjacent to a street and there is no driveway between the property line adjacent to the street and the wall projection, the minimum setback shall be eight (8) feet. 
(f)  Side yard setbacks for garages on lots with single-family, ancillary single-family, and duplex structures. Any rear-loaded, side-loaded, or front-loaded garage recessed a minimum of forty (40) feet from the front or rear lot line and conforming to all applicable criteria of the design guidelines may reduce the side yard setback for the garage to five (5) feet. 
(g)  Porch eave overhangs for single-family, ancillary single-family, and duplex structures. For structures satisfying the criteria of the design guidelines pertaining to open, unenclosed porches fronting on streets or alleys, any wide eave overhang of such porch, which does not exceed three (3) feet in length from the outside of the porch column support to the porch roof fascia shall not be included in the calculation of lot coverage. 
(h)  Interior yard. Where a single-family dwelling and an ancillary dwelling are on the same lot, up to thirty-five (35) percent of the length of the wall facing the required interior yard may encroach into the required interior yard, except that in no case shall there be less than ten (10) feet of separation between the single-family dwelling and the ancillary single-family dwelling. 
(i)  Parking spaces for single-family, ancillary single-family, and duplex structures. The area of a parking space located below any second story overhang not exceeding two (2) feet in width, and the area of a parking space located below a decorative trellis or the overhanging eave of the main structure and not exceeding four (4) feet in width shall qualify as on-site parking. 
(j)  Parking area paving. Parking spaces consisting of pervious paving material, such as brick runners and open pavers, may be used to satisfy on-site parking requirements. 
(k)  Maximum floor area. The total maximum floor area ratio may be increased to 0.8. 
(Ord. No. 2908, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 3269, 4-23-13)  
Sec. 1906. - Old Beach Design Review Committee. 
(a)  The Old Beach Design Review Committee, hereinafter referred to as the "committee", is established as a resource for those seeking to develop within the Old Beach Overlay District. The committee is intended to preserve, enhance, and promote the character of the residential neighborhood in accordance with the Old Beach Design Guidelines and provisions of the Old Beach Overlay District. Plan submission and review by the committee is voluntary. 
(b)  The Old Beach Design Review Committee shall consist of five (5) members selected by Virginia Beach City Council, two (2) representatives from the Resort Advisory Commission and three (3) representatives who reside or own property within the area encompassed by the Old Beach Overlay District. All committee members shall be qualified by knowledge or experience to make decisions on questions of neighborhood planning or design. A member of the City of Virginia Beach Planning staff shall serve as liaison to the committee as needed. 
(Ord. No. 2908, 12-20-05)  
ARTICLE 20. - THE HISTORIC KEMPSVILLE AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 2000. - Findings; intent. 
The City Council hereby finds that the Historic Kempsville Area is not only one of the primary crossroads within the City, but is also the location of the third courthouse in Princess Anne County, the site of a Revolutionary War skirmish, an early cultural and economic hub within the City, and is surrounded by many stable and attractive residential communities. As such, its appearance and revitalization is important to the physical and economic vitality of the City. The purpose of the Historic Kempsville Area Overlay District is to enhance the appearance of the area encompassed by the District and to help restore its vitality as an important and historic location within the City. 
(Ord. No. 2916, 1-24-06)  
Sec. 2001. - District boundaries. 
The Historic Kempsville Area Overlay District boundaries shall be as designated on the official zoning map of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2916, 1-24-06)  
Sec. 2002. - Application of regulations. 
The designation of any property as lying within the Historic Kempsville Area Overlay District shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the underlying zoning district classification of such property, such that any property situated in the Historic Kempsville Area Overlay District shall also lie within one or more of the zoning districts enumerated in section 102(a) of this ordinance. All such property shall be subject to the requirements of this article as well as to all other regulations applicable to it, and to the extent that any provision of this article conflicts with any other ordinance or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2916, 1-24-06)  
Sec. 2003. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Principal uses. Subject to general requirements and to the regulations of the underlying zoning district, all uses and structures permitted as principal uses in the underlying zoning district in which they are located shall be permitted as principal uses within the Historic Kempsville Area Overlay District, except as set forth in section 901 of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Subject to general requirements and to the regulations of the underlying zoning district, all uses and structures permitted as accessory uses in the underlying zoning district in which they are located shall be permitted as accessory uses within the Historic Kempsville Area Overlay District. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Subject to general requirements and to the regulations of the underlying zoning district, all uses and structures permitted as conditional uses in the underlying zoning district in which they are located shall be permitted as conditional uses within the Historic Kempsville Area Overlay District, as well as the following uses and structures: 
(1)  Multiple-family dwellings in the B-4K (HK) Mixed Use District; 
(2)  Attached dwellings in the B-4K (HK) Mixed Use District; 
(3)  Commercial parking lots, parking garages and storage garages located in the B-2(HK) Community Business or B-4K (HK) Mixed Use Districts; 
(4)  Drive-through facilities for drugstores, in accordance with the provisions of section 233.02, in the B-4K (HK) Historic Kempsville Mixed Use District; and 
(5)  Eating and drinking establishments with drive-through windows, in accordance with the provisions of section 233.1, in the B-4K (HK) Historic Kempsville Mixed Use District. 
(d)  [Additions.] Additions to single-family dwellings, duplexes, attached dwellings and multiple-family dwellings not increasing the number of dwelling units in any such use shall be permitted by right, provided that all other requirements of this ordinance are met. Where setbacks or other dimensional requirements pertaining to such additions are not specified in the regulations of the underlying zoning district, such requirements shall be as specified in the B-4K (HK) Mixed Use Business District. 
(Ord. No. 2916, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 3343, 4-22-14; Ord. No. 3608, 1-21-20)  
Sec. 2004. - Dimensional and other requirements; density; landscape screening and buffering. 
Subject to the provisions of section 2003 of this ordinance, dimensional and other requirements for uses and structures located within the Historic Kempsville Area Overlay District shall be as specified in the underlying zoning district; provided, however, that: 
(a)  The density of multiple-family dwellings shall not exceed eighteen (18) units per acre or the maximum density permitted by the regulations of the underlying zoning district, whichever is the lesser, on a zoning lot. 
(b)  Where a zoning lot within the B-2(HK) or B-4(HK) district adjoins any district in which single-family dwellings, duplexes, attached dwellings or multiple-family dwellings are permitted as a conditional or principal use, without an intervening street, alley or body of water over twenty-five (25) feet in width, a fifteen-foot minimum yard shall be required along all lot lines adjoining such district. Category IV landscape screening shall be required, and no other uses or structures shall be permitted, within the yard. 
(c)  The requirements within the B-4K (HK) Mixed Use Business District for minimum lot area, width, yard spacing and maximum lot coverage for residential dwellings and commercial structures are set forth in Article 9 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2916, 1-24-06)  
ARTICLE 21. - WORKFORCE HOUSING 
 
Sec. 2100. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to encourage the development of high-quality housing that is affordable by households with annual incomes falling within a prescribed range for prospective purchasers and prospective renters of workforce housing, respectively, set forth in the Workforce Housing provisions of chapter 16 of the City Code and who live or work in Virginia Beach. Because such households generally, although not uniformly, consist of one (1) or two (2) working members, such housing is termed "workforce housing." In order to accomplish that goal, this article establishes incentives for the construction of workforce housing in areas of the city, including Strategic Growth Areas, in which the Comprehensive Plan recognizes increased density to be appropriate. Equally importantly, this article also ensures that workforce housing will be well-designed, of high quality, and well-integrated into the overall development of which it is a component. 
(Ord. No. 2997, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3214, 1-24-12)  
Sec. 2101. - Findings. 
The city council hereby finds that: 
(a)  Housing prices have risen much faster than incomes during the past few years, thereby eliminating, for many people, the option of purchasing a home, and for others, the option of renting without causing an undue financial burden; 
(b)  The most effective approach to preserving the quality of the city's housing and neighborhoods is to maintain and improve upon their diversity. This diversity includes the type, value and design of housing and neighborhoods, which in turn, helps the city meet its goals for a quality physical environment, family and youth opportunities and economic vitality. In addition, people from a variety of cultures, backgrounds, ages, races and capabilities will have greater opportunities to find and retain safe, decent and affordable housing; 
(c)  The planning and creation of mixed-income and mixed-use developments will advance the city's goal of providing diverse, high-quality and affordable housing in desirable neighborhoods. Allowing a greater mix of incomes within neighborhoods increases the affordability of housing and reduces the isolation of income groups. Further, mixed-use developments are beneficial in the long run because they broaden housing opportunities, increase residents' access to nearby employment and provide a better land use arrangement to accommodate alternative, cost-effective transportation systems. 
(d)  Without an adequate supply of workforce housing, employees of local businesses would be forced to live in places that are distant from the workplace, thereby causing financial and social stress upon the families of such employees. In addition, an inadequate supply of workforce housing would discourage prospective businesses from locating in Virginia Beach; and 
(e)  Workforce housing is not housing of inferior quality or design, nor will it adversely affect the value of homes in the vicinity. As required by the provisions of this article, the exterior of workforce housing units will be essentially indistinguishable from non-workforce housing units of the same housing type, and the overall quality of construction of the interior of workforce housing units will be comparable to that of non-workforce housing units. Workforce housing units within mixed-use developments, will be subject to applicable design standards set forth in the Comprehensive Plan. In addition, workforce housing units will be integrated into the residential component of a mixed-use development, rather than being located in discrete areas within that component. 
(Ord. No. 2997, 8-28-07)  
Sec. 2102. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
(a)  Affordable. Housing is considered affordable if no more than approximately thirty (30) percent of the gross household income of the purchaser or renter is spent on direct housing costs, as set forth in article VIII of chapter 16 of the City Code. For buyers, such costs include mortgage principal, interest, taxes, homeowner's insurance, mandatory homeowners' association dues and condominium fees, but do not include utilities or other related housing costs. For renters, such costs include rent payments and an allowance for tenant-paid utilities other than cable television and telephone service, but do not include other related housing costs. 
(b)  Affordability level statement. A statement of the number of workforce housing units that are affordable to eligible buyers at or to eligible renters at designated percentages of Area Median Income. 
(c)  Area median income (AMI). The Area Median Income for the Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, Virginia Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) published annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and adjusted for household size. 
(d)  Bonus density. An increase in the maximum allowable dwelling unit density on a property attributable to the provision of workforce housing on that property. 
(e)  Eligible buyer. A person whose workforce housing application has been approved and who meets the home ownership requirements of the workforce housing program. These requirements center on gross annual income, financial assets, and location where the prospective buyer works and lives. 
(f)  Eligible renter. A person whose workforce housing application has been approved and who meets the rental requirements of the workforce housing program. These requirements center on gross annual income, financial assets, and location where the prospective renter works and lives. 
(g)  Strategic growth area (SGA). Areas of the city that are designated in the Comprehensive Plan to absorb most of city's future growth, both residential and non-residential. These areas, which are planned for more intensive uses than most other areas of the city, are characterized by the integration, not separation, of diverse but compatible uses including, where appropriate, residential uses. 
(h)  Workforce housing (WFH). Housing that is generally affordable to households with working members who live or work in the City of Virginia Beach. For home ownership, it is housing that is priced to be affordable to households with annual incomes within a range prescribed in section 16-46 of the City Code. For rentals, it is housing that is priced to be affordable to households with annual incomes within a range prescribed in section 16-51 of the City Code. 
(i)  Workforce housing discount. The difference in sales price between a market rate unit and an equivalent workforce housing unit. This amount is calculated to be the reduction in sales price necessary to make a workforce housing unit affordable to a household at a targeted income level. 
(j)  Workforce housing unit (WFH unit). A dwelling unit that is reserved for sale or rent by an eligible buyer or eligible renter, as the case may be, at a price incorporating the workforce housing discount. Workforce housing units are constructed as a result of the bonus density provisions that allow the construction of a greater number of dwelling units on a specific parcel of land than is otherwise allowed in exchange for the provision of workforce housing on the parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2997, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3054, 10-28-08; Ord. No. 3214, 1-24-12)  
Sec. 2103. - Areas of applicability. 
The Workforce Housing Overlay District shall be limited to property in areas of the city in which increased density of residential development is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, including strategic growth areas; provided, however, that no property within any accident potential zone or noise zone of 65—70 dB DNL or greater or any property in the R-10 through R-40 Residential Districts shall be included within the district. 
(Ord. No. 2997, 8-28-07)  
Sec. 2104. - Allowed uses. 
(a)  All development within the Workforce Housing Overlay District, including, but not limited to, uses, site layout, building design, open space, parking and other improvements shall conform to the land use plan approved by the city council in accordance with the provisions of this article. The approved land use plan shall supersede any conflicting provisions of the underlying zoning district, but shall conform to all requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance except those for which a variance has been granted. 
(b)  Within the Workforce Housing Overlay District, uses shall be allowed in accordance with the use regulations of the underlying zoning district; provided, however, that where the underlying zoning district is residential, single-family, duplex, semi-detached, attached and multiple-family dwellings shall be allowed notwithstanding any contrary provision of the regulations of the underlying zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2997, 8-28-07)  
Sec. 2105. - Applications; workforce housing overlay district land use plan. 
(a)  In addition to any other information generally required for rezoning applications, applications for the Workforce Housing Overlay District shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A survey of existing site conditions, including trees, contours, floodway, Special Flood Hazard Areas, waters, wetlands and other natural features; 
(2)  A narrative statement of planning objectives for the proposed development; 
(3)  A construction schedule, including a schedule of construction of workforce housing units; 
(4)  A detailed land use plan, which shall, at a minimum, consist of: 
a.  Architectural elevations for proposed structures, including building materials and colors; 
b.  A general landscape plan and tree preservation plan; 
c.  A detailed description of the differences in size, interior layout and construction materials between workforce housing units and other dwelling units of the same type; 
d.  An affordability level statement; 
e.  The total area to be included in the Workforce Housing Overlay District as part of the application; 
f.  The location of residential uses and total number and type of proposed dwelling units, including the location, number and type of workforce housing units; 
g.  Types of nonresidential uses proposed, if any, including the area and gross floor area proposed for such nonresidential development; 
h.  Gross floor area of all structures; 
i.  Location of all buildings, streets, alleys and pedestrian walkways; 
j.  Regulations governing height, setbacks, floor area ratio, lot coverage, impervious surface, accessory structures (sheds, swimming pools, etc,), signs and fences; 
k.  Number and location of parking spaces, including parking structures; 
l.  Proposed improvements to adjacent public streets; 
m.  Open space and recreation areas, including areas inside buildings; 
n.  Green development features, such as porous paving or pavers, native plant landscaping, reduced street lengths, reduced pavement width, bio-retention islands, shared parking, vegetated swales in lieu of curb and gutter or other features of development intended to enhance environmental quality. 
(b)  No substantial modifications of the approved land use plan shall be allowed except pursuant to an amendment to such plan approved by the city council in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 107 of this ordinance. For purposes of this section a "substantial modification" shall include any changes to the approved land use plan that, in the judgment of the planning director, are not clearly in keeping with the intent of the city council in approving the plan. The term shall also include any modifications of the number, location, design or affordability level of workforce housing units. 
(Ord. No. 2997, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 3310, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 2106. - Bonus density; workforce housing unit requirements. 
The dwelling unit density in the Workforce Housing Overlay District may be increased by a maximum of thirty (30) percent over the density allowed in the underlying zoning district if all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Not less than seventeen (17) percent of the total number of dwelling units are workforce housing units. In the event the maximum allowable density is not increased by thirty (30) percent, the percentage of workforce housing units required shall maintain the same ratio of thirty (30) percent to seventeen (17) percent; 
(b)  Workforce housing units shall be integrated into the development to the same extent as other dwelling units and shall not be clustered in discrete locations separate from other dwelling units; 
(c)  The construction of workforce housing units shall reasonably coincide with that of other units; 
(d)  Workforce housing shall conform to the Workforce Housing Design Criteria and any other applicable design standards in the Comprehensive Plan, including, but not limited to, the following standards: 
(1)  The exterior of workforce housing units shall have the same building materials and finish, and be effectively indistinguishable from, non-workforce housing units of the same housing type; 
(2)  Workforce housing units shall be comparable in bedroom mix, design, and overall quality of construction to the market rate units in the development, except that workforce housing units shall not be required to exceed three (3) bedrooms per unit; and 
(3)  The square footage and interior features of workforce housing units shall not be required to be the same as other dwelling units in the development units, so long as they are reasonably similar in size and quality and are consistent with the current building standards for new housing in the City of Virginia Beach. 
(Ord. No. 2997, 8-28-07)  
ARTICLE 22. - CENTRAL BUSINESS CORE DISTRICT  
A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 2200. - Applicability; severability. 
(a)  This Article sets forth the zoning regulations applicable to development within the Central Business Core District. Such district shall be designated on the official zoning map as "CBC". 
(b)  In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this Article and any other provision of the City Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of this Article shall apply unless expressly otherwise provided. 
(c)  The provisions of this Code shall be severable, such that in the event one (1) or more of the provisions of this Code shall be adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the validity and enforceability of the remaining provisions shall not in any way be affected or impaired by such adjudication. 
(Ord. No. 3327, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 2201. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this Article is to establish regulations implementing the vision of the City Council for the Central Business District/Core Area portion of the Pembroke Strategic Growth Area, as expressed in the Pembroke Strategic Growth Area Implementation Plan ("SGA Plan") adopted on November 10, 2009. Such regulations are intended to foster the continued development of a central urban core with a vertical mix of urban uses, mobility and transit alternatives, urban gathering places, environmental and neighborhood protection, "green" buildings and infrastructure opportunities providing a variety of civic, commercial, artistic and ethnically diverse areas. 
(Ord. No. 3327, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 2202. - Findings. 
The City Council finds that: 
(a)  In the 2003 Comprehensive Plan, the City established Strategic Growth Areas (SGAs), including the Pembroke SGA, as areas designed to absorb most of the City's anticipated future growth, both residential and non-residential. The SGAs were planned to contain uses that are more intensive than in most other areas of the City but are integrated into compact, yet compatible, mixes of uses, including office, retail, service, hotel and, where appropriate, residential, uses. 
The 2003 Comprehensive Plan also set forth five common planning principles applicable to all SGAs: 
(1)  Efficient use of land resources; 
(2)  Full use of urban services; 
(3)  A compatible mix of uses; 
(4)  A range of transportation opportunities; and 
(5)  Detailed human-scale design. 
(b)  The 2003 Comprehensive Plan also set forth guidance concerning the implementation of the vision embodied in the various SGAs. It stated: 
Of equal importance will be how the SGAs develop in regard to the form that they take. The SGAs are intended to be urban in form with a mixture of uses commonly found in urban settings. The areas, however, that are designated as SGAs are largely either undeveloped or developed in the same suburban pattern found throughout the City. How we reshape these undeveloped and suburban areas will be critical if we are to create memorable urban places where people desire to live, work, play, and learn. As the various implementation plans are developed for the SGAs, we must develop design guidelines and new zoning tools, such as Form Based Codes, that provide specific direction to those who own property in the SGAs regarding what the form of those places will be. If the form of the SGAs does not match our vision for the SGAs, we will have lost much. This Plan, therefore, provides fundamental guidance regarding the proper form of urban places and the principles of design that can be used as we move forward to create an active and vibrant urban corridor from Newtown to the Oceanfront. 
(c)  The 2009 Comprehensive Plan retained the strategy and guiding principles set forth hereinabove. That strategy has been refined and expanded by means of separate plans that were specific to each of the eight SGAs within the City and that were adopted only after an extensive public participation in each instance. The plans for all of those SGAs retain the five basic planning principles set forth in subsection (a). In addition, the 2009 Plan noted that the City has identified SGAs as: 
(1)  Providing opportunities for continued physical and economic growth; 
(2)  Helping to prevent urban sprawl; 
(3)  Protecting our established residential neighborhoods and rural areas from incompatible development due to growth pressures; 
(4)  Maximizing infrastructure efficiency; and 
(5)  Creating unique and exciting urban destinations. 
(d)  Traditional suburban-style development typically lacks significant connectivity to mass transit systems and bicycle or pedestrian-oriented features, instead depending almost exclusively upon automobile traffic. Such dependence upon the automobile results in large expanses of asphalt or other impervious parking surfaces that are rarely, if ever, fully utilized, and has significant undesirable impacts, including, among others: 
(1)  Inefficient use of land; 
(2)  Greater adverse impacts on air and water quality, notwithstanding compliance with applicable regulations, than vertically-oriented, mixed-use development; 
(3)  Incompatibility, both functional and architectural, with adjacent communities; 
(4)  Increased traffic congestion; and 
(5)  A lack of uniqueness and "sense of place" differentiating Virginia Beach from other cities. 
(e)  As stated in the Pembroke SGA Plan: 
Without an urban core, the City will not be able to attract the kind of employers needed to provide jobs to certain segments of its ever-expanding citizenry. The time has come for the City of Virginia Beach to embrace its urban potential and take steps to create a sustainable city form that better serves its citizens now and long into the future. 
(f)  In light of the foregoing findings, it is in the best interests of the City of Virginia Beach that this Article be adopted in order to promote development that advances the City's vision for the Central Business District/Core Area portion of the Pembroke Strategic Growth Area. That vision was finalized only after residents, business owners and other stakeholders participated with City planners and other officials in an extensive public participation process in which a variety of views and opinions were expressed and considered. 
(g)  The zoning regulations that currently govern development in the Central Business District/Core Area of the Pembroke SGA should be updated and refined so as to allow more flexible and creative forms of development; accordingly, the regulations set forth in this Article are intended to be flexible and performance-oriented, so as to allow multiple forms of development that advance the goals and objectives of the Pembroke SGA Plan. 
(Ord. No. 3327, 2-25-14)  
B. - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 2203. - Use regulations. 
(a)  The following chart lists those uses permitted within the Central Business Core District. Uses and structures shall be allowed either as principal uses, indicated by a "P", or as conditional uses, indicated by a "C." Uses and structures indicated by an "X" shall be prohibited, unless allowed by special exception for Alternative Compliance pursuant to section 2205. No uses or structures other than as specified herein or as allowed pursuant to subsection (b) shall be permitted. 
Use 	District CBC 
Adult book stores, but not within 500 feet of any apartment or residential district, single - or multiple-family dwelling, church, park, or school 	X 
Animal hospitals, veterinary establishments, pounds, shelters and commercial kennels, provided that all animals shall be kept in soundproofed, air-conditioned buildings 	P 
Assembly uses 	P 
Automobile museums, subject to the provisions of section 223.1 	C 
Automobile repair garages, subject to the provisions of section 224 	X 
Automobile service stations; subject to the provisions of section 225, and provided that, where there is an adjoining Residential or Apartment district without an intervening street, alley or permanent open space greater than twenty-five (25) feet in width and where lots separated by a district boundary have adjacent front yards, Category VI screening shall separate the automobile service station use from the adjacent Residential or Apartment district and no freestanding sign shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any such Residential or Apartment District 	C 
Bakeries, confectioneries and delicatessens, provided that products prepared or processed on the premises shall be sold only at retail and only on the premises except that bakeries, confectioneries and delicatessens with 7,500 square feet or less in floor area may prepare products on the premises for retail sale at an off-site location 	P 
Bars or nightclubs, subject to the provisions of section 225.01 	C 
Beverage manufacturing shops 	P 
Bicycle and moped rental establishments and bicycle sharing systems, subject to the provisions of section 226 	C 
Boat sales 	X 
Body piercing establishments 	X 
Building-mounted antennas meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Building-mounted antennas other then those meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 
Bulk storage yards and building contractors yards, subject to the provisions of section 228, and provided that no sale or processing of scrap, salvage or second-hand material shall be permitted; and provided further that such storage yards shall be completely enclosed except for necessary openings in ingress and egress by a fence or wall not less than six (6) feet in height 	X 
Business and vocational schools which do not involve the operation of woodwork shops, machine shops or other similar facilities, with a floor area greater than 7,500 square feet 	C 
Business and vocational schools which do not involve the operation of woodwork shops, machine shops or other similar facilities, with a maximum floor area of 7,500 square feet 	P 
Business studios and offices 	P 
Car wash facilities, subject to the provisions of section 228.1 	C 
Colleges and universities, public or private 	C 
Commercial and other surface parking lots, including on-site surface parking, parking garages and storage garages, except as provided below 	C 
Commercial and other surface parking lots, including on-site parking, located behind a building or otherwise screened from view from a public street 	P 
Commercial parking structures, which may include car wash, car rental or car detailing services when wholly enclosed within a parking structure and accessory thereto 	P 
Communication towers meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communication towers meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Communication towers not meeting the requirements of section 232(j) and temporary communication towers not meeting the requirements of section 207 	C 
Craft distillery shops 	C 
Day-care and child care education centers 	P 
Dwellings, attached/townhouses 	X 
Dwellings, multiple-family 	P 
Fiber-optics transmission facilities, subject to the provisions of section 233.15 	C 
Financial institutions, provided that drive-through facilities shall be located on the block interior or in the ground floor of a parking structure so as not to be visible from a public right-of-way 	P 
Funeral homes 	C 
Furniture repair and upholstering; repair services for radio and television and household appliances other than those with gasoline engines; carpet and linoleum laying, tile setting, sign shops and other small service businesses within a mixed-use building 	P 
Furniture repair and upholstering; repair services for radio and television and household appliances other than those with gasoline engines; carpet and linoleum laying; tile setting, sign shops and other small service businesses other than within a mixed-use building 	X 
Greenhouses and plant nurseries in a mixed-use building 	C 
Grocery stores, carry-out food stores and convenience stores 	P 
Heliports and helistops 	C 
Home occupations 	C 
Home sharing meeting the requirements of section 209.6 	P 
Housing for seniors and disabled persons, subject to the provisions of section 235; convalescent, nursing or maternity homes 	C 
Hospitals and sanitariums 	C 
Hotels 	P 
Laundry and dry cleaning establishments, retail 	P 
Liquor stores other than at wholesale 	P 
Medical and dental offices and clinics 	P 
Medical laboratories 	P 
Mini-warehouses 	X 
Mobile home sales 	X 
Motor vehicle sales and rentals, subject to the provisions of section 239, except as provided below 	X 
Motor vehicle sales and rentals, provided that such use and any accessory or other uses in conjunction with the principal use are fully enclosed within a building 	P 
Museums and art galleries 	P 
Off-site parking facilities, subject to the provisions of section 2212 	P 
Pharmacies, provided that drive-through facilities shall be located on the block interior or in the ground floor of a parking structure so as not to be visible from the public right-of-way 	P 
Printing, publishing and similar uses 	P 
Personal service establishments 	P 
Personal watercraft rentals 	X 
Public schools 	C 
Public uses, except public schools 	P 
Public utilities installations and substations, provided that storage and maintenance facilities shall not be permitted; and provided further, that utilities substations other than individual transformers shall be surrounded by Category IV screening except for entrances and exits; and provided also that transformer vaults for underground utilities shall require only Category I screening, except for access openings 	P 
Public utilities offices 	P 
Public utility storage or maintenance installations 	X 
Radio and television broadcasting stations 	C 
Recreational or amusement facilities, indoor, with a maximum floor area of 7,500 square feet 	P 
Recreational or amusement facilities, indoor, with a maximum floor area greater than 7,500 square feet 	C 
Recreation or amusement facilities, outdoor, other than riding academies and recreational campgrounds, subject to the provisions of section 240.1 	C 
Religious uses with a floor area greater than 4,000 square feet 	C 
Religious uses with a maximum floor area of 4,000 square feet 	P 
Restaurants inside a mixed-use building, except as provided below 	P 
Restaurants, whether freestanding or in a mixed-use building, with a drive-through window, provided that drive-through facilities shall be located on the block interior or on the ground floor of a parking structure so as not to be visible from a public right-of-way 	P 
Restaurants, freestanding, without drive-through windows 	P 
Retail establishments, other than those listed separately, including the incidental manufacturing of goods for sale at retail on the premises; provided that outdoor storage or display of any items for sale shall comply with the provisions of section 2204(c) 	P 
Storage or processing of salvage, scrap or junk 	X 
Satellite wagering facilities within a mixed-use building 	C 
Short term rental 	C 
Short Term Rental within a STR Overlay District 	P 
Single room occupancy facility 	X 
Small wireless facilities meeting the requirements of section 207 	P 
Small wireless facilities not placed on existing structures 	C 
Specialty shops 	P 
Tattoo parlors and body-piercing establishments 	X 
Truck and trailer rentals, in accordance with the provisions of section 242.2 	X 
Wholesaling and distribution operations, provided that such operations do not involve the use of: (i) more than 2,000 square feet of floor area for storage of wares; (ii) any vehicle rated at more than 1½ tons, or (iii) a total of more than five (5) delivery vehicles 	X 
Wildlife rehabilitation centers 	X 
Wind energy conversion systems, freestanding 	C 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, except as provided below 	P 
Wind energy conversion systems, roof-mounted, in excess of one (1) per principal structure 	C 
Wine-tasting rooms, in accordance with the provisions of section 209.4 	P 
 
(b)  If a proposed use is not expressly permitted pursuant to subsection (a), but is similar to a listed use, the Zoning Administrator may categorize the proposed use as a use permitted by this section, either as a principal or conditional use. In determining whether a proposed use is similar to a listed use, the Zoning Administrator shall consider (1) the actual or projected characteristics of the proposed use in comparison to those of the most similar listed use; and (2) the categorization of the proposed use in the Standard Land Use Coding Manual (First Edition January 1965). Rental of rooms in a dwelling or the entire dwelling thirty (30) consecutive days or more is an accessory use to the dwelling. 
(c)  Uses other than those allowed pursuant to subsections (a) or (b) may be allowed pursuant to the Alternative Compliance provisions set forth in section 2205 if such use conforms to the standards set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. 3327, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3403, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 3412, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 3441, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3514, 7-11-17; Ord. No. 3527, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 3578, 1-15-19)  
Sec. 2204. - Development standards. 
Uses and structures in the District shall conform to the development standards listed below, unless approved pursuant to the Alternative Compliance (section 2205) or Optional Forms of Development (section 2206) provisions of this Article: 
(a)  Lot Standards (values expressed in feet unless otherwise indicated): 
Standard 	District CBC 
Lot area (min.) 	5,000 square feet 
Lot width (min.) 1 	50 
Front setback (min.) 	0 
Side street setback (min.) 	0 
Side setback (min.) 	0 or 5 
Rear setback (min.) 	0 or 5 
Build-to zone 2 	0—10 
Alley setback (min.) 	5 
Surface parking setback (min.) 	20' (on 70% of street frontage) 
Parking structure setback (min.) 3 	20' (on 50% of street frontage) 
Outdoor amenity space 4 (min.) 	5% of lot area 
 
Notes: 
1.  Lot width shall be measured at the front property line. For building sites on which one or more standalone buildings is located on a leased portion of a recorded lot or zoning lot, the lot width shall be determined as if the lease lines were lot lines. 
2.  The build-to zone is the portion of a lot in which at least the first two (2) stories of a building façade facing a street must occupy no less than the percentage, as designated in subsection (b), of the distance between the lot lines abutting the public street faced by the building façade. The build-to requirements shall apply to all building façades facing a public street. 
3.  The parking setback must be met in the designated percentage of the street frontage of any portion of the lot or leased area, as the case may be, adjacent to a public street and applies to surface parking and parking structures (ground story only). Where the required setback of a parking structure is met in less than seventy (70) percent of the street frontage, the structure must substantially conform to the applicable Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. 
Surface parking on corner lots, including vehicular entrances and exits, shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from each point of intersection unless a greater setback is required by the conditional use permit. 
4.  Outdoor amenity space is an exterior area of an establishment that: (1) serves as an amenity for occupants of the establishment or members of the public and (2) consists of areas such as gardens (including roof gardens), landscaping beds or other vegetated and maintained areas, courtyards, fountains, plazas, parks, cafes, or similar areas. Stormwater management facilities may be included within outdoor amenity spaces, but outdoor display areas and areas consisting solely of grass and lacking other components such as trees, landscaping or hardscape improvements shall not be included as outdoor amenity space. Outdoor amenity space shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
(b)  Building Form Standards (values expressed in feet unless otherwise indicated): 
Standard 	District CBC 
Height (min.) 	25 or 2 stories, whichever is lower 
Height (max.) 1 	None, subject to section 202 
Ground floor height (min.) 2 	12 
Build-to zone 3 	70% 
Transparency (min.) 4 	30% ground floor; 15% upper floors 
Blank wall (max.) 5 	30 
Permitted uses in mixed-use buildings 6 (ground floor) 	A, B, C, D, E, F 7 , G, H 
Permitted uses in mixed-use buildings 7 (upper floors) 	A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H 
 
Key to permitted uses: 
A: Retail and service 
B: Office 
C: Hotel lobby/conference space/accessory uses 
D: Restaurants 
E: Recreational, assembly or institutional 
F: Residential 
G: Hotel 
H: Commercial parking structures 
Notes: 
1.  Permitted encroachments above the maximum height shall be as set forth in section 202. 
2.  Measured from finished floor to finished floor. 
3.  Minimum percentage of street frontage of the lot or leased area occupied by building façade. 
4.  Minimum percentage of windows and doors that must cover a ground story façade facing a street, as measured between two (2) and eight (8) feet above the adjacent sidewalk. The minimum percentage of windows and doors that must cover an upper floor façade facing a street is measured from the finished floor to the finished floor above. When there is no floor above, upper story transparency is measured from the top of the finished floor to the top of the wall plate. A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of a required entrance must be transparent on a mixed-use or commercial building. 
5.  "Blank wall" means a portion of the exterior street-facing façade of the building that does not include a substantial material change (paint color is not considered a substantial change); windows, doors, columns, pilasters or other articulation greater than twelve (12) inches in depth. The above requirement applies in both a vertical and horizontal direction and to both ground and upper story street-facing facades. 
6.  A mixed-use building is a building containing two (2) or more separate uses, one of which consists of residential dwelling units, that are physically and functionally integrated within the same building on one zoning lot. 
7.  Residential dwelling units may not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the total floor area of the ground floor of the building in which it is located. 
(c)  Outdoor display and storage. 
(1)  Outdoor display is the outdoor display of merchandise available for sale at an establishment. 
(2)  Outdoor display of merchandise is permitted in association with any permitted commercial use in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  Outdoor displays shall be limited to an area within eight (8) feet of a building façade that contains the principal customer entrance for the building, and shall not be within any area consisting of outdoor amenity space. Outdoor displays shall occupy no more than thirty percent (30%) of the horizontal length of such façade, and the maximum height of any such display shall not exceed six (6) feet; 
b.  Outdoor displays shall be removed and placed inside a fully-enclosed building at the end of each business day; and 
c.  Outdoor displays may not impair the ability of pedestrians to use the sidewalk. 
(3)  Outdoor display of liquefied petroleum (LP) gas storage racks, ice storage bins or similar items, soft drink or other vending machines, or items on pallets, shall not be permitted. 
(4)  Outdoor storage is the overnight storage, outside of a building, of products or materials, including, without limitation, merchandise or material in boxes, in crates, on pallets or in shipping containers; vehicles awaiting repair; recreational vehicles and boats; shopping carts; garden or building supplies; shipping containers; lumber, pipe, steel, junk and other similar items. 
(5)  Outdoor storage shall be allowed only as provided in section 208 or as a condition of a conditional use permit authorizing the use at which outdoor storage occurs. 
(d)  Permitted encroachments. 
(1)  The following encroachments into the area between a building façade and public right-of-way shall be permitted: 
a.  Galleries, awnings, porte cocheres, stoops, porches and balconies; 
b.  Outdoor seating; 
c.  Outdoor display areas, in accordance with subsection (c); 
d.  Signs, as allowed by section 2210; 
e.  Trash receptacles, water features, bicycle racks and bollards; 
f.  Pedestrian lighting; 
g.  Minor structures accessory to utility facilities such as hydrants, manholes, transformers, utility boxes, meters and fire suppression equipment; 
h.  Handicapped ramps to the extent necessary to perform their proper function; 
i.  Building eaves, roof overhangs and light shelves, provided there is at least eight (8) feet in clearance above the sidewalk; 
j.  Cornices, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar architectural features, provided there is at least eight (8) feet in clearance above the sidewalk; 
k.  Bay windows, oriels, vestibules that are less than ten (10) feet wide may extend up to four feet, provided that such extension is at least two (2) feet from the vertical plane of the lot line; 
l.  Chimneys or flues, which may extend up to two (2) feet, provided that such extension is at least two feet from the vertical plane of the lot line; 
m.  Outdoor amenity space components, plant material, landscaping, sidewalks, trees, tree wells, and planters; 
n.  Sculptures and other public art, in accordance with the provisions of section 2207 
o.  Permitted access drives; 
p.  Walls or fences not more than four (4) feet in height; provided, however, that walls or fences providing required screening or used to screen mechanical or similar equipment shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height; 
q.  Subgrade foundations; 
r.  Loading docks and necessary mechanical equipment; and 
s.  Conditional uses allowed by section 2203 if specified in the conditional use permit. 
(2)  Encroachments into or over public streets, sidewalks or other public property shall be permitted in accordance with Article VI of Chapter 33 of the City Code, except as otherwise provided in this Article. All encroaching structures and signs shall conform to the applicable Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 3327, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3464, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 2205. - Alternative compliance. 
(a)  This section sets forth the procedures and standards for Alternative Compliance under which the City Council may grant special exceptions to allow the development of new uses or structures that do not conform to the uses or forms of development, including signs, otherwise permitted under this Article. 
(b)  Applications for special exceptions seeking Alternative Compliance shall be filed with the Planning Director. There shall be a fee in the amount set forth in section 107.1. The Planning Director shall review applications in light of the applicable standards set forth in this section and may solicit the comments of the Central Business District Association Design Review Committee thereof in connection with such review. Upon completion of such review, the Planning Director shall report his findings and recommendations concerning the application, in writing, to the Planning Commission. Applications shall be the subject of public hearings before the Planning Commission and the City Council in accordance with the procedures prescribed in section 221. 
(c)  Alternative Compliance Applications shall be evaluated for consistency with the following standards, and the City Council, in deciding whether to allow Alternative Compliance, shall consider the extent to which the proposed development: 
(1)  Advances the stated goals and objectives of the Pembroke Strategic Growth Area Plan and the applicable policies of the Comprehensive Plan; 
(2)  Is consistent with, or demonstrably superior in design and quality to, the applicable provisions of the Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. 
The City Council shall also consider the potential impacts of the proposed deviation on surrounding properties and other properties in the remainder of the Central Business Core District and the extent to which any adverse impacts from such deviation can be mitigated. 
(d)  The City Council may attach reasonable conditions of approval to an application seeking Alternative Compliance. Such conditions shall be limited to those intended to mitigate any adverse visual, functional or other impacts of the deviation from the provisions of this Article or to promote compliance with the goals and objectives of the Pembroke SGA Plan and this Article. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair the right of any proper party to apply to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a variance from any of the development standards set forth in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3327, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 2206. - Optional forms of development. 
(a)  Optional Forms of Development are design alternatives that may be used in place of the specific requirements prescribed by this Article if the applicable conditions set forth in this section are met. Generally, such conditions include: (1) usage of a form of development or amenity that is different from the specific development standard prescribed by this Article, where the different form or amenity serves the same or a closely-related purpose or purposes as the prescribed development standard; and (2) substantial conformity to applicable provisions of the Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. 
(b)  The requirements of this Article may be satisfied by compliance with either the prescribed development standard set forth in section 2204 or the provisions of this section, as applicable. The provisions of this section are intended to encourage creativity by providing a flexible development option that will achieve the goals and objectives of this Article equally well as compliance with the specific development standards set forth in section 2204. 
(c)  Optional Forms of Development and Alternative Compliance shall not be deemed to be mutually exclusive, and approval as an Optional Form of Development shall not preclude any application for a special exception under the Alternative Compliance provisions of this Code; provided, however, that if any condition of approval pursuant to a special exception for Alternative Compliance conflicts with an approved Optional Form of Development, the condition contained in the special exception shall control. 
(d)  The following provisions set forth the purposes of the development standards prescribed in section 2204 and the optional means of fulfilling those purposes through the use of alternative design and building features: 
(1)  Front and side street setbacks. 
Purpose: To provide additional space for improvements that contribute to the public realm, such as wider sidewalks, outdoor amenity areas, and plant material and landscaping. 
Optional form of development: Provide features that contribute to the public realm, such as public art, courtyards surrounded by buildings built to the property line, balconies, arcades, galleries, porte cocheres or other suitable building elements. The building facade and any other portion of the building encroaching into the setback shall substantially conform to the applicable Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. 
(2)  Build-to Zone. 
Purpose: To activate the street frontage and establish a street wall by locating building façades close to the street, thereby providing a walkable, pedestrian-oriented streetscape. 
Optional form of development: 
(i)  Provide outdoor amenity space located adjacent to the street and encompassing substantially the entire area between the street and the building façade along at least seventy percent (70%) of the street frontage of the lot or leased area. 
(ii)  Outdoor amenity space may consist of an outdoor café, swimming pool, courtyard, fountain, park, plaza, garden or similar area, or a combination thereof. No vehicular parking shall be allowed anywhere within outdoor amenity space or between the outdoor amenity space and the building facade. 
(iii)  The building façade shall substantially conform to the applicable Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. 
(iv)  The building façade shall be located no greater than thirty (30) feet from the lot line faced by such building façade unless allowed pursuant to a special exception for Alternative Compliance. 
(v)  Where a driveway prevents the use of outdoor amenity space in a location specified by this section, such outdoor amenity space may be placed elsewhere on the lot in such location as will sufficiently activate the street frontage to the extent contemplated by this section. 
(3)  Parking Setbacks. 
Purpose: To avoid "dead" space along the street frontage that does not contribute to an active street presence. 
Optional form of development: Enliven the street frontage and screen the parking area by the creative use of public art, plant material and landscaping, water features, or other pedestrian amenities that provide visual interest. For structured parking, maintain continuity of the sidewalk by minimizing the number and width of curb cuts for driveways. Where alleys do not exist, concentrate curb cuts at side streets or mid-block. The optional form of development shall substantially conform to applicable Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. 
(4)  Height. 
Purpose: To provide an organized form throughout the Central Business Core District; provide gradual transitions in building height in areas in which such transitions are contemplated by the Pembroke SGA Plan. 
Optional form of development: An increase in height not exceeding that permitted by section 202(b) or reduction in the minimum height to no less then twenty-two (22) feet is permitted for any building that substantially conforms to Chapter 3 (Buildings) of the Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. 
(5)  Transparency/Blank Wall. 
Purpose: To contribute to an interesting and safe pedestrian environment. 
Optional form of development: provide outdoor amenity space, such as a courtyard, outdoor café or water feature, adjacent to the street, or, for upper stories, balconies and galleries. Enhance materials and architectural detail on building facades in substantial conformity with applicable Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. Outdoor amenity space shall be in reasonable proportion to the degree of difference between the prescribed transparency requirements and the actual transparency provided. 
(Ord. No. 3327, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 2207. - Special rules for public art as an optional form of development. 
(a)  Definition. Public art, as used in this Article, means works of art in any media, whether located on public or private property, that are visible to members of the general public or that have been planned and executed with the specific intention of being sited or staged on or within publicly-owned property. 
(b)  Purpose. Public art is an investment in the cultural vitality and economic development of a community. Sculptures, murals and other forms of public art can become place-makers, landmarks, and foster culturally dynamic, economically vibrant communities by creating memorable urban places where people desire to live, work, play and learn. For those reasons, the provision of public art in lieu of conformity with one or more of the required forms of development prescribed in this Article accords with the City Council's vision of the Town Center area as a future Arts and Cultural District, the recommendations of the Pembroke SGA Plan, and advances the ultimate goals of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  Applicability. Public art may be utilized as an Optional Form of Development in place of conformity with one or more of the following provisions regarding a prescribed development standard set forth in section 2204: 
(1)  Build-to zone; 
(2)  Front or side street setbacks; 
(3)  Transparency; 
(4)  Blank wall; or 
(5)  Outdoor amenity space. 
(d)  Location. Subject to the provisions of subsection (f), public art shall be located: 
(1)  Outdoors so as to be readily visible and accessible to pedestrians, and no further than fifty (50) feet from the nearest point on a public sidewalk, except under exceptional circumstances as approved by the Public Art Committee; 
(2)  Away from signage, transit stop structures or benches, utility boxes, utility poles, mailboxes, bicycle racks or other items, either on or off the property, that may impair the public's view or diminish the aesthetic value of the artwork; 
(3)  In such manner as not to interfere with or impede the flow of pedestrian traffic on a public sidewalk; and 
(4)  On the same zoning lot as the development for which the artwork serves as an Optional Form of Development and, to the extent possible consistent with the foregoing criteria, in such location as to maximize the degree to which the work of art offsets noncompliance with the prescribed development standard. 
(e)  Public art provided as an Optional Form of Development shall serve as a direct replacement for each prescribed development standard or standards from which the subject development deviates and, if located on the same zoning lot as the subject development, shall serve the same purpose or purposes as the prescribed development standard. 
(f)  Public art located on publicly-owned property. Public art may be located on publicly-owned property within the Pembroke Strategic Growth Area, including, without limitation, public streets and sidewalks, Town Center gateways, street corners, the Fountain Plaza, the Sandler Center Plaza, public parking garages and future transit stations, with the approval of the City Council, provided that: 
(1)  There is no feasible location on the subject property from which the work of art can be plainly and wholly seen by the public; 
(2)  The present or any planned land use of the subject property is such that placement of a work of art, in any media, on the property would be destructive to the work of art due to the activities related to the land use; 
(3)  The property is already fully developed in such a way that there is no location on the site for a work of art, and the work of art is approved as an Optional Form for renovation of the building necessitating use of a blank wall or reduction in transparency; or 
(4)  The location of the work of art cannot physically meet the criteria specified in subsection (d)(1); 
(g)  Approval by Public Art Committee. Public art, and any alteration or removal thereof, must be approved by the Public Art Committee of the Virginia Beach Arts and Humanities Commission. 
(h)  Ownership, maintenance, contractual provisions. Except in cases in which public art is dedicated to the City, the ownership of public art works shall be bound in perpetuity by written covenant, approved by the City Attorney, to the property for which they serve as an Optional Form of Development and, unless otherwise approved by the City, shall be maintained by the owner of the property for which it serves as an Optional Form of Development. Where a work of art is to be dedicated to the City, there shall be a written agreement between the City, the owner of the work of art and, if applicable, the artist, which agreement shall include, at a minimum, terms regarding the ownership, maintenance, insurance and intellectual property rights pertaining to the work of art. Such agreement shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. 
(i)  Signage. No lettering, symbols, or signage shall be permitted upon public art works except as intended by the artist as an integral part of the work. Paintings or murals may be signed by the artist, and the name of the work displayed. For sculptures, the artist shall designate the plaque location, which shall be permanently installed, using theft-resistant techniques, in a ground location near the sculpture or on the base and list only the sculpture's title, the artist's name the date of installation and the name of the donor, if applicable. 
(j)  Planting/landscaping. Sculptures and their bases shall be well integrated with the surrounding softscape and hardscape. Long-term maintenance should be considered when selecting plant material. Native and drought-resistant plants are encouraged. 
(k)  Unacceptable art. Decorative or ornamental pieces that are not conceptualized, designed, and fabricated by a qualified artist, such as "off-the-shelf" decorative items such as garden sculpture; historical markers or bells; bell towers; obelisks; architectural ornamentation or enhancements; art as advertisements or commercial signage mixed with imagery; and busts or statuary memorials, or mass produced reproductions or replicas of original works of art shall not be accepted as an Optional Form of Development. 
(l)  Artists' qualifications. Artists creating public art, or supervising students creating public art, shall be selected by the property owner or developer, subject to approval by the Public Art Committee, and shall have the following qualifications: 
(1)  Artists shall be recognized by critics and peers as a professional practitioner of the visual arts. To assess the qualifications of an artist the Committee will consider factors such as the artist's body of work, educational background, formal training, past and current large scale outdoor public art commissions, sales of work, exhibition records, publications, and any other factors the Committee reasonably deems relevant; 
(2)  Artists shall also have experience in successfully collaborating with design teams, architects, art consultants, developers, engineers, fabricators, and landscape architects; meeting scheduled deadlines; negotiating and contracting their work responsibly; and conceptualizing, designing, fabricating, and installing large-scale outdoor sculpture similar in scope to the proposed sculpture; and 
(3)  Artists shall have the experience and expertise to create site specific public art after consideration of contextual issues related to the development site, including architectural style, the future use and users of the development project, and community input. 
(m)  Applications. Applications and supporting materials shall be submitted to the Director of the Office of Cultural Affairs, who shall provide the Arts and Humanities Commission members with copies thereof. The form of such application and requirements for supporting materials shall be determined by the Director. 
(n)  Conflicting provisions. The procedures set forth in this section shall exclusively govern the selection, placement and other provisions pertaining to public art as an Optional Form of Development, such that in the event of a conflict with any other ordinance, directive, or other provision concerning public art as an Optional Form of Development, the provisions of this section shall control. 
(Ord. No. 3327, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 2208. - Nonconforming buildings and structures. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 105(d), additions to or substantial alterations of any building or other structure rendered nonconforming by the adoption of this Article shall be allowed if: 
(1)  Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the original building or structure is demolished in order to accomplish the addition or substantial alteration; 
(2)  The exterior footprint of the building or structure, including the floor plate of upper stories, is not increased by more than fifteen percent (15%); 
(3)  The height of such building or structure is not increased by more than fifteen percent (15%) in any district in which there is a maximum height limitation; provided, that no structure shall be higher than otherwise allowed by section 202; 
(4)  The use or uses of the building or structure conform to the provisions of this Article or are allowed by special exception for Alternative Compliance pursuant to section 2205; 
(5)  The building or structure, as added to or substantially altered, will be compatible with surrounding properties and neighborhoods; and 
(6)  The portions of the building or structure that are added or substantially altered substantially conform to the Central Business Core District Design Guidelines, as determined by the Planning Director after review and recommendation by the Central Business District Design Review Committee. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c), additions to or substantial alterations of nonconforming buildings and other structures not allowed pursuant to subsection (a) shall require a special exception for Alternative Compliance in accordance with the provisions of section 2207. 
(c)  Any nonconforming building or structure that is involuntarily damaged or destroyed may be reconstructed or restored to its prior condition and location within two (2) years of its being damaged or destroyed; provided that any enlargement or substantial alteration of such building shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3327, 2-25-14)  
C. - SIGN REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 2209. - Intent; findings, establishment of special sign district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the sign regulations set forth in this section is to: 
(1)  Encourage signage that enhances the overall aesthetics of the Central Business Core District; 
(2)  Ensure that the public benefits derived from past and future expenditures of public funds for the infrastructure improvements and beautification of the streets and public spaces are protected by preventing visual clutter caused by excessive or poorly placed signage; 
(3)  Encourage signage that is reflective of the aesthetics and character of its location and compatible with, and integrated into, the building's architectural design and with other signs on the property; 
(4)  Provide incentives for high-quality signage by increasing signage allowances for signs that conform to the Central Business Core District Design Guidelines; and 
(5)  Encourage creativity by providing flexibility to utilize signage not only as a means of identifying a business establishment but as a decorative feature to enhance the appearance of a building as well. 
(b)  Findings. The City Council finds that: 
(1)  Signs have a strong visual impact on the character and quality of a community. They are an integral part of the cityscape and, as such, can enhance or detract from the City's image and character. As a prominent part of the cityscape, they can attract or repel the viewer and affect the safety of vehicular traffic, and their suitability helps to define the way in which a community is perceived. Because the City of Virginia Beach relies on the attractiveness of the Town Center area to attract tourists and commerce, aesthetic considerations are directly related to economic value. Apart from economic considerations, however, there are intangible benefits for a community in which signage is orderly and attractive; 
(2)  The City's current sign regulations address characteristics such as the size and number of signs, but generally do not address other characteristics, such as design, that are equally important in promoting an attractive, urban downtown area. 
(3)  Design standards for signage are used in many other localities that are known for their attractiveness and appeal to residents and visitors alike, and have been well-accepted by both businesses and the general public as a means of enhancing the overall appearance and prosperity of the community; and 
(4)  Providing incentives for businesses to display signage that conforms to voluntary design guidelines is an appropriate means of encouraging those businesses to use well-designed, highly attractive signs that harmonize with the buildings on which they are displayed, the surrounding neighborhood, and other signage in the area. 
(c)  Establishment of special sign district. The Central Business Core District is hereby declared a special sign district, in which the provisions of this section apply. 
(Ord. No. 3327, 2-25-14)  
Sec 2210. - Regulations applicable to all signage. 
The following regulations shall apply to all signage within the Central Business Core District. All signage shall comply with the provisions of Article 2, Part B of the City Zoning Ordinance, except as otherwise expressly provided in this section. Definitions of sign types shall be as set forth in section 210.2. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this section and any other provision of the City Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
(a)  Permitted signs. The following signs shall be permitted within the Central Business Core District: 
(1)  Awning signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per awning and shall not exceed a maximum of two (2) square feet in area; provided, however, that an establishment with no wall signs may apply its wall signage allowance, if any, to one (1) awning, in addition to the maximum two square-foot signs permitted on the remaining awnings. In such cases, the awning and sign must conform to the Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated. Awnings shall not horizontally extend more than three (3) feet over the public street, sidewalk or other public property or from the building façade and shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight (8) feet above ground level. 
(2)  Banner signs other than those allowed in connection with major entertainment venues shall be permitted on buildings no less than thirty-two (32) feet in height and must conform to the Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. Banner signs shall not be internally illuminated. Banners shall have a minimum vertical clearance of fifteen (15) feet above ground level, shall not horizontally extend more than five (5) feet over the public street, sidewalk or other public property or from the building façade, and shall not extend above the top of the building façade. Banners shall be securely mounted by means of mounting hardware perpendicularly to a vertical building wall. 
(3)  Building crown signs. In addition to other signage allowed by this section, buildings no less than thirty-two (32) feet in height may have a maximum of two (2) building crown signs. Buildings no less than fifty-two (52) feet in height may have a maximum of four (4) building crown signs, provided they conform to the Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. Building crown signs shall not exceed the area set forth below, nor shall more than one such sign be placed on each building façade. Such signs shall be mounted at least three-fourths (¾) of the distance from ground level to the top of the building façade, but no higher than the top of the building façade. No such sign shall horizontally extend into the public street, sidewalk or other public property or from the building façade more than the amount listed below. 
Bldg. height (in feet) 	Maximum area per sign (in square feet) 	Maximum extension from building (in feet) 
Less than 75 	75 	1 
75—99 	100 	2 
100—149 	125 	2 
150—199 	175 	3 
200 or more 	250 	3 
 
(4)  Canopy signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per canopy and shall not exceed a maximum of two (2) square feet in area; provided, however, that an establishment with no wall signs may apply its wall signage allowance, if any, to one (1) canopy, in addition to the maximum two square-foot signs permitted on the remaining canopies. In such cases, the canopy and sign must conform to the Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. No canopy sign shall exceed two (2) feet in height or one (1) foot in depth. No canopy sign shall extend outside of the width of the canopy on which it is located. Canopies shall not horizontally extend more than three (3) feet over the public street, sidewalk or other public property or from the building and shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight (8) feet. 
(5)  [RESERVED] 
(6)  Freestanding signs shall be allowed only by special exception for Alternative Compliance pursuant to section 2205. 
(7)  Hanging signs shall be limited to one (1) sign for each building façade occupied by a ground story establishment and shall not exceed nine (9) square feet in area. Such signs shall have a maximum of two (2) faces, which shall be parallel to each other. No establishment having a hanging sign shall also have a projecting sign on the same building façade. No hanging sign shall be internally illuminated. Hanging signs shall not horizontally extend more than three (3) feet over the public street, sidewalk or other public property or from the building façade and shall maintain a minimum vertical clearance of eight (8) feet above ground level. 
(8)  Information board signs shall be placed within a weather-resistant closed display cabinet permanently mounted to the building façade and extending no more than six (6) inches over the public street, sidewalk or other public property or from the building façade. The maximum height of the lettering on such signs shall not exceed two (2) inches. 
(9)  Major entertainment venue signs shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of section 218. 
(10)  Marquee signs shall be allowed only on buildings occupied by theaters, cinemas, performing arts facilities or similar venues, and shall conform to the Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. The top of such signs shall be at a height no greater than eighteen (18) feet above ground level, and the marquee shall have a minimum vertical clearance of nine (9) feet above ground level. In addition, such signs may contain changeable copy as permitted by subsection (b)(7). Marquee signs may encroach over a public street, sidewalk or other public property by a maximum horizontal distance of ten (10) feet. 
(11)  [RESERVED] 
(12)  Projecting or blade signs shall be limited to one (1) sign for each building façade occupied by a ground story establishment. Such signs shall have a maximum of two (2) faces, which shall be parallel to each other, and no establishment having a projecting sign shall also have a hanging sign on the same building façade. Projecting signs shall not be internally illuminated and shall not exceed nine (9) square feet per face in sign area or horizontally extend more than three (3) feet over the public street, sidewalk or other public property or from the building façade, provided, however, that an establishment with no wall sign may apply its wall signage allowance, if any, to one (1) projecting sign, if it conforms to the Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. All projecting signs shall maintain a minimum vertical clearance of eight (8) feet above ground level. 
(13)  Sandwich board, A-frame or other signs placed on the sidewalk shall be made primarily of wood, wood composite or metal and have a professional finish. Incorporated inserts must contain a fixed message or be made out of chalkboard, dry eraser board, or similar material. Such signs shall be placed directly in front of the façade of the building in which the establishment that is associated with the sign is located, and a horizontal clearance of at least eight (8) feet shall be maintained on public sidewalks. Such signs shall not be illuminated or left out overnight. A maximum of one (1) such sign, not to exceed six square feet per side, shall be permitted per establishment. No merchandise or other material shall be placed on or hang from any such sign. Sidewalk signs other than sandwich board, A-frame style (not hinged at the top) are permitted if they conform to the Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. 
(14)  [RESERVED] 
(15)  Table umbrella signs shall be limited to no more than two (2) signs on each umbrella and no more than two (2) square feet per sign. 
(16)  Wall signs shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet or one (1) square foot per linear foot of building frontage. Establishments located on the ground or second story shall be permitted one (1) such sign on each building façade occupied by the establishment. No wall sign shall extend above the building façade or horizontally extend more than twelve (12) inches over the public street, sidewalk or other public property or from the building façade. 
(17)  Window signs shall not exceed, in the aggregate, ten (10) per cent of the total area of the windows in which they are located; provided, however, that an establishment with no wall signs may apply its wall sign allowance to any window. In such cases, window signs must conform to the Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. Window signs shall not consist of or contain oscillating lights, electronic displays, televisions, or computer monitors. Neon or similar types of signs not to exceed the area specified above shall be permitted if such signs conform to the Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. 
(b)  Special regulations. 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided, the regulations set forth in this section apply to each separate establishment. 
(2)  In the event of a conflict between any of the following provisions and the provisions of subsection (a), the provisions of this subsection control unless stated otherwise. 
(3)  All signs that encroach into or over a public street, sidewalk, or other public property shall conform to the Central Business Core District Design Guidelines unless otherwise authorized by resolution of the City Council pursuant to Article VI of Chapter 33 of the City Code. 
(4)  Except as expressly allowed, no sign shall be located above the second story of any building. 
(5)  Except as expressly allowed, all signs shall be located on that portion of a building wall occupied exclusively by the establishment that is associated with the sign. 
(6)  Cabinet or box signs, either standing alone or as a component of a sign, shall not be allowed. 
(7)  Changeable copy shall only be allowed as part of a marquee sign, where the changeable copy portion of such signs is not greater than forty percent (40%) of the total area of the marquee sign. Skewed or missing lettering shall be promptly replaced. 
(8)  Electronic displays shall be allowed only for major entertainment venues and shall require the approval of the City Council as specified in section 218. 
(9)  Neon signs shall not oscillate, blink or flash and shall only be allowed in windows as specified in subsection (a)(17). 
(10)  Parking structures and parking garages, public or private, may have one (1) wall sign and one (1) projecting sign per pedestrian or vehicle entrance. The maximum sign area for such wall signs shall not exceed one foot per linear foot of the width of the entrance. The maximum area for projecting signs shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet and shall not horizontally extend more than six (6) feet over the public street, sidewalk or other public property or from the building façade. Projecting signs on parking structures may be internally illuminated. Wall or projecting signs at pedestrian entrances shall be located at ground floor height. In addition to wall and projecting signs, parking structures no less than thirty-two (32) feet in height shall also have no more than two (2) building crown signs. Unless otherwise specified, no signs on parking structures or garages shall exceed the dimensions specified in section 2210(a). 
Where a building is located on a zoning lot with a parking structure that is used to satisfy, in whole or in part, the vehicular parking requirements of the building, such building may have, in addition to other signage permitted by this section, one (1) wall sign, which shall be located on the parking structure serving the building and which may be located above the second story of the structure. Such sign shall have an area no greater than one (1) square foot of signage per linear foot of the building wall of the parking structure on which the sign is located, not to exceed sixty (60) square feet. 
(11)  Temporary signs located on property for sale, lease or rent shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. Not more than one (1) such sign is permitted for each building frontage; provided, however, that leasable spaces with a building frontage one hundred (100) feet or greater in width shall be permitted a maximum of two (2) such signs. Properties with no buildings shall be subject to the regulations of the B-3 Central Business District pursuant to section 905(c). 
(Ord. No. 3327, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3442, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 3464, 10-18-16)  
D. - DESIGN GUIDELINES 
 
Sec. 2211. - Central Business Core District Design Guidelines. 
The Central Business Core District Design Guidelines, October 2016 ("Design Guidelines") appended hereto are hereby incorporated by reference into this Article. Such Design Guidelines shall supersede Section V (Architectural Guidelines) and Sections VII through X (Signage Guidelines/Design Review Process) of the Central Business District Urban Guidelines (February 4, 2004), and the Special Area Design Guidelines, Urban Areas, set forth in the Reference Handbook of the Comprehensive Plan. 
The Planning Director shall determine whether or not a proposed design conforms to the Design Guidelines and may, in making such determination, seek the advice of the Central Business District Association Design Review Committee or a designated subcommittee thereof. Such determination shall be appealable to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 3327, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3464, 10-18-16)  
E. - VEHICULAR PARKING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 2212. - Off-street parking. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "parking requirements" shall mean the number of off-street vehicular parking spaces required by this section. 
(b)  Parking requirements shall be determined in accordance with a parking analysis prepared by a licensed professional engineer or other qualified professional. Such analysis shall contain, at a minimum, the current parking utilization, parking demands based upon current land uses, a determination of a surplus or shortage of parking, and the impact of the proposed development on parking and traffic conditions. The Planning Director shall determine the adequacy of the analysis. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything in this ordinance to the contrary, required off-street parking for any use located within the District may be made available for use by the general public as well as by the customers or patrons of such use. 
(d)  Parking requirements for uses within the District may be satisfied by any one, or a combination of, the following: 
(1)  On-site parking; 
(2)  Off-site parking facilities, as set forth in section 901 of this ordinance; or 
(3)  Public parking, if the Planning Director determines (i) that there is at least a sufficient number of public parking spaces located within the District to meet public parking demands; and (ii) that the use of such public parking spaces to satisfy the parking requirements of the proposed use, either wholly or partially, is warranted in light of the following considerations: 
a.  The extent to which the proposed use advances the goals and objectives of this Article; and 
b.  The extent to which the proposed use conforms to the Urban Design Plan component of the Pembroke Strategic Growth Area Plan. 
(Ord. No. 3327, 2-25-14)  
APPENDIX 1. - OCEANFRONT RESORT DISTRICT FORM-BASED CODE 
By Ordinance Number 3253, adopted by the Virginia Beach City Council on July 10, 2012, the city council adopted the Oceanfront Resort District Form-Based Code as Appendix 1 to the city zoning ordinance. The Oceanfront Resort District Form-based Code is on file in the Department of Planning and may be found at the following web address: Go to http://www.vbgov.com/ofbc 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3525, adopted December 5, 2017, amended and reorganized Appendix 1, Oceanfront Resort District Form-Based Code.  
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 292 
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS FOR THE CITY OF VIRGINIA BEACH, PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS IN RELATION TO SUBDIVISION, AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF SUCH SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
WHEREAS the planning commission has prepared and recommended such an ordinance, after public notice and hearing as required; therefore: 
BE IT ORDAINED by the city council of the City of Virginia Beach pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Virginia, 1950, Title 15.2, Chapter 22, and for purposes set forth therein: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 292 was adopted by the council on June 22, 1970, as is set out herein as it appeared in title II of the appendix to the 1965 Virginia Beach Code, as supplemented. Amendments have been added and are indicated by history notes appearing in parentheses ( ) at the end of amended sections. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is derived, unamended, from Ordinance No. 292. Any words appearing in brackets [] were added by the editor for clarity. 
Charter reference— Planning commission, §§ 19.01, 19.02. 
Cross reference— Subdivision ordinance not affected by Code or ordinance adopting Code, § 1-5(8); responsibilities of engineering division of department of public works with respect to subdivision plans and plats, § 2-268; department of planning, § 2-381 et seq.; planning commission, § 2-396 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; housing code, Ch. 16; mobile homes, Ch. 19; motor vehicle and traffic code, Ch. 21; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28; soil removal and other land-disturbing activities, Ch. 30; solid waste, Ch. 31; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 33; swimming pools, Ch. 34; water supply, Ch. 37; zoning ordinance, App. A; site plan ordinance, App. C. 
State Law reference— Land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-465 et seq.; requirement that municipalities adopt ordinances, to assure the orderly subdivision of land and its development, § 15.1-465; provisions to be included in subdivision ordinance, § 15.1-466. 
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 1.1. - ERU. 
Equivalent residential unit or ERU means the equivalent impervious area of a single-family residential developed property per dwelling unit located within the city based on the statistical average horizontal impervious area of a single-family residence in the city. An equivalent residential unit (ERU) equals two thousand two hundred sixty-nine (2,269) square feet of impervious surface area. 
(Ord. No. 2224, 5-25-93)  
Sec. 1.2. - Planning director. 
The director of the department of planning or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2224, 5-25-93)  
Sec. 1.3. - Street. 
A vehicular way (which may also serve, in part, as a way for pedestrian and bicycle traffic) whether called street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, alley, mall, bikeway or otherwise designated. 
(a)  Arterial or major streets or highways are used by or designated primarily for fast or heavy traffic, and for the purpose of these regulations shall be considered to be as shown in any comprehensive plan or element thereof designating such arterial or major streets or highways officially adopted by city council. 
(b)  Collector streets are used primarily to carry traffic from minor streets to arterial or major streets or highways. 
(c)  Minor streets are used primarily for access to abutting properties, and include marginal access streets, which are generally parallel and adjacent to arterial streets or highways, serve abutting properties and provide protection from friction with through traffic. 
(d)  Marginal access streets are used to separate local traffic from through traffic on an adjacent thoroughfare and to provide controlled ingress to and egress from through traffic. 
(e)  Alleys are minor ways used primarily for vehicular access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting a street. 
(f)  Bikeways are any road, path, or way which in some manner is specifically designated as being open to bicycle travel, regardless of whether such facilities are designated for the exclusive use of bicycles or are to be shared by other transportation modes. 
(Ord. No. 1581, 1-27-86; Ord. No. 2155, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2224, 5-25-93)  
Sec. 1.4. - Subdivision. 
The division of any parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels for immediate or future transfer of ownership or building development. The term shall be construed to include all changes in lot lines, the creation of new lots involving any division of an existing lot or lots, or if a new street is involved in such division, any division of a parcel of land, and when appropriate to context, the process of subdividing or the territory subdivided. To expedite two (2) lot subdivisions, the subdivision shall only be reviewed by the department of planning, and where appropriate, the health department. 
(Ord. No. 565; Ord. No. 762; Ord. No. 2224, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 2402, 6-25-96)  
Sec. 1.5. - Floodplain. 
Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source and floodplains subject to special restrictions as defined in Appendix K, section 4.10. 
(Ord. No. 2666, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 3311, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 1.6. - Wetlands. 
Areas shall include those defined in section 1401 (e)(f)(j) of the City Zoning Ordinance (Appendix A) and shall also include tidal wetlands, which are vegetated and nonvegetated wetlands, as defined in section 1401 of the City Zoning Ordinance (Appendix A); and nontidal wetlands, which are those wetlands, other than tidal wetlands, that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as identified or referred to in the City of Virginia Beach Soil Survey by soil names Backbay Mucky Peat; Duckston portion of Corolla-Duckston Fine Sands; Dorovan Mucky Peat; Duckston Fine Sand; Nawney Silt Loam; Pamlico Mucky Peat; Pamlico-Lakehurst Variant Complex; Rapahannock Mucky Peat, Strongly Saline or Pocaty Peat; and any other lands which under normal conditions are saturated to the ground surface and connected by surface flow and contiguous to tidal wetlands or tributary streams. 
(Ord. No. 2666, 10-23-01)  
RECORDING PLATS 
 
Sec. 2.1. - Submittal, approval, and recording of plats. 
After the effective date of this ordinance, the owner or proprietor of any tract who desires to subdivide it shall submit a plat to the planning director, who is hereby charged with responsibility for coordinating the processing of such plats. If and after a final plat has been approved by the planning director and other affected agencies as conforming to regulations relating to subdivisions, the owner or proprietor may cause it to be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2155, 6-23-92)  
Sec. 2.2. - Compliance with ordinance. 
No person shall subdivide land without making and recording a plat thereof and complying fully with the provisions of these regulations and all other state and local laws applying to subdivisions.  
Sec. 2.3. - When sale or transfer of land by reference to plat prohibited. 
No person shall sell or transfer such land or any part thereof by reference to, or exhibition of, or by any other use of, a plat of a subdivision before such plat has been duly recorded as provided herein, unless such subdivision was lawfully created prior to the adoption of a subdivision ordinance applicable thereto, provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the recordation of the instrument by which such land is transferred or the passage of title as between parties to the instrument.  
PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 3.1. - Preapplication conference. 
Before filing application for approval of a plat, the subdivider may confer with the planning department and such other agencies of the city as he or the department deems advisable concerning the general proposal. Such action does not require formal application, fees or filing of a plat, and is not to be construed as application for approval of a plat in computing time limitations in relation thereto.  
Sec. 3.2. - Procedure for conditional preliminary plat approval. 
(a)  The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat with other material required as set forth in section 6, and shall submit such number of copies as the planning director shall require thereof to the planning director for processing and referral to affected agencies, together with an application for approval and such fee as is established by city council in relation to processing subdivision plats for plats involving more than fifty (50) lots. The subdivider may prepare a preliminary plat, as described above, for plats involving fifty (50) lots or less. Time limitations in relation to such processing shall begin as of date of receipt of the preliminary plat, application and fee as indicated on such documents when they are received by the planning director. 
(b)  After the preliminary plat and related material has been submitted it shall be reviewed by the planning director and other affected agencies of the city for conformity to this ordinance and other applicable regulations, and negotiations made with the subdivider as to changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him. The planning director shall act upon the preliminary plat and related material as submitted or as modified by the subdivider, and if approved shall certify its approval as conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, of any, or if disapproved, shall indicate its disapproval and the reasons therefor. 
(c)  The action of the planning director shall be noted on all copies of the preliminary plat to be retained in the record, referenced and attached to any changes or conditions determined. One such copy shall be returned to the subdivider, and others retained as required for records or further action of the department or other affected agencies of the city. 
(d)  Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat, but shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat and other matters determined in connection therewith which shall serve as a guide in preparation of the final plat to be submitted for final approval and for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of this ordinance and the conditions of the conditional approval, if any. Such approval of the preliminary plat shall be valid for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days and may be extended by the planning director. Unless the final plat is submitted within one hundred (180) days or such extended period as may be allowed, the conditional approval shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 2155, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 3359, 7-1-14)  
Sec. 3.3. - Procedure for approval of final plat. 
(a)  The final plat and other exhibits required for approval shall be prepared as specified in section 6 and submitted to the planning director within the time limit specified in the conditional approval of the preliminary plat, or such extension as may be granted by the planning director. Where provision has been made for staged development in connection with conditional approval of the preliminary plat, including time limitations, the subdivider may submit a final plat for only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time, if such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations 
(b)  Such number and type of copies as the planning director shall require of the final plat shall be submitted for approval. Copies of other materials required for approval shall be provided by the subdivider, in such numbers as may reasonably be required in the case. 
(c)  Upon submittal of the final plat and other materials required with application for final approval, the planning director shall initiate and coordinate review by affected agencies of the city to determine: 
(1)  Substantial compliance with the preliminary plat and any conditions of the conditional approval thereof. 
(2)  General compliance with the regulations set forth herein, and other applicable regulations. 
Such review shall be completed within sixty (60) days of submittal (or such longer period as may be agreed upon in writing by the subdivider and the department) and within such time, the final plat and related materials shall be approved or disapproved. Approval shall be in the form provided in section 6. Disapproval shall include written reasons therefor. In the event that action is not taken within sixty (60) days, recourse shall be as provided by law. 
(d)  Approval of the final plat shall be void: 
(1)  Unless the approved plat is recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the city within one year from the date of approval. 
(2)  If there are any additions, deletions or alterations in the original tracing following approval, except for marking incidental to recording. 
(Ord. No. 2155, 6-23-92)  
DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 4.1. - Streets and alleys. 
(a)  Arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan insofar as elements of the plan relating to streets have been officially adopted by city council, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, public conveniences and safety, and appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. 
(b)  Where not indicated in the comprehensive plan, arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
(1)  Provide for continuation or appropriate projection of existing arterial or collector streets in surrounding area; or 
(2)  Where topography or other conditions make continuous or projection of existing streets unnecessary or impracticable shall conform to a general area plan approved by the planning commission. 
(c)  Minor streets in residential neighborhoods shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(d)  Where [a] subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street or other streets carrying heavy traffic, the planning director may require marginal access streets, reversed frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment, including wider pavement widths, as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential or other properties and separation of local and through traffic. 
(e)  Where a subdivision borders or contains a railroad or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning director may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way and at such distance therefrom as required for appropriate use of intervening land, if any, and as determined with due regard for requirements of future approach grades and grade separations. 
(f)  Reserve strips controlling sole access to public streets shall be prohibited unless their control is definitely placed in the city under conditions approved by the planning director. 
(g)  Street jogs with centerline off-sets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided. 
(h)  No street intersection shall include more than four (4) street approaches. 
(i)  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect another at less than sixty (60) degrees; provided, however, that other arrangements for smooth merging of traffic shall be permitted where the total effect on the intersection is to reduce traffic hazards and to provide for smooth traffic flow at the intersection as a whole. 
(j)  Property lines at the intersection of minor streets with each other or with alleys shall be rounded with a minimum radius of ten (10) feet. Property lines at the intersection of alleys with any streets shall be rounded with a minimum radius of ten (10) feet. Property lines at all other street intersections shall be rounded with a minimum radius of twenty (20) feet. 
(k)  A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
(l)  When connecting street lines deflect from each other, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius sufficient to insure a sight distance adequate for visibility and safety, as determined by the planning director in consultation with the city engineer after consideration of the character of the street and the types of speed of traffic anticipated. 
(m)  (1) Street right-of-way widths shall be as specified in officially adopted elements of the comprehensive plan relating to streets. Where not shown therein, pavement widths and right-of-way widths for public streets shall be in relation to the proposed density and/or the land use of the property adjacent to the roads and within the parcel sought to be subdivided, but in no case, be less than as follows: 
	Minimum R/W 
Width 
(feet) 	Minimum Paved 
Width 
(face to face 
of curb) 
(feet) 
Arterial 	80 	52 
Collector 	60 	36 
Minor: 		
 a. 
Serving commercial or industrial uses 	60 	36 
 b. 
Serving residential lots of 7,500 square feet or more, or fewer than 10 lots of less than 7,500 square feet on a cul-de-sac, or 10 lots or more of less than 7,500 square feet where adequate legal assurance has been provided that all required driveways on lots served by such street shall be at least 18 feet wide 	50 	30 
 c. 
Serving townhouse lots in the R-2.5 zoning category 	50 	30 
Marginal access 	40 	30 
Alley 	24 	20 
Residential cul-de-sac 	40 	30 
 
Where curb and gutter is not required, minimum paved width, as stated above, shall be measured from edge of pavement to edge of pavement. 
(n)  Except in planned unit developments established under the terms of the zoning ordinance, [2] public streets narrower than the city's standard minimum widths as described in provision 4.1(m) of this ordinance providing sole or primary access to two (2) or more lots are permissible only where topographic conditions will not permit public streets with widths as required above, or where reduction is necessary to achieve substantial protection of trees, and only if all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Such street shall serve not more than twenty (20) dwelling units, each on a lot of at least fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(2)  Minimum width of the right-of-way for such street shall be twenty (20) feet and may be required to be increased if necessary for installation and servicing of utilities outside the area of the driving surface. Minimum paved width shall be eighteen (18) feet. 
(3)  Maximum length shall not exceed five hundred fifty (550) feet, except where topographic conditions require such greater length as may be necessary. 
(4)  Design, location and improvement shall provide for safe intersection with public streets, safe passage of public service and emergency vehicles, and protection of adjoining property. 
(5)  Where such a street is a cul-de-sac, it shall have a circular turnaround in accordance with provision 4.1(p) of this ordinance. 
(o)  Half-streets are prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in relation to surrounding lands and where the planning director finds it practicable to require dedication of the other half when adjoining property is subdivided. Where a half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract at the time of its subdivision. No residence shall be constructed with sole access from a half street. 
(p)  Except where unusual land configuration requires otherwise, cul-de-sac streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than: 
(1)  Three thousand (3,000) feet to the turnaround if serving very-low-intensity residential uses (lot area per dwelling unit at or exceeding forty thousand (40,000) square feet) or 
(2)  Fifteen hundred (1,500) feet to the turnaround if serving low-intensity residential uses (lot area per dwelling unit exceeding seventy-five hundred (7,500) square feet) but less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet or 
(3)  One thousand (1,000) feet to the turnaround if serving residential uses of higher intensity. 
All cul-de-sac streets shall be provided at the closed end with a circular turnaround having an outside roadway radius of forty (40) feet and a right-of-way radius of at least fifty (50) feet, except where other forms of turnaround are approved by the planning director as conforming to standard practice. 
(q)  Street names shall be subject to approval by the planning director. No name shall be used which duplicates or is likely to be confused with the name of an existing street. 
(r)  Unless other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and the like, alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoidable, corners shall be rounded to permit safe vehicular movement. Alleys which dead end against permanent barriers are prohibited unless approved provision for turnaround is made at the terminus. 
(s)  The overall street plan for any subdivision must provide access to the subdivision by a public street connected to the existing road system of the city. 
(t)  Bikeway location, type and width shall be as specified in the Virginia Beach Master Bikeway Plan. 
(Ord. No. 860, 5-15-78; Ord. No. 1514, 1-28-85; Ord. No. 1582, 1-27-86; Ord. No. 1809, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 1979, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2057, 4-23-91; Ord. No. 2155, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2283, 6-28-94; Ord. No. 3087, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 3110, 11-24-09) 
Cross reference— Streets, Ch. 33. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, App. A. 
 
Sec. 4.2. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements for utilities shall be provided as required by the director of public utilities and easements for drainage shall be provided as required by the director of public works across lots overlapping or adjoining rear or side lot lines, and shall be of whatever width is necessary to provide for installation of such installation of such utilities or drainage and for access for maintenance; provided, however, that no such easement shall be less than ten (10) feet wide. In the case of any waiver to this requirement as outlined above, conditions or safeguards may be attached to the grading plan as necessary to assure proper drainage in the area. 
(b)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines thereof, and [of] such further width or construction, or both, as will be required for the purpose of handling drainage. Streets or parkways parallel, but not necessarily adjacent to such water courses, may be required. Shifts from existing locations of water courses, drainage ways, channels or streams may be permitted only where such [shifts] result in equivalent or better drainage within and surrounding the subdivision than will the existing location; provided, however, that any such changes [shifts] shall be explained in writing, including the specific reasons therefor, and be made a part of the permanent application record. 
(Ord. No. 762; Ord. No. 1144, 1-26-81; Ord. No. 1360, 3-14-83; Ord. No. 2402, 6-25-96)  
Sec. 4.3. - Blocks. 
(a)  Lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use anticipated. 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
(3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street and pedestrian traffic. 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)  Block lengths shall not exceed eighteen (18) hundred (1,800) feet nor be less than four hundred (400) feet, except where alternate designs are approved by the planning director as conforming to standard practice; provided, however, that any such waiver shall be put into writing and include the reasons therefor, and be made a part of the permanent application record. 
(c)  Pedestrian walks not less than ten (10) feet wide shall be required where deemed essential to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. Where such walks are provided they shall be located and fenced, screened, lighted or otherwise improved in such manner as to provide security, tranquility and privacy for occupants of adjoining property for users of the walks. 
(Ord. No. 2155, 6-23-92)  
Sec. 4.4. - Lots. 
(a)  Lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and the type of development and use contemplated. 
(b)  Except where created by governmental action, lots created by subdivision must meet all requirements of the zoning ordinance.* However, existing lots which fail to conform to present applicable zoning regulations may also be resubdivided to less than current minimum zoning standards where the following apply: [] 
(1)  The existing lots have been legally created; and 
(2)  The resulting lots conform to applicable requirements in each respect that the existing lots conform, and in those respects that the existing lots do not conform, no greater degree of nonconformity than that already present would result. 
(c)  Corner lots must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Corner lots shall be platted not less than ten (10) feet wider than the minimum required by the zoning ordinance* for interior lots in the district, except that no such increase shall be required where minimum lot width for interior lots is one hundred twenty-five (125) feet or more. [] 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other requirement to the contrary, the street frontage of any corner lot platted in the B-1 through B-4 Business Districts, the H-1 Hotel District, the O-1 and O-2 Office Districts, the I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts and located at the intersection of two (2) streets, either of which is shown on the master street and highway plan as a four-laned undivided roadway or greater, shall adhere to the following requirements: 
(i)  The street frontage shall be shown with the no-ingress-egress easement with access guaranteed the site only through adjoining parcels; or 
(ii)  On the side of the lot departing the intersection, the lot shall have at least two hundred ten (210) feet of frontage on the street on which it abuts and has access, as well as designation of space for a right turn lane in substantial accordance with Figure 1 below; and on the side of the lot approaching the intersection, the lot shall have at least one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage on the street on which it abuts and has access, as well as designation of space for a right turn lane in substantial accordance with Figure 1 below; or 
(iii)  Any combination of (i) or (ii) may be utilized. Where such a combination is utilized, access through adjoining parcels may not be required. 
(iv)  For any frontage of such lot not abutting a street shown on the master street and highway plan as a four-line undivided roadway or greater, such frontage shall be exempt from the requirements in (i), (ii) and (iii) above. 
(v)  Whenever designation of space for a right turn lane is made in accordance with these requirements, dedication and improvement of the space shall be made in accordance with the need generated. 
 
(d)  Each lot created in a subdivision shall have direct access to a public street. 
(e)  Double frontage and reversed frontage residential lots shall in general be avoided except where essential to provide residential separation from traffic arteries or to overcome other disadvantages of orientation or topography. Where the side or rear of a residential lot abuts a major right-of-way ninety (90) feet or more in width as shown in the master street and highway plan, there shall be located on the lot along the right-of-way line Category VI screening in accordance with the Virginia Beach Landscaping, Screening and Buffering Standards and Specifications. There shall be no right of ingress or egress across such buffer. 
(f)  Side lot lines shall be substantially perpendicular or radial to street lines, and shall not vary from the perpendicular or radial by more than thirty (30) degrees. However, greater variation than thirty (30) degrees is permissible if such variation has no bearing on whether the lot meets the minimum lot width requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(g)  Where utility or other easements are involved, lot lines shall be so arranged with respect to such easements as to permit efficient installation of the utilities without unnecessary irregularities in alignment. 
(h)  No lot shall be recorded for residential or other use unless the land is suitable for the use permitted by the zoning ordinance† and intended for the land. Among other considerations, suitability shall include freedom from extraordinary flooding or storm hazard and adverse soil and ground water conditions. [] 
(i)  Any lot created by subdivision which meets the area and dimensional requirements of some of the uses in the zoning district in which it is located, but not all uses, and is thus restricted by the zoning ordinance as to use, shall have such restriction clearly noted on the plat. 
(j)  Each plat of any area adjacent to a tidal shoreline or drainageway on which for any lot along the banks thereof there is a slope of eight (8) percent or greater shall contain a statement as follows: "Further development of these lots including any filling or physical alteration of the lots may require additional permits from the City of Virginia Beach or other governmental agencies." 
(k)  If highly erodible soils are existing, as determined by the city soil scientist on any lot within or adjacent to floodplains, then the plat creating such lot shall contain a statement as follows: "Due to the high erodibility of the soils existing within or adjacent to floodplains, removal of existing vegetation or alteration of existing contours may accelerate erosion and may require additional permits from the City of Virginia Beach or other governmental agencies." 
(l)  All subdivision lots created in the floodplain must meet all requirements of the Floodplain Ordinance (Appendix K). 
(Ord. No. 1059, 7-14-80; Ord. No. 1330, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 1583, 1 27-86; Ord. No. 1732, 9-14-87; Ord. No. 1769, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 1770, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 1771, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 1944, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 2402, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 2666, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 3311, 11-26-13) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
*Cross reference—Zoning ordinance, App. A. 

--- () --- 
*Cross reference—Zoning ordinance, App. A. 

--- () --- 
†Cross reference—Zoning ordinance, App. A. 
 
Sec. 4.5. - Public sites and open spaces. 
It is required that residential developers meet the following recreational open space requirements to serve the residents of their developments: 
(a)  The developer shall reserve within his subdivision a parcel of land for open space and recreational purposes according to the following rates: 
Lot Size 	% of Total Land 
Required for 
Open Space 
Less than 5,000 sq. ft. 	15% 
5,000 sq. ft.—7,499 sq. ft. 	12% 
7,500 sq. ft.—9,999 sq. ft. 	10% 
10,000 sq. ft.—14,999 sq. ft. 	8% 
15,000 sq. ft.—19,999 sq. ft. 	7% 
20,000 sq. ft.—29,999 sq. ft. 	6% 
30,000 sq. ft.—39,999 sq. ft. 	5% 
Greater than 40,000 sq. ft. 	3% 
 
However, in subdivision where the resulting area to be reserved for recreational purposes would be less than one-half acre, and would serve no useful public purpose, the director of planning may waive the open space requirements. 
(b)  As an alternative to the requirement in (a) above, if mutually agreed to by the city and the developer, the developer may elect to meet the recreational open space requirement by one of the methods listed below. However, in subdivisions where the resulting area to be reserved for recreational purposes serves no useful public purpose, the city council may waive the open space requirements. 
(1)  The developer may dedicate at no cost to the city a parcel of land equal in size to one-half the area derived from (a) above. 
(2)  The developer may dedicate at no cost to the city a parcel of land lesser in size than one-half the area derived from (a) above, provided that he also installs facilities or other improvements on an approved schedule so that the total recreational amenity provided is, in the opinion of the planning director, equivalent to that which would be provided by (a) above. 
(3)  Any other arrangement mutually agreed to by the city council and the developer, provided that the recreational amenity made available is equivalent to that which would be provided by (a) above. 
(c)  As a further alternative to the requirements in (a) and (b) above, the developer may establish a homeowner's association to own and maintain open space and facilities. If the developer chooses this option, he shall deed the property and facilities to the homeowner's association. No property and/or facility shall be deeded to a homeowner's association which cannot be used as deeded for the intended purpose. The amount of open space provided and the nature, extent, and availability of facilities or other improvements provided must be sufficient, in the opinion of the planning director, to constitute a recreational amenity equivalent to that which would otherwise be provided by (a) above. 
(d)  All land provided for recreation must be easily accessible from all the lots of the subdivision and must be located on land well suited for recreational purposes. No land whose use for recreational purposes is significantly impeded by the presence of easements, soil conditions, topographic conditions, or other similar factors shall be included as land set aside for recreation. 
(e)  The developer must provide clearly defined street and pedestrian access in readily usable condition for the homeowners to the public sites and open space areas. 
(f)  Any reservation of land for public acquisition and use required under this provision shall be void if not exercised within five (5) years from the date of recordation of the subdivision agreement; provided, however, that the city council may release such reserved land at an earlier date if it is found to be no longer necessary to the public purpose. The compensation due the developer shall be an expressed element of the subdivision agreement. 
(g)  The developer shall be required to show in dotted lines on the final plat how he will develop any reserved areas in the event that the city elects not to acquire the reserved property. 
(Ord. No. 1106, 10-20-80; Ord. No. 1585, 2-10-86)  
Sec. 4.6. - Preservation of noteworthy features. 
In all subdivisions, to the maximum degree reasonably practicable, efforts shall be made to preserve historic sites, scenic points, large trees and other desirable natural growths, watercourses and other water areas, and other features worthy of preservation, either as portions of public sites and open spaces as described in section 4.5 above, or in such other form as to provide amenity to the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 919, 1-8-79)  
Sec. 4.7. - Condominium development. 
Any dedicated public street developed in conjunction with a condominium project adjacent to or within the condominium project but not as part of it shall comply with the requirements set forth in this ordinance as to design standards. This section shall not be construed as requiring the dedication of a public street within a condominium project. 
(Ord. No. 1090, 9-22-80)  
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 5.1. - Permanent monuments. 
Permanent monuments of material, size and length as prescribed in the Public Works Design Standards Manual, as approved by the council of the City of Virginia Beach, shall be placed at all block corners and at the tangent points of curves connecting intersecting street lines; at the points of curvature and tangency in curved street lines; at all corners in the exterior boundary of the subdivision except those inaccessible due to topography; and at such other points as may be designated by the director of public works. 
The location and character of such monuments shall be clearly designated on the final plat. 
Such monuments shall be set not less than three (3) nor more than nine (9) inches below the finished grade of the ground. 
Any developer, builder, owner, occupant, firm or corporation or any person shall take precautions to protect all monuments, and any monument which is moved or destroyed shall be immediately reported to the department of public works and shall be replaced as directed. 
(Ord. No. 762; Ord. No. 3621, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 5.2. - Streets and alleys. 
Streets and alleys shall be graded and surfaced in accordance with the Public Works Design Standards Manual, as approved by council of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(Ord. No. 762; Ord. No. 3621, 6-16-20) 
Cross reference— Streets, Ch. 33.  
Sec. 5.3. - Street signs and traffic-control devices. 
Street signs and traffic-control devices in accordance with the Public Works Design Standards Manual, as approved by the council of the City of Virginia Beach, shall be erected at all street intersections. 
(Ord. No. 762; Ord. No. 3621, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 5.4. - Street lights. 
Street lights shall be provided and installed: 
(a)  Along arterial or collector streets; 
(b)  In all multiple family, hotel, commercial and industrial districts; 
(c)  In such other locations as are found by the department of public works to require such lighting in the interests of safety and security for persons, property or traffic. 
Such lighting shall be provided and installed as set forth in the Public Works Design Standards Manual, as approved by the council of the City of Virginia Beach. The recorder subdivider shall pay to the city all costs involved in installation and all costs to be incurred during the first year of operation following installation, upon receipt of a certified bill. 
(Ord. No. 762; Ord. No. 3621, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 5.5. - Street and other drainage. 
Every subdivision shall have a drainage system adequate for the type of development proposed and so related to existing or potential surrounding development as to form a logical part of a coordinated system minimizing potential drainage problems for the general area. No plan or development shall take such form as to create potential or actual impoundment of water on, or discharge of water onto, adjacent property in such a manner as to (a) affect adversely existing development, or (b) increase problems of future development on such adjacent property, except with the written and recorded consent of the adjoining property owners affected and the approval of the department of planning. 
To these ends, the department of planning is empowered to require such changes in plans or to establish such minimum and maximum elevations and gradients in particular subdivisions or to require employment of such measures as onsite retention of storm water as necessary to provide for orderly and efficient development of coordinated drainage systems, even though the drainage proposed for a particular subdivision might be adequate for the subdivision itself. In addition, where adjoining lands are in districts with varying improvement requirements or in other cases where similar adjustments are necessary, the department of public works is empowered to establish such transitional requirements as to types of curbs and gutters, storm drains and the like as are appropriate and reasonably necessary in the circumstances of the case. 
(a)  [Curbs and gutters]. Curbs and gutters built in accordance with the Public Works Design Standards Manual, as approved by the council of the City of Virginia Beach shall be required, except as provided in subsection (c), on all streets, except when it is determined by the director of planning or his designee that existing soil or site conditions would make this requirement impractical or where the use of best management practices is better promoted otherwise, in which case a waiver or modification may be authorized, provided, however, that any such waiver or modification shall be put into writing and include the reasons therefor and be made a part of the permanent application record. 
(b)  Storm sewers and drainage. Where required by the director of public works, underground storm sewers in accordance with the Public Works Design Standards Manual, as approved by the council of the City of Virginia Beach, shall be installed, except as provided in subsection (c) and, except where such requirement is waived or modified under the provisions set forth in section 5.5(d). Elsewhere open drainage ways in accordance with the Public Works Design Standards Manual, as approved by the council of the City of Virginia Beach, shall be used. 
(c)  Roadside swales. Roadside swales designed with 3:1 side slopes to a maximum depth of eighteen (18) inches are permitted along all minor streets in areas zoned AG-1 Agricultural District and AG-2 Agricultural District. 
(d)  [Waiver or modification.] The director of the department of planning shall consider and may approve a waiver or modification to the requirements set forth in sections 5.5(a) and 5.5(b), for a subdivision, provided that the following are met: 
(i)  Each lot in the subdivision shall be no less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area; 
(ii)  Each lot shall provide area for no fewer than four (4) on-site parking spaces; 
(iii)  All open drainage systems shall be provided and designed in accordance with the performance standards and design criteria of the stormwater management ordinance; 
(iv)  The proposed system of open or natural drainage ways shall be an appropriate component of a stormwater management plan to be approved for the subdivision as part of the process for granting a waiver or modification under this section. Such stormwater management plan shall include, in addition to the requirements of section 1-6, Appendix D, the following elements: A tree inventory/protection plan meeting the requirements of section 1.4, Appendix E; a wetlands delineation; depicting the limits of tidal and non-tidal wetlands and a plan for avoiding impacts to identified wetlands to the maximum extent practicable, minimizing unavoidable impacts to the maximum extent practicable and a plan for compensating for impacts that cannot be avoided and minimized; provision for the protection or creation of a natural area buffer of sufficient width to prevent erosion, trap sediment in overland runoff, provide necessary maintenance access and provision for the protection of any other significant natural features in accordance with the design principles for "Sheet Flow to Conserved Open Space" contained in Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse, including steep slopes; 
(v)  The continued functioning and integrity of all open drainage systems and other components of a natural area protection plan not within the public right-of-way shall be ensured through deed restrictions, covenants or other means. There also shall be recorded through deed restrictions, covenants or other means acceptable to the director of the department of public works, a statement which advises all potential purchasers that the City of Virginia Beach will not be responsible for providing and/or bearing the cost of curbs and gutters if and when owners of lots in the subdivision desire such improvements; 
(vi)  Application for waiver or modification to curb and gutters and/or storm sewers and drainage may be considered in conjunction with request for reduced pavement widths as set forth under section 4.1(m) of this ordinance. 
(e)  [Indemnification of city.] Developer will indemnify, keep and hold the city, and its agents and employees, free and harmless from and against all contractual liability of developer and from and against all claims on account of injury to developer or any other person, firm or corporation, or damage to the property of the developer, purchaser or any other person, firm or corporation, and will defend the city, and its agents and employees, against all actions and settle all claims, damages, losses and expense arising from or growing out of the city's approval of the design, construction and/or installation of the said drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 762; Ord. No. 1404, 9-26-83; Ord. No. 1423, 12-5-83; Ord. No. 1980, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2058, 4-23-91; Ord. No. 2402, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 3339, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3621, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 5.6. - Sidewalks. 
Where constructed, sidewalks shall be in accordance with the Public Works Design Standards Manual, as approved by the council of the City of Virginia Beach and the standards established by the Americans With Disabilities Act. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of arterial or collector streets. The director of planning or his designee may require additional sidewalk width to match existing improvements. 
(b)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of minor streets within subdivisions proposed for multiple-family or commercial use and may be required on one (1) or both sides of minor streets in subdivisions proposed for industrial use, if the director of planning finds such requirement necessary in view of desirable continuity of flow of substantial pedestrian traffic. The director of planning or his designee may require additional sidewalk width to match existing improvements. 
(c)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on one (1) side of each minor street within subdivisions proposed for one-family, two-family or townhouse residential use and where minimum lot width requirements as specified in the zoning ordinance [6] are less than one hundred (100) feet. As an exception to this requirement, no sidewalk is required where not more than twenty-five (25) dwelling units could be constructed on property served by the street. This applies only if the street could not reasonably be extended to serve more dwelling units. The director of planning or his designee may require additional sidewalk width to match existing improvements. 
(d)  No sidewalks shall be required on minor streets in districts zoned for one-family residential use where the minimum lot width requirements as specified in the zoning ordinance [7] are one hundred (100) feet or more. 
(e)  Supplementary to the above requirements and notwithstanding any exceptions or exclusions made therein, where sidewalks required above fail to provide adequate access to schools, along pedestrian routes where substantial concentration of school pedestrian traffic is anticipated, sidewalks forty-eight (48) inches in width shall be provided on both sides of streets along the route of such concentration and within the subdivision; provided, however: 
(1)  No such sidewalks shall be required to be extended more than one-half (½) mile from the point of access to the school grounds by normal pedestrian routes, except to include the full length of a block which would otherwise have such sidewalks for only a portion of its full length; 
(2)  Where the pattern of proposed and potential development is such that safe, logical and convenient routing of school pedestrian traffic requires a sidewalk on only one (1) side of the street, the director of planning may permit the provision of only one (1) such sidewalk; and 
(3)  Where the director of planning finds that walkways other than in the form of sidewalks at the edges of streets would provide safe, logical and convenient routing of pedestrian traffic, such walkways, constructed in a manner found by the city engineer to be appropriate to their purpose, may substitute for such sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 2355, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 2402, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 2768, 8-5-03; Ord. No. 3621, 6-16-20) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, App. A. 

--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, App. A. 
 
Sec. 5.7. - Driveway entrances. 
Driveway entrances shall be in accord with the Public Works Design Standards Manual, as approved by the council of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(Ord. No. 762; Ord. No. 3621, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 5.8. - Water supply. 
(a)  Every subdivision shall have a water supply system adequate for the type of development proposed and so related to existing or potential surrounding development as to form a logical part of a coordinated system, minimizing potential water supply problems for the general area. Each lot in subdivisions shall be provided with water from the public water system when reasonably available. If the director of public utilities should determine that public water is not reasonably available, then privately supplied general and/or individual water supply systems shall be constructed, and shall be designed to facilitate later connection with the public system. Such privately supplied facilities shall be permitted only after approval by the state board of health and the city department of health. All publicly supplied systems provided by the developer shall be offered for dedication to the City of Virginia Beach at no cost to the city, upon completion. The system shall include, but it shall not be limited to, the necessary mains, laterals, service connections, valves, hydrants, and accessories to supply water to the various lots of the proposed development. 
All privately supplied general systems shall be offered for dedication to the City of Virginia Beach at such time as a public water supply is determined by the director of public utilities to be reasonably available. All offers of dedication of any system shall be deemed to include all necessary easements and rights-of-way for the maintenance and operation thereof. 
Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit installation of private irrigation facilities not used for domestic water supply. 
(b)  All water supply systems, other than private individual systems, shall be planned and constructed to meet the standards and specifications of the department of public utilities. Developer shall, at its expense, have plans and specifications for the system prepared by a professional engineer certified by the State of Virginia. Before construction is commenced, all plans and specifications must be reviewed by and have the approval of the department of public utilities. The developer shall notify the city prior to starting of construction so that inspection may be provided. Any work covered prior to inspection may be required to be uncovered at the developer's expense. All construction shall be in accordance with approved plans. No changes shall be made in approved plans without further approval by the department of public utilities. 
(c)  Fire hydrants shall be installed in the manner and at locations required by the specifications of the department of public utilities. Developer shall pay the fees in connection therewith as set forth in Chapter 37 of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach, Virginia. 
(d)  Developer shall pay all costs of inspection, testing and chlorination, and such other costs as may be involved in the connection to the public water supply. Developer shall also pay such connection, line and tap fees as may be specified by city ordinance. No water shall be furnished by the city to any lot created under this ordinance until all charges are paid. 
(e)  Developer shall furnish a completion bond, with corporate surety or other security, as approved by the city attorney, in an amount as required by the director of public utilities, which bond shall remain and be in full force and effect until a final inspection of the system is made and the city accepts such system. No bond shall be required to remain in full force and effect beyond the final inspection if a public water supply will not be available within a reasonable time after completion of the said system. 
(f)  Developer will indemnify, keep and hold the city free and harmless from any contractual liability of developer and from all claims on account of injury to developer, lessee, purchaser or any other person, firm or corporation, or damage to the property of the developer, lessee, purchaser or any other person, firm or corporation arising from or growing out of the design, approval, construction, and/or installation of the said water distribution system. 
(g)  The city may suspend supplying water to any subdivision, including any property leased or purchased in said subdivision, at any time upon three (3) days' written notice to that effect given to any such owner of property by the director of public utilities, when in the director's judgement: 
(1)  The use of water is excessive or interferes with or impairs the maintenance and operation of the city's distribution; or 
(2)  Developer or any purchaser or lessee of any property in the subdivision fails, refuses or neglects to observe or comply with any of the terms and conditions of this ordinance, or any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation governing water supply services in the city; or 
(3)  An emergency exists and suspension of the service is required on account thereof, which may be done without notice. 
(Ord. No. 643; Ord. No. 826, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 1411, 10-24-83) 
Cross reference— Water supply, Ch. 37.  
Sec. 5.9. - Sanitary sewerage. 
(a)  Every subdivision shall have a sanitary sewerage system adequate for the type of development proposed and so related to existing or potential surrounding development as to form a logical part of a coordinated system, minimizing potential sanitary sewerage problems for the general area. Each lot in subdivisions shall be connected with the public sewerage system when reasonably available. If the director of public utilities should determine that public sewerage is not reasonably available, then privately supplied general and/or individual sewerage systems shall be constructed, and shall be designed to facilitate later connection with the public system. Such privately supplied facilities shall be permitted only after approval by the state board of health and the city department of health. All publicly serviced systems provided by the developer shall be offered for dedication to the City of Virginia Beach at no cost to the city, upon completion. The system shall include, but shall not be limited to, the necessary force mains, sewer mains, laterals, lines, pipes, pumping stations and other facilities needed to service the various lots of the proposed development. 
All privately supplied general systems shall be offered for dedication to the City of Virginia Beach at such time as public sewerage is determined by the director of public utilities to be reasonably available. All offers of dedication of any system shall be deemed to include all necessary easements and rights-of-way for the maintenance and operation thereof. Such dedications shall be limited to facilities capable of serving more than one customer, plus laterals up to but outside private property lines. 
(b)  All sanitary sewerage systems, other then private individual systems, shall be planned and constructed to meet the standards and specifications of the department of public utilities. Developer will, at its expense, have plans and specifications for the system prepared by a professional engineer certified the State of Virginia. Before construction is commenced, all plans and specifications must be reviewed by and have the approval of the department of public utilities. The developer shall notify the city prior to starting of construction so that inspection may be provided. Any work covered prior to inspection may be required to be uncovered at the developer's expense. All construction shall be in accordance with approved plans. No changes shall be made in approved plans without further approval by the department of public utilities. Upon final approval of the system, city will notify the developer in writing when the city will receive sewage originating in the area and will specify the date upon which the developer may discharge sanitary sewage into the city system. 
(c)  Individual sewerage systems shall be permitted only when approved by the director of public health, upon findings that the type of system proposed will be effective in the area in which it is proposed to be used, and will not create health hazards on the lot, on adjacent property, or in the form of unlawful pollution of water. The director of public health may prohibit certain types of systems in areas to which they are not adapted, may require the use of other systems, may specify increases in lot sizes above those generally required if necessary to make such systems effective, and may specify the manner in which such systems are to be located or designed to meet the needs of particular sites or areas. 
If the director of public health should determine that any land proposed for subdivision should be neither approved nor disapproved for septic tank installation, but instead approved subject to compliance with criteria for septic tank installation in poorly drained soil, then he shall require a land management plan consisting of a location of proposed septic tank or tanks and a proposed drainage plan to be submitted for his approval. Furthermore, he shall require covenants providing for satisfactory construction, repair, maintenance, and operation of the total system at the cost of the landowner. Such covenants are to be executed and recorded prior to his approval of the final plat. Further, in such case, the final plat shall make reference by general note to the conditions of approval and to the deed book and page number of the recorded covenant. 
(d)  Where general sewerage systems provided by the developer include pumping stations, where on-site standby power is not provided by the developer, the developer will be required to deposit with the department of public utilities the sum of one thousand one hundred thirty three dollars ($1,133.00) from July 1, 2008 to June 30, 2009, and one thousand six hundred sixty six dollars ($1,666.00) effective July 1, 2009, per pumping station to be used for the purchase of emergency portable equipment. 
(e)  Developer shall pay all costs of engineering and inspection, landscaping, data communications, and such other costs as may be involved in the connection to the public sewerage system. Landscaping fees shall be in the sum of one thousand five hundred seventy dollars ($1,570.00) from July 1, 2008 to June 30, 2009, and one thousand six hundred thirty nine dollars ($1,639.00) effective July 1, 2009. Developer shall also pay such connection, line and tap fees as may be specified by city ordinance. No sewerage service shall be furnished by the city to any lot created under this ordinance until all charges are paid; provided, however, that in case of a hardship, temporary use may be made where the method of handling is jointly approved by the director of public utilities and the director of public health and where the developer or lot owner accepts full responsibility and bears the cost of such operation. 
(f)  Developer shall furnish a completion bond, with corporate surety or other security, as approved by the city attorney, in an amount as required by the director of public utilities, which bond shall remain and be in full force and effect until final inspection of the system is made and the city accepts such system. No bond shall be required to remain in full force and effect beyond the final inspection if public sewerage will not be available within a reasonable time after completion of the said system. 
(g)  Developer will indemnify, keep and hold the city free and harmless from any contractual liability of developer and from all claims on account of injury to developer, lessee, purchaser, or any other person, firm or corporation, arising from or growing out of the design, approval, construction, and/or installation of the said sewerage system. 
(h)  Developer will not discharge into the sewerage system any storm water, surface or subsurface water. Also, he will not discharge any waste, effluent or other matter prohibited by any ordinance, rule, or regulation of the city or any other appropriate agency or government having jurisdiction thereof. Developer will not permit under any circumstances the discharge of sewage originating on any other property or premises, either directly or indirectly, into said sewerage system. Developer may, with the approval of the city, agree with owners of adjacent properties to construct joint facilities. 
(i)  City shall have the right at any and all times to make, connect, or permit the connection of any other sewer or sewer connections or extensions with the said sewerage system, at any point or points, and shall have the right at any and all times to take and dispose of the sanitary sewage through the said system in the area, from persons beyond and adjacent to said subdivision and originating on other properties. City shall have the further right to make collection charges therefor. 
(Ord. No. 643, Ord. No. 681; Ord. No. 734; Ord. No. 735; Ord. No. 826, 11-21-77; Ord. No. 3020, 5-13-08) 
Cross reference— Sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28; App. H.  
Sec. 5.10. - Underground utilities. 
(a)  Except as provided below, transmission, distribution, and customer service utility facilities carrying or used in connection with electric power, streetlights, telephone, telegraph, cable television, petroleum, gas or steam, shall be placed below the surface of the ground. Exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  Equipment such as electric distribution transformers, switchgear, meter pedestals, telephone pedestals, meters, service connections and the like normally installed aboveground in accordance with accepted utility practices for underground distribution. 
(2)  Temporary overhead facilities required for construction purposes. 
(3)  High tension transmission lines, fifty thousand (50,000) volts or more. 
All installations shall be in accord with applicable codes and the Public Works Design Standards Manual, as approved by the council of the City of Virginia Beach and shall be in accordance with charges as approved by the state corporation commission. 
The requirements of this provision shall not apply to subdivisions with lot sizes of three (3) acres or more. 
(b)  Construction, installation and maintenance of any of the facilities mentioned in this section and located in Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 109 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance [Appendix F]. 
(Ord. No. 1490, 10-8-84; Ord. No. 2008, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2793, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 3621, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 5.11. - Condominium development. 
Any dedicated public street developed in conjunction with a condominium project adjacent to or within the condominium project but not as part of it shall comply with the requirements set forth in this ordinance as to required improvements. This section shall not be construed as requiring the dedication of a public street within a condominium project. 
(Ord. No. 1090, 9-22-80)  
PLATS AND DATA 
 
Sec. 6.1. - Preliminary plats and data—Generally. 
The preliminary plat shall be at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet and may be of one or more sheets as necessary. The plat shall include or be accompanied by the following: 
(a)  Name of subdivision (not duplicating the name of an existing subdivision), names and addresses of owner(s) of record, subdivider and person or firm responsible for preparation of preliminary plat, date of drawing, number of sheets, north point and scale. 
(b)  A boundary survey or survey of record, including map book and page reference, deed book and page reference, or instrument number, locating and identifying adjacent or abutting streets (existing or platted), subdivisions, unsubdivided parcels, easements, water areas, and the like, and all visible monuments. 
(c)  Location and identification of existing features and improvements within the tract, including streets, structures, water areas by type (including areas in marsh or subject to frequent inundation), wooded areas, easements, installed utilities and other important details. Information on soil and subsoil conditions shall be provided in the form and manner indicated in the Public Works Design Standards Manual. Plats of tracts abutting on or containing natural or artificial bodies of water shall show the approximate high water lines, bulkhead and pier, head lines if officially established, and top of bank and toe of slope. 
(d)  Location and identification of proposed uses within the tract. 
(e)  Location, identification and widths of proposed streets, alleys and easements. 
(f)  Location of proposed water mains, sanitary sewers, and storm sewers and catch basins, with indication of proposals for disposal of surrounding drainage if other than or in addition to storm drains. 
(g)  Lot lines, with dimensions. Where sewerage is to be by septic tanks or similar devices, percolation test results may be required for each lot or selected lots at locations indicated by the director of public health. Where groundwater levels or soil conditions may lead to difficulties with proposed septic tanks or with structures, the director of public health or the director of planning or his designee may require test results on subsurface soil and groundwater conditions for each lot or selected lots indicated by such officials. 
(h)  Location and dimensions of all parcels proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use or common use by occupants of the subdivision, with conditions or restrictions, if any, of such dedication or reservation. 
(i)  Private restrictions, if any, proposed to be included in deeds. 
(j)  Topographic map of a suitable scale and contour interval, as determined by the Planning Director, where a grading and drainage plan is required by the Public Works Design Standards Manual, as approved by the council of the City of Virginia Beach. Vertical control shall be based on North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
(k)  Location and identification of existing graves and objects or structures marking a place of burial. 
(l)  Where Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas lie within a subdivision, the preliminary plat shall, unless waived by the planning director, delineate the boundaries of all resource protection areas, resource management areas, intensely developed areas and reserve sewage disposal drainfield sites as required by Sections 106 and 107 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance [Appendix F]. 
(m)  Where floodplains lie within a subdivision, the preliminary plat shall delineate the boundaries of all floodways and special flood hazard areas as required by the Floodplain Ordinance (Appendix K) of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(n)  Where wetlands are within a subdivision, the preliminary plat shall identify and delineate the location of all such wetlands. 
(o)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 1904, 8-14-89; Ord. No. 2008, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2155, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2377, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 2402, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 2666, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 2793, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2918, 1-31-06; Ord. No. 3198, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 3311, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3339, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3621, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 6.2. - Same—Special provisions. 
(a)  If, during pre-application conference as described in section 3.1, it is determined that portions of the requirements set forth in section 6.1 above are unnecessary in the particular case because of the small number of lots involved or for other reasons, such requirements may be waived in the case; provided, however, that any such waiver shall be in writing with reasons therefor, signed by an appropriate officer of the city, and shall become part of the record on the application. 
(b)  At the time of submission of preliminary plats and related data, or at any time thereafter, appropriate officers of the city may request and the applicant shall supply additional information required in the circumstances of the particular case. Time elapsing between the request and provision of the information shall be added to the general time limitation of processing. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit submittal of preliminary plats and data in the form required for final plats and data, for use in both preliminary and final review.  
Sec. 6.3. - Final plats and data. 
The final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a certified civil engineer or land surveyor in ink on an approved durable tracing-medium at a scale of 1" = 100' unless a different scale is approved by general rule for classes of cases or by the planning director in a particular case. All original tracings shall be presented between the following sizes: 8½" × 11½" and 18½" × 24½". Lettering shall be no less than one-tenth inch or 2.54 mm. in height. Lettering and line weight shall be no less than .013 inches or .3302 mm. Letter and line spacing for control pencil drawings shall be no less than .050 inches and for ink drawings no less than .040 inches. When more than one sheet is required, all sheets shall be numbered and of the same size, with match marks to guide preparation if composite maps, and an index map on a sheet of the same size as the sectional maps shall be filed, which shall show, among other things, sectional map numbers, all lot and block numbers, and street names. In addition, a small scale location map showing the property shall be required. The final plat shall show the following data, and shall be completed and processed as indicated: 
(a)  Subdivision name, date plat was prepared, graphic scale and north arrow. 
(b)  A certificate endorsed by a certified civil engineer or land surveyor indicating source of title of the owner of the land subdivided and place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. When the plat is of land acquired from more than one source, outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated on the plat. The certificate shall further state that the subdivision is entirely within lands owned by the subdivider and that monuments shown on the plat have been put in place and that their location and character are correctly shown. 
(c)  Appropriate legal documents in form for recording. 
(d)  Each plat or deed of dedication to which the plat is attached shall contain a statement as follows: "The platting or dedication of the following described land (here insert correct description of the land subdivided) is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned (indicate owners, proprietors and trustees, if any)…" This statement shall be signed by such persons and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgement of deeds. When thus executed and acknowledged, such plat, upon final approval and in accord with other provisions specified herein, shall be filed and recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the city. 
(e)  On the face of the plat, a place shall be prepared to receive the signature, with date, of the planning director and other affected agencies, which signatures, when affixed, shall indicate approval of the final plat. A 2? × 3? box shall be provided in the upper right-hand corner of the first sheet to receive the recording information from the Clerk of the Circuit Court. All required signatures shall be in a durable ink. 
(f)  All linear and angular dimensions for locating boundaries of the subdivisions, lots, streets, alleys, public and private easements. Linear dimensions shall be expressed in feet and hundredths of a foot. Angular measurements shall be expressed by bearings. All curve data shall be expressed by a curve table on the face of the plat, each curve being tabulated and numbered to correspond with the respective numbered curves shown on its respective sheet throughout the plat. The curve data shall include the curve number, arc, delta, radius, tangent, chord and the chord bearing. Dimensions, both linear and angular, shall be determined by an accurate control survey in the field which shall be checked for closure and must balance and close within 1 to 10,000. Horizontal control shall be based on the Virginia State Plane Coordinate System, South Zone, NAD 1983/1993 (High Accuracy Reference Network) (HARN). A minimum of two (2) coordinate values must be shown on each sheet of the plat, expressed in U.S. Survey Feet. No plat showing plus or minus distance will be approved. Plan and profile sheets shall be provided on all new streets and underground utilities, as required by Public Works Design Standards Manual or department of public utilities, as approved by the council of the City of Virginia Beach. The director of public works or director of public utilities may require such office and field checks, respectively, as necessary to assure the accuracy of the plat. 
(g)  Description and location of all monuments, found or set, shall be shown on the face of the plat and clearly indicated in a legend provided on at least one sheet. 
(h)  The boundary of the property being subdivided, names of all proposed streets, and boundaries of all property within the subdivision intended to be dedicated to public use. In resubdivisions of existing recorded lots, existing lot lines shall be shown by dotted lines, resubdivisions by full lines. The map book, deed book, or instrument number reference of the document creating the property being resubdivided shall be specified. 
(i)  Exact locations, lengths and bearings of all existing boundary lines of blocks, public grounds, streets, alleys and easements partially or wholly within the property being subdivided and their legal reference. 
(j)  Exact locations and widths of all proposed public or private easements, streets and alleys. 
(k)  Angles of departure of adjoining property, street and alley lines, with names of abutting recorded subdivisions. Unsubdivided abutting acreage property shall be designated by the names of owners with deed book reference. 
(l)  Widths and names of abutting or adjoining roads, streets and alleys, along with the Map Book, Deed Book, or instrument number reference for the existing right-of-way. 
(m)  A definite bearing and distance tie shall be shown to existing street intersections where possible and reasonably convenient. 
(n)  Exact length and bearing of all lot lines, provided that where lines in any rectangular tier of lots are parallel, it shall be sufficient to mark the bearings of the outer lines thereof. 
(o)  Designating symbols for all lots and blocks. If the finished plat consists of one section of a proposed larger subdivision, then the block numbers shall run consecutively throughout the several sections of the entire subdivision and each section shall be designated by letter or number. All lots in each block shall be consecutively lettered or numbered. 
(p)  All plats of property abutting on or containing any natural or artificial bodies of water shall show the approximate high water lines, bulkhead and pierhead lines, if officially established, top to bank and toe of slope, and where such lines are intersected by lot or block lines, measurements locating such intersections shall be given along such lot or block lines. 
(q)  When any subdivision plat or map is presented for recordation, in addition to the requirements now in effect, there shall be added the source of title of the immediate grantor of the property being added. 
(r)  Each final plat in any agricultural district shall contain a statement as follows: "THIS SUBDIVISION IS LOCATED IN AN AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT AND MAY BE SUBJECT TO NOISE, DUST, ODOR, CHEMICAL SPRAYING, AND THE LIKE AS THE RESULT OF THE RAISING OF CROPS AND LIVESTOCK ON NEARBY PROPERTY." 
(s)  The tax map reference number or geographic parcel identification number (GPIN #) for each lot and/or parcel being created or referenced by the plat. 
(t)  Reserved. 
(u)  Every final plat of a subdivision containing any land located in a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall state as follows: "ALL OR A PORTION OF THIS SUBDIVISION IS LOCATED IN A CHESAPEAKE BAY PRESERVATION AREA AND IS SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE CHESAPEAKE BAY PRESERVATION AREA ORDINANCE." 
(v)  Every final plat of a subdivision containing any land located within a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall delineate the boundaries of all resource protection areas, including buffer areas, resource management areas, and reserve sewage disposal drainfield sites as required by Sections 106 and 107 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Ordinance [Appendix F]. 
(w)  Reserved. 
(x)  Every final plat with land located within a special flood hazard area shall provide base flood elevations and flood zone designation, per the Floodplain Ordinance (Appendix K) and the FIRM (Flood Insurance Rate Map). 
(y)  Effective October 27, 1998, every final plat of a subdivision containing any land located in an aircraft accident potential zone as designated on the geometric specifications and height limitations map and/or in noise zone greater than 75 dB Ldn, 70-75 dB Ldn, 65-70 dB Ldn or less than 65 dB Ldn, as designated on the city zoning map, shall delineate the boundaries of such zones and such plat shall state as follows: "THIS SITE LIES WITHIN AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT POTENTIAL ZONE AND/OR NOISE ZONE(S) AND MAY BE SUBJECT TO AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS AND/OR ABOVE AVERAGE NOISE LEVELS DUE TO ITS PROXIMITY TO AIRPORT OPERATIONS. NOISE ATTENUATION MEASURES FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION MAY BE REQUIRED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE AIRPORT NOISE ATTENUATION AND SAFETY ORDINANCE AND HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS HAVE BEEN IMPOSED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 202(b) OF THE CITY ZONING ORDINANCE." 
(z)  Every final plat shall contain a note that states the following: "THE MERIDIAN SOURCE OF THIS PLAT IS BASED ON THE VIRGINIA STATE PLANE COORDINATE SYSTEM, SOUTH ZONE, NAD 1983/1993 (HARN). COORDINATE VALUES SHOWN ARE EXPRESSED IN U.S. SURVEY FEET." 
(Ord. No. 628; Ord. No. 642; Ord. No. 762; Ord. No. 970, 7-16-79; Ord. No. 1401, 10-8-84; Ord. No. 1595, 4-14-86; Ord. No. 2008, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2155, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2224, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 2269, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2292, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2421, 9-24-96; Ord. No. 2515, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 2557, 7-13-99; Ord. No. 2572, 2-22-00; Ord. No. 2793, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2918, 1-31-06; Ord. No. 3089, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 3198, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 3311, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3621, 6-16-20)  
PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS ON IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 7.1. - Plans and specifications for general improvements. 
A.  Plans and specifications for general improvements in [a] subdivision shall be prepared and endorsed by a certified engineer. Manner of preparation and number of copies provided shall be as appropriate to the type of improvements and the requirements for local review, approval, inspection and recording, plus one copy for return to the subdivider or his agent, bearing certification of approval by the appropriate official or officials if approved, or if disapproved, indicating the reasons for such disapproval. 
Improvements for which such plans and specifications are required include all required improvements and any gas, water, sewer or electric light or power works, pipes, wires, fixtures or systems, or any telephone or community antenna television systems or the like in, on or under any streets, alleys or easements within the subdivision, and all other general improvements to be provided by the subdivider or his agent, including preparation of land by grading, clearing, filling or drainage. 
To the extent that specifications have been established by the city or other public agency having jurisdiction concerning a particular type of improvement, they may be included by reference and need not be restated in relation to a particular plan. 
B.  Plans and information on hauling operations associated with the excavation of stormwater management facilities. In addition to information required under the provisions of the subdivision regulations (appendix B), where sand, gravel, topsoil, fill or other excavated material from the excavation of a stormwater management facility will be hauled off site, the following information shall be submitted to the planning director: 
(1)  The names and addresses of all haulers; 
(2)  If the hauler is a corporation, the name and address of its corporate offices and registered agent; 
(3)  The proposed date on which the hauling operation will commence and the proposed date on which the operation will be completed; 
(4)  The total number of cubic yards of material to be hauled; 
(5)  The number, type, carrying capacity, and weight of vehicles to be used in the hauling operation on a daily basis; 
(6)  The location of all haul roads leading to public streets and highways within the hauling area; 
(7)  A statement listing the public streets to be used as haul routes to access an arterial or major street or highway; 
(8)  A statement of the methods to be used to maintain or repair any public street or highway to be used for hauling purposes; 
(9)  The location of the on-site haul road, the point at which the haul road intersects the public right-of-way, the nearest street intersections in all directions leaving the excavation site and all existing and proposed entrances on both sides of the public street within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed entrance; 
(10)  A detailed description of the on-site haul road and the entrance to the public right-of-way, including width, radii, composition of surface material and length of improved surface; 
(11)  Erosion and sediment control measures to be employed at the haul road entrance and all access points; 
(12)  The method by which dirt and dust will be controlled on the public streets and in the air; 
(13)  A traffic maintenance/control plan, including, but not limited to, sign type, size, color, lettering size and locations; 
(14)  Location and description of public structures and improvements immediately adjacent to and under the haul road entrance; and 
(15)  A description or plan of all proposed improvements to mitigate the traffic impacts associated with the hauling activity including, but not limited to, turn lanes, signalization, striping and other traffic control measures. 
(16)  If the hauled material will be deposited in the City of Virginia Beach, the address where the hauled material will be deposited and proof of current VPDES or VSMP permit coverage for the site where the material will be deposited. 
The planning director or his designee shall determine the acceptability of the hauling methods and routes and may disapprove a subdivision plat if: 
(1)  Under accepted engineering standards, it is determined that the public streets and highways to be used in the proposed hauling route cannot sustain the weight or frequency of the hauling vehicles without substantial damage thereto; 
(2)  The proposed hauling operation would render the streets and highways affected by the hauling unsafe for public travel; 
(3)  The noise or dust generated by the hauling operation is of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of persons of reasonable sensitivity, or to disturb or annoy the quiet, comfort or repose of reasonable persons who reside in close proximity to the hauling operation; or 
(4)  Any of the information required under this subsection is incomplete, incorrect or false. 
(Ord. No. 2412, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 3339, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 7.2. - Installation of improvements; inspections. 
Where permits are generally required by other regulations of the city, they shall be obtained before installation of improvements begin. In other cases, approval of plans and specifications by all agencies or officers required to pass thereon by state or local law shall constitute permission to proceed. 
During the preparation of land and the installation of general improvements, inspections shall be made to insure conformity with the plans, specifications and standards established by the laws of the city. Except where the nature and timing of such inspections is set forth generally by other regulations of the city, required inspections shall be indicated on the approved copy of the plans and specifications returned to the subdivider or his agent. 
Appropriate agencies of the city may make inspections at any time during the progress of the work, but if a required inspection has not been made by the time the work reaches the stage where such inspection is called for, the subdivider or his agent shall notify the agency involved not less than two (2) working days in advance of the time such inspection is requested, unless the agency involved has previously agreed to a shorter period for notification. The agency responsible for making the inspection shall not be required to do so with less than the required notice. These provisions shall not be construed to require inspection of construction or installation of their own facilities, by public service corporations that have received franchises from the City of Virginia Beach.  
Sec. 7.3. - Performance bond in lieu of installation. 
Where installations as required herein have not been made, in whole or in part, the city may accept for dedication for public use any right-of-way located within the subdivision which has constructed herein, or proposed to be constructed therein according to plans and specifications filed and approved, any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, drainage, traffic control, street lights, sewerage system, water system or other improvement, financed or to be financed other than by city funds, only if the owner or developer furnished to the city a subdivision agreement indicating completion date of the required improvements and a form of surety satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the estimated costs of remaining construction (with estimated costs agreed to by the departments of planning, parks and recreation and public works, and the department of public utilities where water or sewer facilities are concerned); however, in no case shall the amount of surety be less than twenty (20) percent of the total construction costs of the improvement. 
(Ord. No. 643; Ord. No. 762; Ord. No. 1335, 9-27-82; Ord. No. 2186, 10-13-92; Ord. No. 2520, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2823, 5-25-04)  
Sec. 7.4. - As-built construction drawings. 
As-built construction drawings for all improvements shall be provided on an approved durable tracing medium by the owner or developer and approved by the city prior to the release of the defect bond. 
(Ord. No. 2520, 1-12-99)  
Sec. 7.5. - Defect bond. 
With regard to any improvement to be accepted for dedication, maintenance or operation by the city, the owner or developer shall, at the time of city acceptance of responsibility, provide a form of surety satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the total construction costs of the improvements for coverage of costs of remedy of defects appearing in such improvements within two (2) years or such lesser time as may be deemed appropriate by the planning director; however, any items for which the developer has paid a fee or posted an escrow and which the developer is not responsible for constructing or installing shall not be included in the defect bond. 
(Ord. No. 1335, 9-27-82; Ord. No. 2520, 1-12-99)  
Sec. 7.6. - Release of bonds. 
Performance bonds or other sureties established in accordance with the provisions of section 7.3 shall be released when the director of planning or other affected official certifies that the requirements set forth therein have been met. On application by the owner or developer, portions of such bonds or other sureties may be released in proportion to the cost of the requirements certified by the director of public works or, in the case of water or sewer facilities, the director of public utilities as having been met; however, in no case shall the amount of surety be reduced to less than twenty (20) percent of the total construction costs of the improvement. 
Defect bonds or other sureties established in accordance with the provisions of section 7.5 shall be released at the end of two (2) years from the date of city acceptance of responsibility, or such lesser period of time deemed appropriate by the planning director, provided, however, that all improvements and requirements of this ordinance have been installed or met. Such release shall be in full if no defects have been found to exist, or if defects found to exist have been corrected by the owner or developer. If defects found to exist have been corrected by action of the city, the costs of such action shall be deducted from the defect bond. If defects found to exist within the two (2) year period have not been corrected after proper notice by the end of such period, the director of public works or, in the case of water or sewer facilities, the director of public utilities, shall estimate the cost of correction and such cost shall be deducted from the defect bond, and any balance remaining as a result of lesser actual than estimated cost shall be paid to the owner or developer. 
(Ord. No. 643; Ord. No. 762; Ord. No. 1335, 9-27-82; Ord. No. 2186, 10-13-92; Ord. No. 2402, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 2520, 1-12-99)  
Sec. 7.7. - Public acceptance of improvements or proposed dedications. 
The installation of improvements or the offer of dedications in subdivisions created hereafter under the terms of this ordinance shall in no case bind the city to accept such improvements or offers to dedicate. Upon certification of completion of required improvements as set forth in section 7.6, the director of planning or other affected official or, in the case of water and sewer facilities, the director of public utilities, is authorized to accept on behalf of the city such dedications or improvements as the city may then be prepared to accept and maintain. No city permit shall be issued and no city services extended to any lot within such subdivision until the requirements of this or other ordinances or lawful regulations of the city have been met in full. 
(Ord. No. 643; Ord. No. 2520, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 3339, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 7.8. - Consideration and action by the planning director or his designee. 
In considering and acting upon subdivision plats, the planning director or his designee shall take into consideration the public health, safety and welfare, the comfort and convenience of the public in general and of the immediate neighborhood in particular and may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be required in order that the result of the action may, to the maximum extent possible, further the expressed interest of the subdivision regulations and all city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2412, 8-13-96)  
FEES 
 
Sec. 8.1. - Plat fees. 
(a)  At the time preliminary subdivision plats are submitted, the following fees shall be due and payable: 
(1)  Residential two (2) lot plats: Three hundred thirty-six dollars ($336.00). 
(2)  Residential three (3) to five (5) lot plats: Eight hundred forty dollars ($840.00) plus one hundred sixty-eight dollars ($168.00) per lot. 
(3)  Residential six (6) or more lot plats: One thousand one hundred eighty-eight dollars ($1,188.00) plus seven dollars ($7.00) per lot after the first five (5) lots. 
(4)  Nonresidential plats: One thousand one hundred eighty-two dollars ($1,182.00) plus fifty-one dollars ($51.00) per lot. 
(5)  As an exception to the above, there shall be no preliminary subdivision review fee for residential lot plats in the AG-1 and AG-2 Agricultural Districts where standard conditional use permit fees have been paid. 
(b)  At the time construction plans are submitted, the following fees shall be due and payable from the effective date of this ordinance [July 1, 2014]: 
Area of proposed land disturbance 	Fee 
Greater than or equal to 2500 SF and less than 1 acre 	$900.00 
Greater than or equal to 1 acre and less than 5 acres 	$1,000.00 
Greater than or equal to 5 acres and less than 10 acres 	$1,333.00 
Greater than or equal to 10 acre and less than 50 acres 	$2,847.00 
Greater than or equal to 50 acres and less than 100 acres 	$5,877.00 
Greater than or equal to 100 acres 	$7,560.00 
Stormwater Management Review fees as required by Section 1-33 of the Stormwater Management Ordinance [Appendix D]. 
 
(c)  At the time of final subdivision plats are submitted, the following fees shall be due and payable from the effective date of this ordinance [July 1, 2014]: 
(1)  Residential two (2) lot plats: Three hundred thirty-six dollars ($336.00), if not submitted as a preliminary plat. 
(2)  Residential three (3) to five (5) lot plats: Eight hundred forty dollars ($840.00) plus one hundred sixty-eight dollars ($168.00) per lot, if not submitted as a preliminary plat. 
(3)  Residential six (6) to fifty (50) lot plats: One thousand one hundred eighty eight dollars ($1,188.00) plus seven dollars ($7.00) per lot after the first five (5) lots, if not submitted as a preliminary plat. 
(4)  Residential six (6) or more lot plans: Five hundred ninety-four dollars ($594.00) plus eight dollars ($8.00) per lot after the first five (5) lots, if submitted as a preliminary plat. 
(5)  Nonresidential plats: One thousand one hundred eighty-two dollars ($1,182.00) plus fifty-one dollars ($51.00) per lot, if not submitted as a preliminary plat. 
(6)  Nonresidential plats: Five hundred eighty-two dollars ($582.00) plus fifty-four dollars ($54.00) per lot, if submitted as a preliminary plat. 
(d)  If an applicant, at any time during subdivision review, submits a review, submits a revised plan or portion thereof, field change or makes a change to the plan under review not at the request of the City of Virginia Beach, such revision shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred sixty-eight dollars ($168.00) per sheet that is revised or changed. 
(e)  If a subdivision plat does not create a greater number of lots, such plat when submitted shall be accompanied by the following fees: 
(1)  Residential plat: Eighty-four dollars ($84.00). 
(2)  Nonresidential plats: Three hundred thirty-six dollars ($336.00). 
(3)  Amended because of error or omission: Eighty-four dollars ($84.00). 
(f)  When a plat is submitted encompassing land within a community development target area, no plat fee shall be due from property owners who qualify as low and moderate income as determined by the secretary of housing and urban development or by the Virginia Housing Development Authority under one or more of their rental assistance or homeowner mortgage programs. Through agreement with the city, waiver of plat fees may also be provided to builders who are building under the aforementioned programs for low and moderate income families. 
(g)  All fees shall be payable to the city treasurer. 
(h)  At the time easement or dedication plats are submitted a review fee in the amount of eighty-four dollars ($84.00) shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 1215, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 1431, 1-23-84; Ord. No. 1872, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 1972, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2090, 8-13-91; Ord. No. 2530, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2751, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 2809, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 3339, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3359, 7-1-14)  
Sec. 8.2. - Permit and inspection fees. 
At the time of installation of improvements, permit and inspection fees shall be as generally provided for permits and inspections specified in other ordinances of the city. [8] For permits and inspections not elsewhere specified, or for reinspection made necessary by failure to pass earlier inspections, fees shall be based on costs, as determined by the agency involved, and shall be payable within thirty (30) days from billing. Failure to pay within the period stipulated may be penal 
ized by a stop-work order or such other action as seems warranted in the circumstances of the case. 
(Ord. No. 1442, 3-12-84) 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Building code, § 8-26 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8.3. - Subdivision variance fees. 
Any appeal for a variance shall be accompanied by the following fees to cover the costs of processing the appeal: eight hundred ten dollars ($810.00). Such fee shall include all costs of notifications and advertising. 
(Ord. No. 684; Ord. No. 937, 4-23-79; Ord. No. 1872, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 1973, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2757, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 3277, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3549, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18)  
Sec. 8.4. - Plat vacation fees. 
Any application for the vacation of a plat or part thereof shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) to cover the cost of processing. 
(Ord. No. 790, 7-18-77; Ord. No. 1492, 10-8-84; Ord. No. 1606, 6-23-86)  
APPEALS 
 
Sec. 9.1. - Appeals from decisions of administrative officers. 
Where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this ordinance, the owner or subdivider or agent therefor may appeal to the circuit court of the city as prescribed by law. In the case of design standards and general procedural matters, the appeal shall be to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 919, 1-8-79)  
Sec. 9.2. - Modification of standards. 
The city council may modify design standards or other requirements of these regulations in order to preserve noteworthy features or otherwise enhance the amenity of neighborhoods, but such modification shall be made only upon findings that public purposes of these or other applicable regulations would be met to at least an equivalent degree by such modification. Where such modification is granted, the city council may attach such conditions and safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect general public interest or the character of the neighborhood, and may require a guarantee or bond to assure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 919, 1-8-79)  
Sec. 9.3. - Variances. 
The city council may authorize in specific cases such variances from the strict application of the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest when, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement will result in unnecessary hardships, provided that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
No variance shall be authorized by the city council unless it finds that: 
(a)  Strict application of the ordinance would produce undue hardship. 
(b)  The authorization of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property, and the character of the neighborhood will not be adversely affected. 
(c)  The problem involved is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of general regulations to be adopted as an amendment to the ordinance. 
(d)  The hardship is created by the physical character of the property, including dimensions and topography, or by other extraordinary situation or condition of such property, or by the use or development of the property immediately adjacent thereto. Personal or self-inflicted hardship shall not be considered as grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
(e)  The hardship is created by the requirements of the zoning district in which the property is located at the time the variance is authorized whenever such variance pertains to provisions of the zoning ordinance [9] incorporated by reference in this ordinance. 
Where a variance is granted, the city council may attach such conditions and safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect general public interest or the character of the neighborhood, and may require a guarantee or bond to assure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 842, 3-13-78; Ord. No. 919, 1-8-79) 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, App. A. 
 
Sec. 9.4. - Procedure for modification of standards and variances. 
Application for modification of standards or for variances to subdivision requirements shall be made to the city council and filed with the director of planning. The application shall be advertised for public hearing before the planning commission in the manner of a rezoning petition. The planning commission shall forward a recommendation to the city council within forty-five (45) days. After receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing and act upon the proposed application, granting the application in whole or in part, with or without modification, or denying it. 
(Ord. No. 919, 1-8-78)  
PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 10.1. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each lot or parcel of land subdivided, transferred or sold without compliance with the terms hereof and shall be required to comply with all provisions of the Subdivision Regulations. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from other lawful remedies. 
(Ord. No. 1053, 6-23-80; Ord. No. 2775, 7-1-03)  
SEPARABILITY 
 
Sec. 11.1. - Separability. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.  
EFFECTIVE DATE 
 
Sec. 12.1. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall become effective as of the date of its passage and certified copies filed in the office of the director of planning, clerk of council, and the clerk of the circuit court. 
ADOPTED by the city council of Virginia Beach, Virginia, June 22, 1970.  
APPENDIX C - SITE PLAN ORDINANCE[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 486 
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING SITE PLAN REGULATIONS FOR THE CITY OF VIRGINIA BEACH, PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS IN RELATION TO SITE PLANS, AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF SUCH REGULATIONS. 
BE IT ORDAINED by the council of the City of Virginia Beach, Virginia: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 486 is set out herein as it appeared in title III of the appendix to the 1965 Virginia Beach Code, as supplemented. Amendments have been added and are indicated by history notes appearing in parentheses at the end of the amended sections. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is derived, unamended, from Ordinance No. 486. 
Cross reference— Site plan ordinance not affected by Code or ordinance adopting Code, § 1-5(9); building regulations, Ch. 8; soil removal and other land-disturbing activities, Ch. 30; zoning ordinance, App. A; subdivision ordinance, App. B; tree planting, preservation and replacement, App. E; Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance, App. F; Storm Sewer System Discharge Ordinance, App. H. 
 
Sec. 1. - Definitions. 
1.1.  City agent. The director of planning or his designee hereinafter referred to as the city agent, is hereby charged with responsibility for coordinating the processing of site development plans. Accordingly, the director of planning or his designee is granted the authority necessary to coordinate the review process; and each city agency's review comments are to be made in writing in such form and following such procedure as may be prescribed by the director of planning or his designee, and shall be made a part of the permanent site development plan application record. 
Provided, however, that this grant of authority shall not be construed to give to the director of planning or his designee a veto over any other city agency's review comments, insofar as the comments relate directly to their operating functions as defined by the City Code. Whenever necessary, the office of the city manager shall arbitrate inter-agency conflicts. 
1.2.  Adequate. The term adequate shall mean standards and/or specifications as set forth in recognized engineering codes and regulations, as approved and recognized by national engineering organizations, except where such standards conflict with the Public Works Design Standards Manual, as approved by the council of the City of Virginia Beach, in which case the latter shall control. 
1.3.  Agricultural use. Shall mean any use devoted to the bona fide production for sale of plants and animals useful to man, as more specifically defined in section 58-769.5 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, and under those uniform standards as may be prescribed by the commissioner of agriculture and commerce, or those uses devoted to and meeting the requirements and qualifications for payments or other compensation pursuant to a soil conservation program under an agreement with an agency of the federal government. 
1.4.  Developer. Any person who desires or intends to improve or construct any improvement upon property as described, defined, and covered by this ordinance. 
1.5.  Dwelling unit. A "dwelling unit" is a room or rooms connected together, constituting an independent housekeeping unit for a family, and containing a single kitchen. 
1.6.  Dwelling, one-family. A building containing one dwelling unit. The term is general, including such specialized forms as one-family detached, one-family semi-detached, and one-family attached (row houses, townhouses, patio houses, and the like). Mobile homes, travel trailers, housing mounted on self-propelled or drawn vehicles, tents or other forms of temporary or portable housing are not included with the definition. 
1.7.  Dwelling, two-family. A building containing only two (2) dwelling units. 
1.8.  Dwelling, multiple-family. A building or group of buildings, other than a hotel, each building containing three (3) or more dwelling units. 
1.9.  Equivalent residential unit (ERU). The equivalent impervious area of a single-family residential developed property per dwelling unit located within the city based on the statistical average horizontal impervious area of a single-family residence in the city. An equivalent residential unit (ERU) equals two thousand two hundred sixty-nine (2,269) square feet of impervious surface area. 
1.10.  Reserved. 
1.11.  Landscape design. The planned treatment of land, structures and flora complementing building construction or land development. 
1.115  Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44CFR § 60.3. 
1.12.  Parcel. A piece, parcel, lot, tract or site or other dimension of land. 
1.13.  Planning director. The director of the department of planning or his duly authorized designee. 
1.14.  Site development plan. Detailed drawings indicating all building construction and land improvements including landscape treatments which may be required by the zoning ordinance, or in accordance with any city council action taken pursuant thereto, or by any other ordinance of the City of Virginia Beach. 
1.15.  Zoning lot. A lot or any portion thereof, or contiguous lots of the same ownership within a single zoning district which are to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. For the purpose of this definition, lots of the same ownership separated solely by an alley of no more than twenty (20) feet in width and by a distance not exceeding the width of the alley shall be considered contiguous. 
1.16.  Undeveloped property. Either vacant land, or land with a building, the existing use of which differs from its present zoning district classification, or the existing use of which differs from its present zoning district classification, or the existing use of which is proposed for a change of occupancy. 
1.17.  Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source and floodplains subject to special restrictions as defined in Appendix K, section 4.10. 
1.18.  Wetlands. Areas shall include those defined in section 1401 (e)(f)(j) of the City Zoning Ordinance (Appendix A) and shall also include tidal wetlands, which are vegetated and nonvegetated wetlands, as defined in section 1401 of the City Zoning Ordinance (Appendix A); and nontidal wetlands, which are those wetlands, other than tidal wetlands, that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as identified or referred to in the City of Virginia Beach Soil Survey by soil names Backbay Mucky Peat; Duckston portion of Corolla-Duckston Fine Sands; Dorovan Mucky Peat; Duckston Fine Sand; Nawney Silt Loam; Pamlico Mucky Peat; Pamlico-Lakehurst Variant Complex; Rapahannock Mucky Peat, Strongly Saline or Pocaty Peat; and any other lands which under normal conditions are saturated to the ground surface and connected by surface flow and contiguous to tidal wetlands or tributary streams. 
(Ord. No. 614; Ord. No. 784; Ord. No. 2146, 6-25-92; Ord. No. 2225, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 2403, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 2665, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 3312, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3462, 9-20-16; Ord. No. 3622, 6-16-20) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, App. A.  
Sec. 2. - Uses requiring site plan review. 
2.1.  After the effective date of this ordinance, the developer of any parcel desiring to put it to use shall submit a site plan to the city agent. 
2.2.  The following site uses, including additions, alterations or changes in the following uses, shall require site plan review: 
(A)  Any structure or improvement permitted by the zoning ordinance as a principal or conditional use in any district, with the following exceptions: 
1.  Agricultural uses, as defined in this ordinance. 
2.  Single or two-family homes and ancillary single-family homes previously approved as a subdivision in accordance with the subdivision ordinance adopted June 22, 1970, and as amended. 
(B)  Condominiums. The sections of this ordinance which require standard site improvements shall pertain to condominium development. 
(C)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision A hereof, any development or redevelopment having a construction footprint exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall be subject to a plan of development process in accordance with Section 107 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance [Appendix F]. The terms "development," "redevelopment" and "construction footprint" shall be as defined in Section 103 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1088, 9-15-80; Ord. No. 2009, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2795, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2913, 12-20-05) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, App. A; subdivision ordinance, App. B.  
Sec. 3. - Procedures. 
3.1.  Preapplication conference. Before filing application for approval of a site development plan, the developer may confer with the city agent and such other agencies of the city as he or the agent deems advisable concerning the general proposal. Such action does not require formal application, fees, filing of a site development plan, and is not to be construed as application for approval in computing time limitations in relation thereto. 
3.2. Procedure for site development plan approval: 
A.1.  The developer shall cause to be prepared a site development plan with other material as set forth in sections 4 and 5. 
A.2.  At the time the site development plan is submitted, the following fees shall be due and payable: 
(a)  Single-family and duplex       Fee 
Individual single-family dwelling .....$75.00 
Two single-family dwellings on the same lot .....$330.00 
One duplex on one lot .....$330.00 
(b)  All other site development not listed above: 
Area of proposed 
land disturbance       Fee 
Greater than or equal to 2500 SF and less than 1 acre .....$900.00 
Greater than or equal to 1 acre and less than 5 acres .....$1,000.00 
Greater than or equal to 5 acres and less than 10 acres .....$1,333.00 
Greater than or equal to 10 acres and less than 50 acres .....$2,847.00 
Greater than or equal to 50 acres and less than 100 acres .....$5,877.00 
Greater than or equal to 100 acres .....$7,560.00 
(c)  Stormwater Management Review fees as required by Section 1-33 of the Stormwater Management Ordinance [Appendix D]. 
(d)  If an applicant, at any time during site plan review, submits a review, submits a revised plan or portion thereof, field change or makes a change to the plan under review not at the request of the City of Virginia Beach, such revision shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred sixty-eight dollars ($168.00) per sheet that is revised or changed. 
A.3.  At the time any other type of site plan is submitted a review fee in the amount of eighty-four dollars ($84.00) shall be required. 
A.4.  At the time easement or dedication plats are submitted a review fee in the in the amount of eighty-four dollars ($84.00) shall be required. 
All fees shall be payable to the city treasurer. 
B.  After the site development plan, related materials and fees have been submitted, it shall be reviewed and processed by the city agent and other affected city agencies for conformity to this ordinance and other applicable regulations. The city agent shall act upon the site development plan and related material as submitted by the developer, or as modified by the site development review process, within twenty (20) working days, unless extensive modification to the plan or extenuating circumstances require additional time, and if approved, shall certify its approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall indicate its disapproval and the reasons therefor. 
C.  The action of the city agent shall be noted on all copies of the site development plan to be retained in the record, referenced and attached to any changes or conditions determined. One such copy shall be returned to the developer, and others retained as required for records or further action of the department or other affected agencies of the city. 
D.1.  Building permits shall be issued in accordance with approved site development plans. A copy of the approved site plan shall be retained in the records of the building inspector's office and all building and occupancy permits shall conform to the provisions of said site development plan. 
D.2.  Prior to issuance of a building permit, the developer shall furnish to the city a certified check or bond with surety satisfactory to the city attorney. The check or bond shall be in the amount of the estimated construction costs for all public improvements to be accepted for dedication, maintenance and operation by the city. Estimated construction costs shall be in accordance with the approved site development plans; and the amount thereof shall be subject to the approval of the department of public works and the department of public utilities. 
D.3.  For development or redevelopment subject to the plan of development process set forth in Section 107 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance [Appendix F], there shall also be furnished a certified check, bond, irrevocable letter of credit or other surety satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the estimated cost, including materials, of installation of required landscaping. Cost estimates shall be based upon the approved plan of development and shall be subject to the approval of the director of development services. The terms "development" and "redevelopment" shall be as defined in section 103 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance. 
E.1.  Approval of the site development plan shall be void unless a building permit has been issued or use of the land has commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of approval. Upon request, revalidation of the site plan may be granted for an additional ninety (90) days if all factors of the original site plan review are the same; provided written notice requesting revalidation is received by the city agent prior to expiration of the original one hundred eighty (180) day period. 
E.2.  A stop work order shall be put on the project if any improvements required on the approved site development plan are not adhered to during the development of the site. 
F.  When any improvement is to be accepted for dedication, maintenance or operation by the department of public utilities, the developer may be required to provide a certified check or bond (with surety acceptable to the city attorney) in the amount of ten (10) percent of the total construction costs of the project to cover the costs of any defects which may occur in such improvements within two (2) years after the date of acceptance by the city. The director of public utilities shall be responsible for determining when such security shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 1216, 8-24-81; Ord. No. 1269, 4-26-82; Ord. No. 1283, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 1873, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 1969, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2009, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2043, 3-12-91; Ord. No. 2531, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2750, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 2795, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2810, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 3340, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 4. - Information required on site development plan. 
4.1.  A site plan, prepared, stamped and endorsed by a registered engineer, surveyor or other persons duly licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia to practice as such, shall be submitted with every application for approval. A sufficient number of copies of the site plan shall be submitted, as the planning director shall require and shall contain the following information: 
A.  Property and ownership information: 
1.  A location map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,600 feet with the site plan clearly marked on the location map identifying the location of the property; 
2.  Present recorded property owner and map book and page reference, deed book and page, or instrument number reference of the site property; 
3.  Owners, lot numbers and map book/page or instrument number reference of all adjacent properties; 
4.  A boundary survey of the parcel prepared at a scale of one inch equals fifty (50) feet or larger; no sheet shall exceed 24 × 36 inches in size. The survey shall include the acreage and/or square footage of the site and indicate all boundaries by course and distance; 
5.  Iron pins 3/8 inch in diameter and 36 inches in length shall be shown and installed at all lot corners, points of tangents and any angle point along a given course of the parcel; 
6.  All property information shall be certified by the engineer or surveyor of the project; 
7.  Existing zoning; 
8.  Geographical parcel identification number; 
9.  Effective October 27, 1998, every site plan for a structure in the residential use group, as defined in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, containing any land located in an aircraft accident potential zone as designated on the geometric specifications and height limitations map and/or in noise zone greater than 75 dB Ldn, 70-75 dB Ldn, 65-70 dB Ldn or less than 65 dB Ldn, as designated on the city zoning map, shall delineate the boundaries of such zones and such site plan shall state as follows: "THIS SITE LIES WITHIN AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT POTENTIAL ZONE AND/OR NOISE ZONE(S) AND MAY BE SUBJECT TO AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS AND/OR ABOVE AVERAGE NOISE LEVELS DUE TO ITS PROXIMITY TO AIRPORT OPERATIONS. NOISE ZONE ATTENUATION MEASURES FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION ARE REQUIRED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE AIRPORT NOISE ATTENUATION AND SAFETY ORDINANCE AND HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS HAVE BEEN IMPOSED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 202(b) OF THE CITY ZONING ORDINANCE"; 
10.  An engineer's cost estimate for the construction of stormwater management facilities and all infrastructure located within the public rights-of-way and easements. 
11.  All sites located in the special flood hazard areas shall provide base flood elevations and flood zone designation, per the Floodplain Ordinance (Appendix K) and the FIRM (Flood Insurance Rate Map). 
B.  Existing and required site features and improvements: 
1.  Streets and easements, their names, rights-of-way status (public or private), numbers and widths. Type (class) and width of pavement, curbs, and sidewalks. 
2.  All property line and property line curve data or centerline and centerline curve data including radius, delta angle, length of arc, chord and tangent shall be shown on the site development plan. 
3.  Utilities of all types. 
4.  The topographic survey, showing the elevation of streets, alleys, buildings, structures, water courses and their names. The topography shall be shown by adequate spot elevations. The finished grade for the entire site shall be shown and the proposed lowest floor elevation of all buildings shall be a minimum of two (2) feet above the elevation of (a) the flood water of record of [or] (b) the intermediate flood level as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or (c) the flood level shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps, whichever is greater. All elevations shall be referenced to North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. All horizontal dimensions shown on the site development plan shall be in feet and decimals of a foot. All bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds. Additionally, on all residential site plans single-family, two-family, duplex and townhouses, the following information must be provided: 
a.  The following statements and information shall appear on the site plan: 
(1)  "The lot grading on this plan is in accordance with the latest subdivision construction plan submitted to and approved by the director of planning or his designee on (indicate date of approval)." 
(2)  "The lowest floor elevation shown is two feet above the base flood elevation as adopted by the City of Virginia Beach." 
(3)  The elevation of the curb (if existing or proposed) in front of each lot shall be indicated. 
(4)  Elevations of the top of bank and toe of slope and limits of fill necessary to construct the dwelling unit, including access, shall be indicated. 
(5)  "The proposed residential dwelling structure is not located in a special flood hazard area as determined by the National Flood Insurance Program Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Community-Panel No. ___ dated ______." for any residential lot located wholly or partially within the floodplains subject to special restrictions of section 4.10 of the Floodplain Ordinance (Appendix K) and recorded after the effective date of this ordinance ([October 23, 2001]). 
(6)  "ALL OR A PORTION OF THIS SITE IS LOCATED IN A SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA, AS DETERMINED BY THE NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) COMMUNITY-PANEL NO. _______ DATED _______," for any land located in the Special Flood Hazard Area, as shown on the most recently City Council adopted Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) prepared by the United States Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
5.  Number of floors, dimensions, and location of each building and proposed use for each building shall be indicated. If a multi-family, townhouse, or hotel development is submitted, a specific schedule showing the following information shall be included on the face of the plan: 
a.  The dwelling units and/or lodging units per gross acre of the project; 
b.  Breakdown of the number of bedrooms; 
c.  Percent of parcel devoted to recreation. Provided further, if the breakdown of number of bedrooms should change prior to the issuance of a building permit, the builder or developer shall notify the city agent by letter of such change; if the number of units does not increase and if the dimensions or position of the building structures do not change then additional site plan approval will not be necessary. 
6.  All off-street parking and parking bays, loading spaces and walkways indicating type of surfacing, size, angle of stalls, width of aisles and a specific schedule or the face of the site plan showing the number of parking spaces provided and the number required in accordance with the Virginia Beach zoning ordinance. [2] 
7.  Existing and proposed storm drainage easements and the direction of drainage flow in streets, storm sewers, valley gutters, streams and ditches. Indicate all contributing areas in acres for storm drainage calculations as required by the Stormwater Management Ordinance [Appendix D]. Drainage area maps and drainage calculations shall be submitted to the city as a component of the site stormwater management plan in accordance with the Stormwater Management Ordinance [Appendix D]. 
8.  All existing and proposed water, sanitary sewer facilities indicating pipe sizes, types and grades shall be shown. Connections into existing or proposed central water and sewer systems shall be shown. 
9.  Provision and schedule for the adequate control of erosion and sedimentation shall be in accordance with article III of chapter 30 of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach (City Code sections 30-56 through 30-78). 
10.  Landscape design and land use buffer plan in accordance with the design standards of the department of planning, as approved by the council of the City of Virginia Beach, shall be required. Where Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas are located on a site, landscaping design and buffer area plans shall be in accordance with Section 107 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance [Appendix F]. 
11.  A definite distance tie to an existing street intersection shall be provided. 
12.  Location and identification of existing graves and objects or structures marking a place of burial shall be shown. 
13.  For development or redevelopment having a construction footprint exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas, there shall, except if waived as unnecessary by the planning director, also be provided all elements of the plan of development as required by Section 107 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance [Appendix F] and the elements for Chesapeake Bay land disturbing activities in accordance with the Stormwater Management Ordinance [Appendix D]. The terms "development," "redevelopment" and "construction footprint" shall be as defined in section 103 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance. The term "Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act land disturbing activity" shall be as defined in Section 1-3 of the Stormwater Management Ordinance [Appendix D]. 
14.  Where required by Section 107 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance [Appendix F], there shall also, except if waived as unnecessary by the planning director, be provided a water quality impact assessment containing all of the elements required therein. 
15.  The equivalent residential unit (ERU) calculations for existing and proposed horizontal impervious surface area rounded to the nearest tenth (0.1), shall be shown. 
16.  Location and identification of wetlands. 
17.  Location and identification of the floodplain. 
C.  Hauling operations plans and information. In addition to the information required in subsections A. and B. of this section, where sand, gravel, topsoil, fill or other excavated material from the excavation of a stormwater management facility will be hauled off site, the following information shall be submitted to the city agent: 
(1)  The names and addresses of all haulers; 
(2)  If the hauler is a corporation, the name and address of its corporate offices and registered agent; 
(3)  The proposed date on which the hauling operation will commence and the proposed date on which the operation will be completed; 
(4)  The total number of cubic yards of material to be hauled; 
(5)  The number, type, carrying capacity, and weight of vehicles to be used in the hauling operation on a daily basis; 
(6)  The location of all haul roads leading to public streets and highways within the hauling area; 
(7)  A statement listing the public streets to be used as haul routes to access an arterial or major street or highway; 
(8)  A statement of the methods to be used to maintain or repair any public street or highway to be used for hauling purposes; 
(9)  The location of the on-the-site haul road, the point at which the haul road intersects the public right-of-way, the nearest street intersections in all directions leaving the excavation site and all existing and proposed entrances on both sides of the public street within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed entrance; 
(10)  A detailed description of the on-site haul road and the entrance to the public right-of-way, including width, radii, composition of surface material and length of improved surface; 
(11)  Erosion and sediment control measures to be employed at the haul road entrance and all access points; 
(12)  The method by which dirt and dust will be controlled on the public streets and in the air; 
(13)  A traffic maintenance/control plan, including, but not limited to, sign type, size, color, lettering size and locations; 
(14)  Location and description of public structures and improvements immediately adjacent to and under the haul road entrance; and 
(15)  A description or plan of all proposed improvements to mitigate the traffic impacts associated with the hauling activity including, but not limited to, turn lanes, signalization, striping and other traffic control measures. 
(16)  If the hauled material is to be deposited within the limits of the City of Virginia Beach, the address of the location where the hauled material will be taken and proof of current VPDES or VSMP permit coverage for the site where the material will be placed. 
The city agent shall determine the acceptability of the hauling methods and routes and may disapprove a site plan if: 
(1)  Under accepted engineering standards, it is determined that the public streets and highways to be used in the proposed hauling route cannot sustain the weight or frequency of the hauling vehicles without substantial damage thereto; or 
(2)  The proposed hauling operation would render the streets and highways affected by the hauling unsafe for public travel; or 
(3)  The noise or dust generated by the hauling operation is of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of persons of reasonable sensitivity, or to disturb or annoy the quiet, comfort or repose of reasonable persons who reside in close proximity to the hauling operation; or 
(4)  Any of the information required under this subsection is incomplete, incorrect or false. 
(Ord. No. 614; Ord. No. 784; Ord. No. 1494, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 1601, 5-12-86; Ord. No. 1820, 11-21-88; Ord. No. 1905, 8-14-89; Ord. No. 2009, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2211, 4-13-93; Ord. No. 2225, 5-22-93; Ord. No. 2291, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2378, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 2403, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 2411, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 2422, 9-24-96; Ord. No. 2514, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 2665, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 2795, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2919, 1-31-06; Ord. No. 3090, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 3198, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 3312, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3340, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3462, 9-20-16) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, App. A. 
 
Sec. 5. - Minimum standards and specifications required. 
5.1.  All improvements required by this ordinance shall be built to the city's standards and specifications as approved by the council of the City of Virginia Beach and shall be installed by and at the expense of the developer. No occupancy permits will be issued until construction has been inspected and accepted by the city. 
5.2.  In addition to 5.1 above, condominium and apartment developments shall have on-site pavement design and improvements based upon soil boring information and design methods which are acceptable under the provisions of the Public Works Design Standards Manual. Also, a professional engineer, duly licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia to practice as such, shall certify that on-site typical pavement sections are consistent with the approved site plan design specifications and that standard pavement construction practices were followed. 
5.3.  Two (2) copies of the recordable plat and general or special warranty deed with a title certificate clearly describing all right-of-way and easement dedications are to be submitted to the director of planning or his designee for processing and recording before the site plan approval process is complete. The width and nature of the easements and right-of-way shall be determined in conference with representatives of the engineering and real estate division, department of public works, and the department of public utilities. 
5.4.  Fire hydrants and water distribution systems shall be provided by the developer in accordance with standards of the department of public utilities in areas where central or public water systems are available. 
5.5. Except within zoning districts intended to implement Strategic Growth Area Plans, transitional buffers shall be placed between incompatible land uses, and landscaping shall be required within and at the perimeter of vehicular use areas, in accordance with the standards of the department of planning. The type and exact location of these buffers shall be as determined by the zoning ordinance [3], or under the provisions of a use permit issued pursuant thereto, or by any other ordinance of the City of Virginia Beach. 
5.6.A.  Where a proposed school, park, playground, open space or other public use shown in an officially adopted element of the comprehensive plan is located in whole or in part in the property to be developed, reservation of such area shall be required. Any reservation of land for public acquisition and use required under this provision shall be void if not executed within five (5) years from the date of final approval of the site development plan; provided, however, that the city council, acting through an amendment to the officially adopted comprehensive plan, may release such reserved land at an earlier date if it is found to be no longer necessary to the public purpose. The developer shall be required to show in dotted lines on the final site development plan how he will develop such reserved areas in the event that the municipality fails to acquire the reserved property. Required reservations shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total land area of the property to be developed; and the compensation due the developer shall be an expressed element of a site development plan agreement between the developer and the city. 
5.6.B. Except within zoning districts intended to implement Strategic Growth Area Plans, a percentage of the lot area within all multifamily developments shall be devoted to recreation and/or usable open space, as prescribed by the zoning ordinance. [4] 
5.7.  Provision for storm surface drainage shall be in accordance with the design standards of the department of public works indicating location, size, types and grades of all sewers, drainage structures, ditches either existing or proposed, and connection to existing drainage system. Disposition of storm or natural waters, both on and off the site, shall be provided and in such a manner as not to have a detrimental effect on the property of others or the public right-of-way. 
5.8.  Right-of-way improvements shall include pavement widening, curb, gutter, sidewalks, and street lighting in accordance with the standards of the department of public works, except when, due to existing conditions or planned construction projects, it is not feasible to construct at the same time the site is being constructed. Pavement widening will be required based on traffic impact and safety considerations as determined by standards established by the department of public works. When the improvements are deferred, the estimated costs of these improvements shall be placed in escrow with the city, unless the construction and improvements are covered by subdivision bonds pursuant to the subdivision ordinance. [5] 
5.9.  Pavement widening of public streets, alleys, and rights-of-way shall be equal to or greater than the existing pavement, but in no case shall it be less than the city's standards and specifications. 
5.10.  All driveways and entrances to public rights-of-way and location thereof shall be in accordance with the standards of the department of public works and approved by the city agent. 
5.11.  Traffic control, signalization, turn lanes and by-pass lanes, shall be provided, when based upon traffic studies, the public safety requires the convenience of traffic movement within the site covered and off site in relation to access streets. 
5.12.  Where water front property is to be developed, adequate storm protection shall be provided. The extent and method of protection shall conform to the standards of the department of public works. 
5.13.  Where installation of a septic tank is necessary, and where the director of public health determines that the subject property should be neither approved nor disapproved for septic tank installation, but instead approved subject to compliance with criteria for septic tank installation in poorly drained soil, then he shall require a land management plan consisting of a location of proposed septic tank or tanks and a proposed drainage plan to be submitted for his approval. Furthermore, he shall require covenants providing for satisfactory construction, repair, maintenance, and operation of the total system at the cost of the landowner to be executed and recorded prior to the issuance of a building permit. For septic tank systems to be located in Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas, the director shall require that there be set aside on the property an area sufficient to accommodate a reserve sewage disposal drainfield site having a capacity at least as great as the primary drainfield site and meeting the requirements of the Commonwealth of Virginia Board of Health sewage handling and disposal regulations. He shall also require a covenant prohibiting the construction of any structure or other impervious surface upon the area set aside for the reserve drainfield site until such time as the property is served by the public sewer system. 
5.14.  Except within zoning districts intended to implement Strategic Growth Area Plans, in any condominium development consisting of single family, duplex or attached dwellings, the developer shall provide open space at the following rates according to the zoning category in which the project lies: 
Minimum Lot Size 
of Zoning 
Category 	% of Total Land 
Required for 
Open Space 
Less than 5,000 sq. ft. 	15% 
5,000—7,499 sq. ft. 	12% 
7,500—9,999 sq. ft. 	10% 
10,000—14,999 sq. ft. 	8% 
15,000—19,999 sq. ft. 	7% 
20,000—29,999 sq. ft. 	6% 
30,000—39,999 sq. ft. 	5% 
40,000 sq. ft. or greater 	3% 
 
If more than one rate applies to a project, then that rate which results in the lesser amount of open space shall be the governing rate. Means of provision and other regulations pertaining to open space shall be as provided in section 4.5 of the subdivision ordinance. 
5.15.  Pumping stations and other sewer collection facilities shall be provided by the developer in accordance with the standards of the department of public utilities in areas where central or public sewer systems are available. Construction of sewer collection facilities shall be in accordance with Section 109 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance. [Appendix F]. 
5.16.  Underground utilities. Except as provided below, transmissions, distribution, and customer service utility facilities carrying or used in connection with electric power, street lights, telephone, telegraph, cable television, petroleum, gas or steam, shall be placed below the surface of the ground. Exceptions are as follows: 
(a)  Equipment such as electric distribution transformers, switchgear, meter pedestals, telephone pedestals, meters, service connections and the like normally installed above ground in accordance with the accepted utility practices for underground distribution. 
(b)  Temporary overhead facilities required for construction purposes. 
(c)  High tension transmission lines, fifty thousand (50,000) volts or more. 
All installations shall be in accord with applicable codes and the Public Works Design Standards Manual as approved by the council of the City of Virginia Beach, and shall be in accordance with charges as approved by the state corporation commission. 
Construction, installation and maintenance of any of the facilities mentioned in this subsection and located in Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 109 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance. [Appendix F]. 
(Ord. No. 641; Ord. No. 725; Ord No. 733; Ord. No. 784; Ord. No. 921, 1-15-79; Ord. No. 933, 3-26-79; Ord. No. 1089, 9-15-80; Ord. No. 1118, 11-24-80; Ord. No. 1345, 11-22-82; Ord. No. 1597, 4-7-86; Ord. No. 2009, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2127, 4-28-92; Ord. No. 2403, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 2665, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 2795, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 3248, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 3330, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3622, 6-16-20) 
Cross reference— Subdivision ordinance, App. B. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, App. A. 

--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, App. A. 

--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Subdivision ordinance, App. B. 
 
Sec. 5A. - Parking lot and foundation landscaping. 
5A.1.  Intent and purposes. The city council of Virginia Beach finds that Virginia Beach is blessed with a diverse and abundant cover of trees and vegetation and that such cover is of general aesthetic value to the city and that the ecological diversity and richness of the city make it a desirable place for residents, owners, and visitors alike; and that the appearance of Virginia Beach from the public ways contributes ecologically and aesthetically to the growth and economic prosperity of the city; and also that the growth and development attracted to the City of Virginia Beach, because of its natural beauty, often times requires the removal of trees and other plant material, thereby contributing to the depletion of a most valuable natural resource, therefore, it is necessary to protect, preserve and restore this valuable asset. The city council declares the intent and purposes of this ordinance to be as follows: 
(a)  To aid in stabilizing the environment's ecological balance by contributing to the processes of air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, and stormwater runoff retardation, while at the same time aiding in noise, glare, and heat abatement; 
(b)  To encourage the preservation of existing trees and desirable vegetation; 
(c)  To assist in providing clean air; 
(d)  To provide visual buffering and enhance the beautification of the city; 
(e)  To safeguard and enhance property values and to protect public and private investment; 
(f)  To preserve, protect, and restore the unique identity and environment of the City of Virginia Beach and preserve the economic base attracted to the city by such factors; 
(g)  To conserve energy; and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare through the reduction of noise, air and visual pollution, light glare, and moderate air temperature; 
(h)  To provide habitat for living things that might not otherwise occur or be found in urban and suburban environments. 
5A.2.  Applicability. As concerns parking lot landscaping requirements, the provisions of this section shall apply to public and private parking lots designed for ten (10) or more spaces and shall include display areas, parking garages, dumpsters, trash receptacles, and loading docks that may be viewed from any public right-of-way. As concerns foundation landscape requirements, the provisions of this section shall have application to all buildings for which site plan review is required pursuant to section 2.2 of the Site Plan Ordinance. A "parking lot" shall be defined as any area or structure where motor vehicles are stored for the purpose of temporary, daily, or overnight off-street parking. A "display area" shall be defined as an area generally considered accessible to the public including auto/truck sales, leasing and rental lots, recreational vehicle sales and rental lots, boat sales lots, manufactured home sales lots, and trailer sales lots. A "loading dock" shall be defined as a platformed space within the building or that protrudes from the building for the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks. 
(a)  Parking lots of ten (10) or more parking spaces shall not be constructed until a landscape plan (see sections 5A.4 and 5A.5) of the parking lot has been approved by the planning director. 
(b)  Existing parking lots of ten (10) or more spaces and existing parking lots of less than ten (10) spaces whose enlargement will increase it to ten (10) or more spaces shall not be enlarged or reconstructed until a landscape plan of the parking lot has been approved by the planning director. Landscaping shall be provided in the new parking area in proportion to its enlargement or reconstruction, and not in proportion to the total parking area for the site. "Reconstruction" is defined as construction activity involving an existing parking lot requiring a site plan which includes the addition of asphalt or concrete for the purpose of facilitating drainage and the addition of curbing and/or curb and gutter. Patching, resurfacing, and restripping are considered maintenance activities and not reconstruction. The addition of islands in an existing parking lot for the purpose of landscaping shall not constitute reconstruction. 
(c)  Display areas shall not be constructed until a landscape plan (see sections 5A.4 and 5A.5) of the display area has been approved by the planning director. Display areas shall be clearly indicated on the landscape plan (customer and employee parking spaces should not be included in the indicated area). Existing display areas shall not be expanded until a landscape plan has been approved by the planning director. Landscaping shall be provided in proportion of the expansion, and not in proportion to the entire area for the site. 
(d)  No building for which site plan review is required pursuant to section 2.2 of the Site Plan Ordinance shall be constructed until a foundation landscape plan (see section 5A.6) has been approved by the planning director. Existing commercial buildings shall not be expanded until a foundation landscape plan has been approved by the planning director. Landscaping shall be provided in proportion to the building's expansion, and not in proportion to the entire building for the site. 
(e)  Parking garages shall not be constructed until either a street frontage landscape plan (see section 5A.5) or foundation landscape plan (see section 5A.6), whichever is applicable, has been approved by the planning director. 
(f)  Dumpsters and/or trash receptacles shall not be placed until a landscape plan (see section 5A.7) has been approved by the planning director. 
(g)  Loading docks shall not be constructed until a landscape plan (see section 5A.7) has been approved by the planning director. 
5A.3.  Procedures. 
(a)  Landscape plans submitted pursuant to this ordinance shall be prepared in the manner specified in this ordinance and in "PARKING LOT AND FOUNDATION LANDSCAPING SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS" and shall be submitted in conjunction with the site development plan. 
(b)  After the landscape plan has been submitted, it shall be reviewed and processed by the planning director for conformance to section 5A and other applicable regulations in conjunction with the site development plan. The planning director may approve any landscape plan which the planning director determines to meet or exceed the objectives of this ordinance. 
5A.4.  Parking lot interior coverage requirements. 
(a)  There shall be provided within the perimeter of the parking lot or between any two (2) parking spaces, landscaped area(s) which together total thirty (30) square feet for each parking space. 
(b)  There shall be provided within the perimeter of the designated display area, landscaped area(s) which together total twelve (12) percent of the display area. 
(c)  Trees shall be provided within the landscaped area in the proportion of one tree per one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of total landscaped area, except any fractional tree shall not be counted as a whole tree. 
(d)  To encourage dispersement of landscaped areas through the parking lot, in parking lots of less than one hundred (100) spaces any portion of a single landscaped area exceeding three hundred fifty (350) square feet shall not be given credit toward satisfying section 5A.4 parking lots of one hundred (100) spaces or more any portion of a single landscaped area exceeding fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet shall not be given credit towards satisfying 5A.4 parking lot interior coverage requirements, except in cases when existing tree(s) are retained and protected during construction, then the maximum square footage requirements shall apply as specified in the "PARKING LOT AND FOUNDATION LANDSCAPING SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS" tree retention section. In no case shall entrance islands or groups of entrance islands be credited with more than a total of three hundred and fifty (350) square feet for each entrance toward satisfying the interior coverage requirements. 
(e)  To encourage dispersement of landscaped areas through the display area, in display areas of less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet any portion of a single landscaped area exceeding three hundred fifty (350) square feet shall not be given credit toward satisfying section 5A.4 parking lot interior coverage requirements; and in display areas thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or more any portion of a single landscaped area exceeding fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet shall not be given credit towards satisfying section 5A.4 parking lot interior coverage requirements. 
(f)  Planting which is required for screening along the perimeter of any parking lot by the provisions of the comprehensive zoning ordinance, conditional use permit, parking lot street frontage requirements (see section 5A.5), or screening requirements (see section 5A.7) shall not be considered as part of the interior landscaping requirements. 
(g)  Provisions of section 5A.4, parking lot interior coverage requirements, shall not apply to parking garages and areas in industrial uses not devoted to required off street parking spaces. 
5A.5.  Parking lot streets frontage requirements. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements of section 5A.4, parking lot interior requirements, landscaping shall be required along any side of a parking lot, display area or parking garage (with parking on the ground level) that abuts the right-of-way of any street more than twenty (20) feet in width. For parking garages that have businesses and/or offices on the ground level, section 5A.6, foundation landscaping requirements, shall apply instead of this section. 
(b)  A landscaping strip a minimum often (10) feet in width shall be located between the abutting edge of the sidewalk and parking lot curb line, or where there is no sidewalk, from the right-of-way line and the parking lot curb line, except where driveways or other openings may be required; provided, however, the required landscaping strip may be reduced to a minimum of five (5) feet in width on property in the RT1, RT2, and RT3 zoning districts. For parking garages, a landscaping strip a minimum of ten (10) feet in width shall be located between the abutting edge of the sidewalk and parking garage foundation or where there is no sidewalk, from the right-of-way line and the parking garage foundation, except where driveways or other openings may be required. In addition to the landscaping strip and street frontage plantings, parking garages with parking on the ground level shall have a solid wall which is a minimum of four (4) feet in height. 
(c)  Trees, hedge forms, and other treatment in accordance with the specifications of the "PARKING LOT AND FOUNDATION LANDSCAPING SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS" shall be placed within the landscaping strip. 
(d)  Where street landscaping required by section 5A.5 parking lot street frontage requirements conflicts with adequate sight distances required at driveways and street intersections by the comprehensive zoning ordinance, section 201(F), the regulations and provisions of the latter shall govern. 
(e)  The requirements of section 5A.5, parking lot street frontage requirements, shall not apply where planting is required along scenic easements designated on the master street and highway plan. 
5A.6.  Foundation landscaping requirements. 
(a)  Landscaping is required adjacent to building sides or provided in planters adjacent to building sides which face the right-of-way of any street more than twenty (20) feet in width. The landscaping strip may be bisected by necessary entrances to the building and may include pedestrian sidewalks servicing such entrances. 
(b)  A minimum of fifty (50) percent of any side of the building facing a public right(s)-of-way shall be landscaped. 
(c)  The minimum width of the landscaped area shall be three (3) feet and shall be designed to prohibit vehicular overhang. 
(d)  Shrubs or trees shall be provided within the landscaped area in the proportion of at least one shrub or one tree per fifteen (15) square feet of total required landscaped area, except any fractional shrub or tree shall not be counted as a whole shrub or tree. 
5A.7.  Screening requirements. 
(a)  Dumpsters and/or trash receptacles shall be screened from view from the right-of-way of any street more than twenty (20) feet in width. 
(b)  Loading docks not screened by an intervening building shall be screened from view from the right-of-way of any street more than twenty (20) feet in width for their entire length except for necessary access. 
5A.8.  Installation and bonding requirements. 
(a)  All required landscaping shall be installed according to the "PARKING LOT AND FOUNDATION LANDSCAPING SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS." 
(b)  Where landscaping is required, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the required landscaping is completed in accordance with the approved landscape plan as certified by an on-site inspection by the planning director. When the occupancy of a structure is desired prior to the completion of the required landscaping, a certificate of occupancy may be issued only if the owner or developer provides to the city a form of surety satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the remaining plant materials, related materials, and installation costs, with the costs approved by the planning director. 
(c)  For expanded or reconstructed parking lots or display areas which do not include building improvements and, therefore, no certificate of occupancy is required, as surety satisfactory to the city attorney must be posted at the time the approved site plan is released to cover the cost of all landscaping indicated on the landscape plan, as determined by the planning director. 
(d)  All required landscaping must be installed and approved by the end of the first planting season following issuance of certificate of occupancy or surety shall be forfeited to the city. 
(e)  The owners and their agents shall be responsible for providing, protecting, and maintaining all landscaping in healthy and growing conditions, replacing unhealthy fifty (50) percent or more dead or completely dead, plant material within ninety (90) days upon written notice, except when replacements should be delayed because of seasonal factors until the next planting season. Replacement material shall conform to the original intent of the landscape plan as determined by the planning director. 
(Ord. No. 1565, 11-4-85; Ord. No. 1974, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2091, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 2146, 6-25-92)  
Sec. 5B. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3312, adopted November 26, 2013, repealed § 5B, which pertained to floodplain regulations. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 6. - Consideration and action by city agent. 
In considering and acting upon site plans, the city agent shall take into consideration the public health, safety and welfare, the comfort and convenience of the public in general and of the immediate neighborhood in particular, and may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be required in order that the result of the action may, to the maximum extent possible, further the expressed intent of this and all other city ordinances.  
Sec. 7. - Variances and appeals. 
7.1.  The city manager and his designee are authorized, upon appeal in specific cases, to grant a variance from the terms of the ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, when owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions will result in unnecessary hardship, provided that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done, as follows: 
(1)  Strict application of the terms of the ordinance will effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the use of the property. 
(2)  Granting of such variance will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship approaching confiscation as distinguished from a special privilege. 
In authorizing a variance the city manager or his designee may impose such conditions as may be necessary in the public interest. 
7.2.  It is further provided that any decision of the city manager or his designee may be modified, reversed or affirmed by the city council upon appeal by any aggrieved party to such decision, if such appeal is filed within thirty (30) days of such decision. 
7.3.  Final decisions under this ordinance shall be subject to review by the appropriate court of record, if filed within thirty (30) days from the date of council action. 
7.4.  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, variances and appeals arising from provisions of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance [Appendix F] included or incorporated in this ordinance shall be in accordance with Section 110 or Section 111 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance, as the case may be. 
7.5 Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, variances and appeals arising from provisions of the Stormwater Management Ordinance [Appendix D] included or incorporated in this ordinance shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Stormwater Management Ordinance [Appendix D]. 
(Ord. No. 641; Ord. No. 1927, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 2009, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2795, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 3340, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 7A. - Permit and inspection fees. 
7A.1.  Permit and inspection fees shall be as generally provided for permits and inspections specified in other ordinances of the city. [6] For permits and inspections not elsewhere specified, fees shall be based on cost, and shall be payable, as determined by the agency involved, and shall be payable within thirty (30) days of billing. Failure to pay within the period stipulated may be penalized by imposition of a stop-work order, withholding of occupancy permits or such other actions as is deemed warranted in the circumstances of the case. 
(Ord. No. 1000, 10-8-79; Ord. No. 2378, 3-26-96) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Building code, 8-26 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8. - Separability. 
8.1.  Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.  
Sec. 9. - Penalty. 
9.1.  Any violation of the provision of this ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is committed.  
Sec. 10. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall be in effect from the 28th day of November, 1973.  
APPENDIX D - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3337, adopted April 22, 2014, effective July 1, 2014, repealed the former App. D, §§ 1—16, and enacted a new App. D as set out herein. The former App. D pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Beaches, boats and waterways, Ch. 6; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28; soil removal and other land-disturbing activities, Ch. 30; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 33; water supply, Ch. 37; zoning ordinance, App. A; subdivision regulations, App. B; site plan ordinance, App. C; Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance, App. F; Southern Watersheds Management Ordinance, App. G; storm sewer system discharge ordinance, App. H. 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Purpose and authority. 
A.  The purpose of this Ordinance is to ensure the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Virginia Beach and protect the quality and quantity of state waters from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater, including protection from a land disturbing activity causing unreasonable degradation of properties, water quality, stream channels, and other natural resources, and to establish procedures whereby stormwater requirements related to water quality and quantity shall be administered and enforced. 
B.  This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Article 2.3 (§ 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia, and in compliance with 9VAC25-870-10 et seq. of the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations, except as amended by this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3618, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1-2. - Stormwater management program established. 
Pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:27 of the Code of Virginia, the City of Virginia Beach hereby establishes a Virginia stormwater management program for land-disturbing activities and adopts the applicable Regulations that specify standards and specifications for VSMPs promulgated by the State Board for the purposes set out in Section 1-1 of this Ordinance. The City Council of the City of Virginia Beach hereby designates the City Manager, or his designee(s), as the Administrator of the Virginia stormwater management program. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions set forth in 9VAC25-870-10 of the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations, as amended, which are expressly adopted and incorporated herein by reference, the following words and terms used in this Ordinance have the following meanings unless otherwise specified herein. Where definitions differ, those incorporated herein shall have precedence. 
"Administrator" means the City Manager, or his designee(s). 
"Agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan" means a contract between the VSMP authority and the owner or permittee that specifies methods that shall be implemented to comply with the requirements of a VSMP for the construction or demolition of a single-family residence; such contract may be executed by the VSMP authority in lieu of a stormwater management plan. 
"Applicant" means any person submitting an application for a permit or requesting issuance of a permit under this Ordinance. 
"Best management practice" or "BMP" means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land-disturbing activities. 
"Channel" means a natural or manmade waterway. 
"Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act land-disturbing activity" means a land-disturbing activity including clearing, grading, or excavation that results in a land disturbance equal or greater than 2,500 square feet and less than one acre in all areas of jurisdictions designated as subject to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Designation and Management Regulations (9VAC25-830) adopted pursuant to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act. 
"Common plan of development or sale" means a contiguous area where separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules. 
"Construction activity" means any clearing, grading or excavation associated with large construction activity or associated with small construction activity. 
"Control measure" means any best management practice or stormwater facility, or other method used to minimize the discharge of pollutants to state waters. 
"Clean Water Act" or "CWA" means the federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C §1251 et seq.), formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public Law 97-117, or any subsequent revisions thereto. 
"Department" means the Department of Environmental Quality. 
"Depression storage" means the amount of rain that is retained on the surface in micro-depressions, ditches, and other terrain irregularities where water is allowed to collect and pond. 
"Development" means land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation or utility facilities or structures or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
"Drainage area" means a land area, water area, or both from which runoff flows to a downstream point (proposed project or the site entry point, project or site outfall, drainage structure, junction, node, upstream end of a culvert or storm drain, upstream face of a waterway crossing, channel, ditch, swale, spillway, weir, point of adequacy or point of analysis), as required. 
"Energy grade line (EGL)" means the line that represents the total energy of flow at a given location. It is the sum of the elevation head, the pressure head, and the velocity head. 
"Flooding" means a general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters, or 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, or 
(c)  Mudflows, which are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
(d)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event that results in flooding as defined above. 
"Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
"General permit" means the state permit titled GENERAL PERMIT FOR DISCHARGES OF STORMWATER FROM CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES found in Chapter 880 (9VAC25-880-1 et seq.) of the Regulations authorizing a category of discharges under the CWA and the Act within a geographical area of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
"Hydraulic grade line (HGL)" means a line coinciding with the level of flowing water in an open channel. In a closed conduit flowing under pressure, the HGL is the level to which water would rise in a vertical tube at any point along the pipe. It is equal to the energy grade line elevation minus the velocity head, V 2 /2g. 
"Hydrologic Unit Code" or "HUC" means a watershed unit established in the most recent version of Virginia's 6 th Order National Watershed Boundary Dataset unless specifically identified as another order. 
"Impervious cover" means a surface composed of material that significantly impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into soil. 
"Land disturbance" or "land-disturbing activity" means a man-made change to the land surface that potentially changes its runoff characteristics including clearing, grading, or excavation except that the term shall not include those exemptions specified in section 1-4 of this Ordinance. 
"Large construction activity" means construction activity including clearing, grading and excavation, except operations that result in the disturbance of less than five acres of total land area. Large construction activity also includes the disturbance of less than five acres of total land areas that is a part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb five acres or more. Large construction activity does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility. 
"Layout" means a conceptual drawing sufficient to provide for the specified stormwater management facilities required at the time of approval. 
"Linear development project" means a land-disturbing activity that is linear in nature such as, but not limited to, (i) the construction of electric and telephone utility lines, and natural gas pipelines; (ii) construction of tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures of a railroad company; (iii) highway construction projects; (iv) construction of stormwater channels and stream restoration activities; and (v) water and sewer lines. Private subdivision roads or streets shall not be considered linear development projects. 
"Localized flooding" means smaller scale flooding that may occur outside of a stormwater conveyance system. This may include high water, ponding, or standing water from stormwater runoff, which is likely to cause property damage or unsafe conditions. 
"Major municipal separate storm sewer outfall" or "major outfall" means a municipal separate storm sewer outfall that discharges from a single pipe with an inside diameter of thirty-six (36) inches or more or its equivalent (discharge from a single conveyance other than circular pipe which is associated with a drainage areas of more than fifty (50) acres); or for municipal separate storm sewers that receive stormwater from lands zoned for industrial activity (based on comprehensive zoning plans or the equivalent), with an outfall that discharges from a single pipe with an inside diameter of twelve (12) inches or more or from its equivalent (discharge from other than a circular pipe associated with a drainage areas of two (2) acres or more). 
"Minor modification" means an amendment to an existing general permit before its expiration not requiring extensive review and evaluation including, but not limited to, changes in EPA promulgated test protocols, increased monitoring frequency requirements, changes in sampling locations, and changes to compliance dates within the overall compliance schedules. A minor general permit modification or amendment does not substantially alter general permit conditions, substantially increase or decrease the amount of surface water impacts, increase the size of the operation, or reduce the capacity of the facility to protect human health or the environment. 
"Natural channel design concepts" means the utilization of engineering analysis based on fluvial geomorphic processes to create, rehabilitate, restore, or stabilize an open conveyance system for the purpose of creating or recreating a stream that conveys its bankfull storm event within its banks and allows larger flows to access its floodplain. 
"Natural stream" means a tidal or nontidal watercourse that is part of the natural topography. It usually maintains a continuous or seasonal flow during the year and is characterized as being irregular in cross-section with a meandering course. Constructed channels such as drainage ditches or swales shall not be considered natural streams; however, channels designed utilizing natural channel design concepts may be considered natural steams. 
"Nonpoint source pollution" means pollution such as sediment, nitrogen, phosphorous, hydrocarbons, heavy metals, and toxics whose sources cannot be pinpointed but rather are washed from the land surface in a diffuse manner by stormwater runoff. 
"Operator" means the owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to the Act and this chapter. In the context of stormwater associated with a large or small construction activity or Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act land-disturbing activity, operator means any person associated with a construction project that meets either of the following two criteria: (i) the person has direct operation control over construction plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications or (ii) the person has day-to-day operational control of those activities at a project that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other state permit or VSMP authority permit conditions (i.e., they are authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or comply with other permit conditions). In the context of stormwater discharges from Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s), operator means the operator of the regulated MS4 system. 
"Outfall" means, when used in reference to municipal separate storm sewers, a point source at the point where a municipal separate storm sewer discharges to surface waters and does not include open conveyances connecting two municipal separate storm sewers, or pipes, tunnels or other conveyances with connected segments of the same stream or other surface waters and are used to convey surface waters. 
"Owner" means the Commonwealth or any of its political subdivisions including, but not limited to, sanitation district commissions and authorities, and any public or private institution, corporation, association, firm or company organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country, or any officer or agency of the United States, or any person or group of persons acting individually or as a group that owns, operates, charters, rents, or otherwise exercises control over or is responsible for any actual or potential discharge of sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes or pollutants to state waters, or any facility or operation that has the capability to alter the physical, chemical, or biological properties of state waters in contravention of § 62.14-44.5 of the Code of Virginia, the Act and this chapter. 
"Peak flow rate" means the maximum instantaneous flow from a prescribed design storm at a particular location. 
"Percent impervious" means the impervious area within the site divided by the area of the site multiplied by 100. 
"Permit" or "VSMP Authority Permit" means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the Administrator for the initiation of a land-disturbing activity, in accordance with this Ordinance, and which may only be issued after evidence of general permit coverage has been provided by the Department, if required. 
"Permittee" means the person to whom the VSMP Authority Permit is issued. 
"Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, state, municipality, commission, or political subdivision of a state, governmental body, including federal, state, or local entity as applicable, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
"Point of adequacy" means a point in the downstream receiving stormwater conveyance system where it has adequate capacity to convey the design storm discharge under proposed conditions to a receiving water body, as determined by the City of Virginia Beach Public Works Design Standards Manual and the latest City of Virginia Beach amendments to the Virginia Department of Transportation Design Manual. 
"Point of discharge" means a location at which concentrated stormwater runoff is released. 
"Pollutant discharge" means the average amount of a particular pollutant measured in pounds per year or other standard reportable unit as appropriate, delivered by stormwater runoff. 
"Pollution" means such alteration of a physical, chemical or biological properties of any state waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters (a) harmful or detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare, or to the health of animals, fish or aquatic life; (b) unsuitable with reasonable treatment for use as present or possible future sources of public water supply; or (c) unsuitable for recreational, commercial, industrial, agricultural, or other reasonable uses, provided that (i) an alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological property of state waters, or a discharge or deposit of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes to state waters by any owner which by itself is not sufficient to cause pollution, but which in combination with such alteration of or discharge or deposit to state waters by other owners, is sufficient to cause pollution; (ii) the discharge of untreated sewage by any owner into state waters; and (iii) contributing to the contravention of standards of water quality duly established by the State Board, are "pollution" for the terms and purposes of this chapter. 
"Postdevelopment" refers to conditions that reasonably may be expected or anticipated to exist after completion of the land development activity on a specific site. 
"Predevelopment" refers to the conditions that exist at the time that plans for the land development of a tract of land are submitted to the VSMP authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, demolition of existing structures, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being submitted shall establish predevelopment conditions. 
"Prior developed lands" means land that has been previously utilized for residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation or utility facilities or structures, and that will have the impervious area associated with those uses altered during a land-disturbing activity. 
"Qualified personnel" means a person knowledgeable in the principles and practices of erosion and sediment and stormwater management controls who possesses the skills to assess conditions at the construction site for the operator that could impact stormwater quality and quantity and to assess the effectiveness of any sediment and erosion control measures or stormwater management facilities selected to control the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges from the construction activity. For VSMP authorities this requires the use of a person who holds a certificate of competency from the State Board in the areas of project inspection for ESC and project inspection for SWM or combined administrator for ESC and combined administrator for SWM as defined in 9VAC25-850-10 or a combination of ESC and SWM qualifications from these two areas. 
"Regulations" means the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Regulations, 9VAC25-870, as amended. 
"Runoff coefficient" means the fraction of total rainfall that will appear at a conveyance as runoff. 
"Runoff" or "stormwater runoff" means that portion of precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways. 
"Runoff characteristics" include maximum velocity, peak flow rate, volume, and flow duration. 
"Runoff volume" means the volume of water that runs off the site from a prescribed design storm. 
"Schedule of compliance" means a schedule of remedial measures included in a state permit, including an enforceable sequence of interim requirements (for example, actions, operations, or milestone events) leading to compliance with the Act, the CWA and regulations. 
"Site" means the land or water area where any facility or land-disturbing activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used or preserved in connection with the facility or land-disturbing activity. Areas channelward of mean low water shall not be considered part of a site. 
"Site hydrology" means the movement of water on, across, through and off the site as determined by parameters including, but not limited to, soil types, soil permeability, vegetative cover, seasonal water tables, slopes, land cover, and impervious cover. 
"Small construction activity" means 
1.  Construction activities including clearing, grading, and excavating that results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, and less than five acres. Small construction activity also includes the disturbance of less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development of sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than one and less than five acres. Small construction activity does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility. The State Board may waive the otherwise applicable requirements in a general permit for a stormwater discharge from construction activities that disturb less than five acres where stormwater controls are not needed based on a "total maximum daily load" (TMDL) that addresses the pollutant(s) of concern or, for nonimpaired waters that do not require TMDLs, an equivalent analysis that determines allocations for small construction sites for the pollutant(s) of concern or that determines that such allocations are not needed to protect water quality based on consideration of existing in-stream concentrations, expected growth in pollutant contributions from all sources, and a margin of safety. For the purpose of this subdivision, the pollutant(s) of concern include sediment or a parameter that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the construction activity. The operator must certify to the State Board that the construction activity will take place and stormwater discharges will occur, within the drainage area addressed by the TMDL or equivalent analysis. 
2.  Any other construction activity designated by the either State Board or the EPA regional administrator, based on the potential for contribution to a violation of a water quality standard or for significant contribution of pollutants to surface waters. 
"Special Flood Hazard Area" means the land in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as set forth in the Floodplain Ordinance (Appendix K). 
"State" means the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
"State Board" means the State Water Control Board. 
"State permit" means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the State Board in the form of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued under a state general permit or an approval issued by the State Board for stormwater discharges from an MS4. Under these state permits, the Commonwealth imposes and enforces requirements pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act and regulations, the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and the Regulations. 
"State Water Control Law" means Chapter 3.1 (§ 62.1-44.2 et seq.) of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
"State waters" means all water, on the surface and under the ground, wholly or partially within or bordering the Commonwealth or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands. 
"Stormwater" means precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
"Stormwater Appeals Board" is the appeal authority designated by City Council to hear appeals from any permit applicant or permittee, or person subject to Ordinance requirements, aggrieved by any action of the City taken in regard to the Ordinance without a formal hearing. The Stormwater Appeals Board shall be appointed by City Council and shall consist of six (6) members, one (1) from the Department of Planning, one (1) from the Department of Public Works, one (1) from the Department of Public Utilities and three (3) citizen members. The city attorney or his designee shall serve as legal counsel to the Stormwater Appeals Board. 
"Stormwater conveyance system" means a combination of drainage components that are used to convey stormwater discharge, either within or downstream of the land-disturbing activity. This includes: 
1.  "Manmade stormwater conveyance system" means a pipe, ditch, vegetated swale, or other stormwater conveyance system constructed by man except for restored stormwater conveyance systems; 
2.  "Natural stormwater conveyance system" means the main channel of a natural stream and the flood-prone area adjacent to the main channel; or 
3.  "Restored stormwater conveyance system" means a stormwater conveyance system that has been designed and constructed using natural channel design concepts. Restored stormwater conveyance systems include the main channel and the flood-prone area adjacent to the main channel. 
"Stormwater discharge associated with construction activity" means a discharge of stormwater runoff from areas where land-disturbing activities (e.g., clearing, grading, or excavation); construction materials or equipment storage or maintenance (e.g., fill piles, borrow area, concrete truck washout, fueling); or other industrial stormwater directly related to the construction process (e.g., concrete or asphalt batch plants) are located. 
"Stormwater management facility" means a control measure that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
"Stormwater management plan" means a document(s) containing material describing methods for complying with the requirements of section 1-6 of this Ordinance. 
"Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan" or "SWPPP" means a document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that identifies potential sources of pollutants that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction site, and otherwise meets the requirements of this Ordinance. In addition the document shall identify and require the implementation of control measures, and shall include, but not be limited to the inclusion of or the incorporation by reference of, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, and a pollution prevention plan. 
"Subdivision" means the same as defined in Section 1.4 of the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Virginia Beach [Appendix B]. 
"Total maximum daily load" or "TMDL" means the sum of the individual wasteload allocations for point sources, load allocations for nonpoint sources, natural background loading and a margin of safety. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of either mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure. The TMDL process provides for point versus nonpoint source trade-offs. 
"Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website" means a website that contains detailed design standards and specifications for control measures that may be used in Virginia to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and associated regulations. 
"Virginia Stormwater Management Act" or "Act" means Article 2.3 (§ 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
"Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook" means a collection of pertinent information that provides general guidance for compliance with the Act and associated regulations and is developed by the department with advice from a stakeholder advisory committee. 
"Virginia Stormwater Management Program" or "VSMP" means a program approved by the State Board after September 13, 2011, that has been established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized in this article, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of this article and associated regulations. 
"Virginia Stormwater Management Program authority" or "VSMP authority" means an authority approved by the State Board after September 13, 2011, to operate a Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3449, 5-3-16; Ord. No. 3618, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1-4. - Stormwater applicability and exemptions. 
A.  Except as provided herein, no person may engage in any land-disturbing activity until a VSMP authority permit or an executed agreement in lieu of a stormwater plan has been issued by the Administrator in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
B.  When a VSMP permit is not required pursuant to an exemption listed below, all land disturbing activities that disturb two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more of land must obtain a Land Disturbing Permit in accordance with the provisions of the City of Virginia Beach Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance (Chapter 30). 
C.  A Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act Land-Disturbing Activity shall not be required to obtain a general Permit, but will be required to obtain a Land Disturbing Permit and be subject to an erosion and sediment control plan consistent with the requirements of the Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance, a stormwater management plan as outlined under section 1-6, the technical criteria and administrative requirements for land-disturbing activities outlined in sections 1-10 through 1-19 and 1-22 through 1-27, the variance procedures of section 1-21 and the requirements for control measures and long-term maintenance outlined under section 1-28. 
D.  Single-family residences separately built and disturbing less than one (1) acre and that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale, and not located in the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area, shall operate in accordance with the general permit and required SWPPP, but shall not be required to complete a registration statement. 
E.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, the following activities are exempt, unless otherwise required by federal law: 
1.  Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted under the provisions of Title 45.1 of the Code of Virginia; 
2.  Clearing of lands specifically for agricultural purposes and the management, tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, livestock feedlot operations, or as additionally set forth by the State Board in regulations, including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11 (§ 10.1-1100 et seq.) of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in Subsection B of § 10.1-1163 of Article 9 of Chapter 11 of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia; 
3.  Single-family residences separately built and disturbing less than one acre and not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, including additions or modifications to existing single-family detached residential structures, unless the land disturbance is located in the Chesapeake Bay watershed. In the Chesapeake Bay watershed, single-family residences separately built and disturbing less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet are exempt; 
4.  Land-disturbing activities that disturb less than one acre of land area, and not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, except in areas designated by the City as subject to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Designation and Management Regulations, where land disturbing activities less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet are exempt; 
5.  Discharges to a sanitary sewer; 
6.  Activities under a State or federal reclamation program to return an abandoned property to an agricultural or open land use; 
7.  Routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original construction of the project. The paving of an existing road with a compacted or impervious surface and reestablishment of existing associated ditches and shoulders shall be deemed routine maintenance if performed in accordance with this subsection; and 
8.  Conducting land-disturbing activities in response to a public emergency where the related work requires immediate authorization to avoid imminent endangerment to human health or the environment. In such situations, the Administrator shall be advised of the disturbance within seven days of commencing the land-disturbing activity and compliance with the administrative requirements of subsection A. is required within thirty (30) days of commencing the land-disturbing activity. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-5. - Submission and approval of plans. 
A.  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued by the Administrator, until the following items have been submitted to and approved by the Administrator as prescribed herein: 
1.  A plan review package that includes a general permit registration statement, if required. Registration statements are not required for detached single-family home construction, within or outside of a common plan of development or sale; however such construction must adhere to the requirements of the general permit; 
2.  An erosion and sediment control plan approved in accordance with the City of Virginia Beach Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance (Chapter 30); 
3.  A stormwater management plan that meets the requirements of section 1-6 of this Ordinance or an executed agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan; and 
4.  When the development of property is proposed, a site plan or subdivision construction plan incorporating all applicable requirements of the Subdivision Regulations (Appendix B) and Site Plan Ordinance (Appendix C). 
B.  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued until evidence of general permit coverage is obtained, if required. 
C.  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued until the fees required to be paid pursuant to section 1-33, are received, and a reasonable performance bond required pursuant to section 1-34 of this Ordinance has been accepted. 
D.  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued until the Stormwater Management Facility Maintenance Agreement is submitted and approved pursuant to section 1-28 of this Ordinance. 
E.  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued unless and until the permit application and attendant materials and supporting documentation demonstrate that all land clearing, construction, disturbance, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan. 
F.  No grading, building or other local permit shall be issued for a property unless a VSMP authority permit has been issued by the Administrator, unless such activity is exempt. 
G.  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued until an Agreement in Lieu of a Stormwater Plan, if required, has been executed, submitted and approved. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3618, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1-6. - Stormwater management plan; content of plan. 
A.  The Stormwater Management Plan, required in section 1-4 of this Ordinance, must apply the stormwater management technical criteria set forth in sections 1-10 through 1-19 and 1-22 through 1-27 of this Ordinance to the entire site or common plan of development or sale where applicable, consider all sources of surface runoff and all sources of surface and groundwater flows converted to surface runoff. Individual lots in new residential, commercial or industrial developments shall not be considered separate land-disturbing activities. Approved stormwater management plans for residential, commercial or industrial subdivisions govern the individual parcels within that plan throughout the development life of the lots even with subsequent owners. 
The Stormwater Management Plan shall include the following information: 
1.  Information on the type and location of stormwater discharges; information on the features to which stormwater is being discharged including surface waters and the predevelopment and postdevelopment drainage areas; 
2.  Contact information including the name, address, and telephone number of the owner, and the applicant if not the owner, and the GPIN and parcel number of the property or properties affected; 
3.  A narrative that includes a description of current site conditions and final site conditions; 
4.  A general description of the proposed stormwater management facilities and the mechanism through which the facilities will be operated and maintained after construction is complete; 
5.  Information on the proposed stormwater management facilities, including: 
i.  The type of facilities; 
ii.  Location, including geographic coordinates expressed in U.S. Survey Feet and based on the Virginia State Plane Coordinate System, South Zone, NAD 1983/1993 (High Accuracy Reference Network) (HARN) or Latitude and Longitude; 
iii.  Area treated, measured in square feet and acreage; and 
iv.  The surface waters into which the facility will discharge; 
6.  Hydrologic and hydraulic computations, including runoff characteristics; 
7.  Documentation and calculations verifying compliance with the water quality and quantity requirements of sections 1-10 through 1-19 or 1-22 through 1-27 of this Ordinance; 
8.  A map or maps of the site that depicts the topography of the site and includes: 
i.  All contributing drainage areas; 
ii.  Existing streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, wetlands, other water bodies, and floodplains; 
iii.  Soil types, forest cover, and other vegetative areas; 
iv.  Current land use including existing structures, roads, and locations of known utilities and easements; 
v.  Sufficient information on adjoining parcels upstream to the watershed limits and adjoining parcels downstream contributing to the point of adequacy, to assess the impacts of stormwater from the site on these parcels; 
vi.  The limits of clearing and grading, and the proposed drainage patterns on the site; 
vii.  Proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, and stormwater management facilities; 
viii.  Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses, including but not limited to planned locations of utilities, roads, and easements; 
ix.  All Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area designations of Resource Protection Areas, including variable width buffers; 
x.  All Southern Rivers Watershed buffers and nontidal wetlands, pursuant to Appendix G of the Virginia Beach City Code; and 
xi.  Any other information reasonably necessary for an evaluation of the development activity. 
B.  If an operator intends to meet the water quality or quantity requirements set forth in sections 1-10 through 1-19 and 1-22 through 1-27 of this Ordinance through the use of off-site compliance options, where applicable, then a letter of availability from the off-site provider must be included. Approved off-site options must achieve the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the applicant's land-disturbing activity except as otherwise allowed by § 62.1-44.15:35 of the Code of Virginia. 
C.  If an operator intends to meet the water quality and quantity requirements available in an existing off-site regional or locally shared stormwater management facility, pursuant to a previously approved plan, documentation shall be required indicating that the facility meets the quality and quantity technical criteria set forth in sections 1-10 through 1-19 and 1-22 through 1-27 of this Ordinance and that a Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Agreement acceptable to the City has been recorded and that all necessary easements are in place to access and utilize the Stormwater Management Facility. 
D.  Elements of the stormwater management plans that include activities regulated under Chapter 4 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
E.  A maintenance agreement and adequate easements shall be executed and recorded to ensure responsibility for the maintenance of any stormwater management facilities constructed under the requirements of this ordinance, unless exempted from this requirement under section 1-28, and to ensure appropriate access to such facilities for maintenance, inspection and corrective action. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3369, 9-16-14; Ord. No. 3618, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1-7. - Review of stormwater management plans. 
A.  The Administrator shall review stormwater management plans and shall approve or disapprove a stormwater management plan according to the following: 
1.  The Administrator shall determine the completeness of a plan submittal package in accordance with section 1-6 of this Ordinance, and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of such determination, within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt. If the plan is deemed to be incomplete, the above written notification shall contain the reasons the plan submittal package is deemed incomplete. 
2.  The Administrator shall have an additional sixty (60) calendar days from the date of the communication of completeness to review the plan, except that if a determination of completeness is not made within the time prescribed in subdivision 1., then the plan shall be deemed complete and the Administrator shall have sixty (60) calendar days from the date of submission to review the plan. 
3.  The Administrator shall review any plan that has been previously disapproved, within forty-five (45) calendar days of the date of resubmission. 
4.  During the review period, the plan shall be approved or disapproved and the decision communicated in writing to the person responsible for the land-disturbing activity or his designated agent. If the plan is not approved, the reasons for not approving the plan shall be provided in writing. Approval or denial shall be based on the plan's compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
5.  If a plan meeting all requirements of this Ordinance is submitted and no action is taken within the time provided above in subdivision 2., the plan shall be deemed approved. 
6.  All written correspondence shall be by email or facsimile unless requested otherwise in writing by the applicant. 
B.  Approved stormwater plans may be modified as follows: 
1.  Modifications to an approved stormwater management plan shall be allowed only after review and written approval by the Administrator. The Administrator shall have sixty (60) calendar days to respond in writing either approving or disapproving such request. 
2.  The Administrator may require that an approved stormwater management plan be amended, within a time prescribed by the Administrator, to address any deficiencies noted during inspection. 
C.  The Administrator shall require the submission of a construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities and stormwater conveyance systems. The Administrator may elect not to require construction record drawings for stormwater management facilities and stormwater conveyance systems for which recorded maintenance agreements are not required pursuant to section 1-28. Prior to the release of the surety and final approval of the facility by the City a construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities and stormwater conveyance systems shall be submitted, inspected and approved by the Administrator. The construction record drawing shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia, certifying that the stormwater management facilities and stormwater conveyance systems have been constructed in accordance with the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3618, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1-8. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan; content of plan. 
A.  The Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) is not required to be submitted for review and approval, however, it is a requirement of the VSMP and general permit and will be reviewed during inspections. Specific components of the SWPPP, as required by section 1-6 will be reviewed. 
B.  The Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) shall include the content specified by Section 9VAC25-870-54, but not limited to, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, a pollution prevention plan for regulated land disturbing activities and a description of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL if required. 
C.  The SWPPP must also comply with the requirements and general information set forth in Section 9VAC25-880-70, Section II [stormwater pollution prevention plan] of the general permit. 
D.  The SWPPP shall be amended by the operator whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance that has a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants to state waters which is not addressed by the existing SWPPP. 
E.  The SWPPP must be maintained by the operator at a central location onsite. If an onsite location is unavailable, notice of the SWPPP's location must be posted near the main entrance at the construction site. Operators shall make the SWPPP available for public review in accordance with Section II of the general permit, either electronically or in hard copy. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-9. - Pollution prevention plan; content of plan. 
A.  A Pollution Prevention Plan, required by 9VAC25-870-56, shall be developed, implemented, and updated as necessary and must detail the design, installation, implementation, and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a minimum, such measures must be designed, installed, implemented, and maintained to: 
1.  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters. Wash waters must be treated in a sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent or better treatment prior to discharge; 
2.  Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste, and other materials present on the site to precipitation and to stormwater; and 
3.  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement chemical spill and leak prevention and response procedures. 
B.  The pollution prevention plan shall include effective best management practices to prohibit the following discharges: 
1.  Wastewater from washout of concrete, unless managed by an appropriate control; 
2.  Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, and other construction materials; 
3.  Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance; and 
4.  Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing. 
C.  Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from dewatering of trenches and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by appropriate controls. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-10. - Applicability of technical criteria for regulated land disturbing activities. 
Except as grandfathered in accordance with the provisions of section 1-20, sections 1-10 through 1-19 establish the minimum technical criteria for regulated land-disturbing activities that shall be employed to protect the quality and quantity of state water from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-11. - Water quality design criteria requirements. 
A.  In order to protect the quality of state waters and to control the discharge of stormwater pollutants from regulated activities, the following minimum design criteria and statewide standards for stormwater management shall be applied to the site. 
1.  New development. The total phosphorus load of new development projects shall not exceed 0.41 pounds per acre per year, as calculated pursuant to section 1-12. 
2.  Development on prior developed lands. 
a.  For land-disturbing activities disturbing greater than or equal to one acre that results in no net increase in impervious cover from the predevelopment condition, the total phosphorus load shall be reduced at least twenty (20) percent below the predevelopment total phosphorus load. 
b.  For regulated land-disturbing activities disturbing less than one acre that result in no net increase in impervious cover from the predevelopment condition, the total phosphorus load shall be reduced at least 10% below the predevelopment total phosphorus load. 
c.  For land-disturbing activities that result in a net increase in impervious cover over the predevelopment condition, the design criteria for new development shall be applied to the increased impervious area. Depending on the area of disturbance, the criteria of subdivisions a. or b. above, shall be applied to the remainder of the site. 
d.  In lieu of subdivision c., the total phosphorus load of a linear development project occurring on prior developed lands shall be reduced twenty (20) percent below the predevelopment total phosphorus load. 
e.  The total phosphorus load shall not be required to be reduced to below the applicable standard for new development unless a more stringent standard has been established by the City. 
B.  Compliance with subsection A. of this section shall be determined in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-12. - Water quality compliance. 
A.  Compliance with the water quality design criteria set out in sections A.1. and A.2. of section 1-11 shall be determined by utilizing the Virginia Runoff Reduction Method or another equivalent methodology that is approved by the State Water Control Board. 
B.  The BMPs listed in 9VAC25-870-65.B are approved for use as necessary to effectively reduce the phosphorus load and runoff volume in accordance with the Virginia Runoff Reduction Method. Other approved BMPs found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website may also be utilized. Design specifications and the pollutant removal efficiencies for all approved BMPs are found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website. 
C.  However, where a site drains to more than one HUC, the pollutant load reduction requirements shall be applied independently within each HUC unless reductions are achieved in accordance with a comprehensive watershed stormwater management plan in accordance with section 1-19. 
D.  Offsite alternatives where allowed in accordance with section 1-14 may be utilized to meet the design criteria of subsection A. of section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-13. - Water quantity. 
A.  Channel protection and flood protection shall be addressed in accordance with the minimum standards set out in this section. 
B.  Channel protection. Concentrated stormwater flow shall be released into a stormwater conveyance system and shall meet the criteria in subdivision 1, 2, or 3 of this subsection, where applicable, from the point of discharge to the limits of analysis defined in subdivision 4 of this subsection. 
1.  Manmade stormwater conveyance systems. When stormwater from a development is discharged to a manmade stormwater conveyance system, following the land-disturbing activity, either: 
a.  The manmade stormwater conveyance system shall convey the postdevelopment peak flow rate from the two-year 24-hour storm event without causing erosion of the system. Detention of stormwater or downstream improvements may be incorporated into the approved land-disturbing activity to meet this criterion, at the discretion of the VSMP authority; or 
b.  The peak discharge requirements for concentrated stormwater flow to natural stormwater conveyance systems in subdivision 3 of this subsection shall be met. 
2.  Restored stormwater conveyance systems. When stormwater from a development is discharged to a restored stormwater conveyance system that has been restored using natural design concepts, following the land-disturbing activity, either: 
a.  The development shall be consistent, in combination with other stormwater runoff, with the design parameters of the restored stormwater conveyance system that is functioning in accordance with the design objectives; or 
b.  The peak discharge requirements for concentrated stormwater flow to natural stormwater conveyance systems in subdivision 3 of this subsection shall be met. 
3.  Natural stormwater conveyance systems. When stormwater from a development is discharged to a natural stormwater conveyance system, the maximum peak flow rate from the one-year 24-hour storm following the land-disturbing activity shall be calculated either: 
a.  In accordance with the following methodology: 
Q Developed = I.F. *(Q Pre-Developed *RV Pre-Developed )/RV Developed 
Under no condition shall Q Developed be greater than Q Pre-Developed nor shall Q Developed be required to be less than that calculated in the equation (Q Forest * RV Forest )/RV Developed ; where 
I.F. (Improvement Factor) equals 0.8 for sites > 1 acre or 0.9 for sites = 1 acre. 
Q Developed = The allowable peak flow rate of runoff from the developed site. 
RV Developed = The volume of runoff from the site in the developed condition. 
Q Pre-Developed = The peak flow rate of runoff from the site in the pre-developed condition. 
RV Pre-Developed = The volume of runoff from the site in pre-developed condition. 
Q Forest = The peak flow rate of runoff from the site in a forested condition. 
RV Forest = the volume of runoff from the site in a forested condition; or 
b.  In accordance with another methodology that is demonstrated by the City to achieve equivalent results and is approved by the State Board. 
4.  Limits of analysis. Stormwater conveyance systems shall be analyzed for compliance with channel protection criteria to the point of adequacy as determined in subsection C. 
C.  Flood protection. Concentrated stormwater flow shall be released into a stormwater conveyance system and shall meet the following criteria as demonstrated by use of acceptable hydrologic and hydraulic methodologies. Adequacy of the downstream system must be demonstrated for all the following: 
1.  The downstream system must adequately convey the design storm to the point of adequacy, using freeboard heights and headwater depths stipulated in the City of Virginia Beach Public Works Design Standards Manual and the referenced documents. 
2.  The post-development design year Hydraulic Grade Line shall not increase over the predevelopment design year Hydraulic Grade Line in all receiving channels and water bodies and upstream facilities. 
3.  Limits of analysis. Stormwater conveyance systems shall be analyzed for compliance with flood protection criteria to the point of adequacy. 
D.  Increased volumes of sheet flow resulting from pervious or disconnected impervious areas, or from physical spreading of concentrated flow through level spreaders, must be identified and evaluated for potential impacts on down-gradient properties or resources. Increased volumes of sheet flow that will cause or contribute to erosion, sedimentation, or flooding of down gradient properties or resources shall be diverted to a stormwater management facility or a stormwater conveyance system that conveys the runoff without causing down-gradient erosion, sedimentation, or flooding. 
E.  For purposes of computing predevelopment runoff, all pervious lands on the site shall be assumed to be in good hydrologic condition in accordance with the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) standards, regardless of conditions existing at the time of computation. Onsite areas which provide depression storage must be accounted for in all calculations. Predevelopment runoff calculations utilizing other hydrologic conditions may be utilized provided that it is demonstrated to and approved by the VSMP authority that actual site conditions warrant such considerations. 
F.  Predevelopment and postdevelopment runoff characteristics and site hydrology shall be verified by site inspections, topographic surveys, available soil mapping or studies, and calculations consistent with good engineering practices. Guidance provided in the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook and on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse website shall be considered appropriate practices. 
G.  The entire drainage area must be considered when determining the design storm and hydrologic methods. This includes both onsite and offsite contributing drainage areas. For drainage areas less than three hundred (300) acres, a ten-year, twenty-four-hour design storm event for capacity design shall be used; for drainage areas equal to or greater than three hundred (300) acres, but less than five hundred (500) acres, a twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour design storm event shall be used; for drainage areas equal to or greater than five hundred (500) acres, a fifty-year, twenty-four-hour design storm event shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3618, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1-14. - Offsite compliance options. 
A.  Offsite compliance options that the City may allow an operator to use to meet required phosphorus nutrient reductions include the following: 
1.  Offsite controls utilized in accordance with a comprehensive stormwater management plan adopted pursuant to section 1-19 for the local watershed within which a project is located; 
2.  A locality pollutant loading pro rata share program established pursuant to § 15.2-2243 of the Code of Virginia or similar local funding mechanism; 
3.  The nonpoint nutrient offset program established pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:35 of the Code of Virginia; 
4.  Any other offsite options approved by an applicable state agency or state board; and 
5.  When an operator has additional properties available within the same HUC or upstream HUC that the land-disturbing activity directly discharges to or within the same watershed as determined by the City, offsite stormwater management facilities on those properties may be utilized to meet the required phosphorus nutrient reductions from the land-disturbing activity. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A. of this section, and pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:35 of the Code of Virginia, operators shall be allowed to utilize offsite options identified in subsection A. of this section under any of the following conditions: 
1.  Less than five (5) acres of land will be disturbed; 
2.  The postconstruction phosphorus control requirement is less than ten (10) pounds per year; or 
3.  At least seventy-five (75) percent of the required phosphorus nutrient reductions are achieved on-site. If at least seventy-five (75) percent of the required phosphorus nutrient reductions cannot be met on-site, and the operator can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that (i) alternative site designs have been considered that may accommodate on-site best management practices, (ii) on-site best management practices have been considered in alternative site designs to the maximum extent practicable, (iii) appropriate on-site best management practices will be implemented, and (iv) full compliance with postdevelopment nonpoint nutrient runoff compliance requirements cannot practicably be met on-site, then the required phosphorus nutrient reductions may be achieved, in whole or in part, through the use of off-site compliance options. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsections A. and B. of this section, offsite options shall not be allowed: 
1.  Unless the selected offsite option achieves the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the operator's land-disturbing activity. In the case of a phased project, the operator may acquire or achieve offsite nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of each phase of land-disturbing activity in an amount sufficient for each phase. 
2.  In contravention of local water quality-based limitations at the point of discharge that are (i) consistent with the determinations made pursuant to subsection B of § 62.1-44.19:7 of the Code of Virginia, (ii) contained in a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) program plan accepted by DEQ, or (iii) as otherwise may be established or approved by the State Board. 
D.  In order to meet the requirements of section 1-13 described in subdivisions 1. and 2. of subsection A. of this section may be utilized. 
E.  In accordance with § 62.1-44.15:35F of the Code of Virginia, nutrient credits used pursuant to subsection A. shall be generated in the same or adjacent eight-digit hydrologic unit code as defined by the United States Geological Survey as the permitted site except as otherwise limited in subsection C. Nutrient credits outside the same or adjacent eight-digit hydrologic unit code may only be used if it is determined by the Director that no credits are available within the same or adjacent eight-digit hydrologic unit code when the Director accepts the final site design. In such cases, and subject to other limitations imposed in this section, credits available within the same tributary may be used. In no case shall credits from another tributary be used. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3618, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1-15. - Design storms and hydrologic methods. 
A.  Unless otherwise specified, the prescribed design storms are one hundred twenty (120) percent of the one-year, two-year, ten-year, twenty-five-year, fifty-year and one hundred-year twenty-four-hour storms using the rainfall precipitation frequency data recommended by the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14, Volume 2 Version 3.0. Partial duration time series, as adjusted by the City of Virginia Beach Public Works Design Standards Manual, shall be used for the precipitation data. 
B.  Unless otherwise specified, all hydrologic analyses shall be based on the existing watershed characteristics and how the ultimate development condition of the subject project will be addressed. 
C.  Except as allowed in subsection D. below, all analysis shall use dynamic modeling. Predeveloped vs. post-developed runoff comparisons shall be performed using the same method of analysis. 
D.  When total land disturbance is less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or the proposed impervious area is at least ten (10) percent less than the existing impervious area, stormwater design may use any computer design program that utilizes the twenty-four-hour design storm hyetograph with increased precipitation and the static tailwater provided by the City of Virginia Beach. Analysis of upstream and downstream impacts is not required under these conditions. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3618, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1-16. - Stormwater harvesting. 
In accordance with § 62.1-44.15:28 of the Code of Virginia, stormwater harvesting is encouraged for the purposes of landscape irrigation systems, fire protection systems, flushing water closets and urinals, and other water handling systems to the extent such systems are consistent with federal, state and City regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-17. - Linear development projects. 
Linear development projects shall control postdevelopment stormwater runoff in accordance with a site-specific stormwater management plan or a comprehensive watershed stormwater management plan developed in accordance with these technical criteria. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-18. - Stormwater management impoundment structures or facilities. 
Stormwater management wet ponds and extended detention ponds that are not covered by the Impounding Structure Regulations (4VAC50-20) shall, at a minimum, be engineered for structural integrity for the 100-year storm event. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-19. - Comprehensive stormwater management plans. 
The City may develop comprehensive stormwater management plans to be approved by DEQ that meet the water quality objectives, quantity objectives, or both of this chapter: 
1.  Such plans shall ensure that offsite reductions equal to or greater than those that would be required on each contributing site are achieved within the same HUC or within another locally designated watershed. Pertaining to water quantity objectives, the plan may provide for implementation of a combination of channel improvement, stormwater detention, or other measures that are satisfactory to the locality's VSMP authority to prevent downstream erosion and flooding. 
2.  If the land use assumptions upon which the plan was based change or if any other amendments are deemed necessary by the locality's VSMP authority, such authority shall provide plan amendments to the department for review and approval. 
3.  During the plan's implementation, the locality's VSMP authority shall document nutrient reductions accredited to the BMPs specified in the plan. 
4.  State and federal agencies may develop comprehensive stormwater management plans, and may participate in locality-developed comprehensive stormwater management plans where practicable and permitted by the locality's VSMP authority. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-20. - Grandfather provisions. 
A.  Any land-disturbing activity shall be considered grandfathered by the Administrator and shall not be subject to the technical criteria of sections 1-10 through 1-19 of this Ordinance, but shall be subject to the technical criteria of sections 1-22 through 1-27 of this Ordinance provided: 
1.  A proffered or conditional zoning plan, zoning with a plan of development, preliminary or final subdivision plat or a preliminary or final site plan or any document determined by the City to be equivalent thereto was (i) approved by the City prior to July 1, 2012, (ii) provided a layout as defined in 9VAC25-870-10, (iii) will comply with sections 1-22 through 1-27 of this Ordinance, and (iv) has not been subsequently modified or amended in a manner resulting in an increase in the amount of phosphorus leaving each point of discharge, and such that there is no increase in the volume or rate of runoff; and 
2.  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and 
3.  Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014. 
B.  Local, state and federal projects shall be considered grandfathered and shall be subject to the technical criteria of sections 1-22 through 1-27 of this Ordinance provided: 
1.  There has been an obligation of local, state or federal funding, in whole or in part, prior to July 1, 2012, or the department has approved a stormwater management plan prior to July 1, 2012; and 
2.  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and 
3.  Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014. 
C.  Land-disturbing activities grandfathered under subsections A and B shall remain subject to the criteria of sections 1-22 through 1-27 for one additional state permit cycle. After such time, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to the technical requirements of sections 1-10 through 1-19 and any new technical criteria adopted by the State Board. 
D.  In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued for a project prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall become subject to the technical requirements of sections 1-22 through 1-27 of this Ordinance. 
E.  Land-disturbing activities that obtain an initial state permit or commence land disturbance prior to July 1, 2014 shall be conducted in accordance with the technical criteria found in sections 1-22 through 1-27 of this Ordinance. Such projects shall remain subject to these technical criteria for two (2) additional state permit cycles. After such time, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to any new technical criteria adopted by the State Board. 
F.  Land-disturbing activities that obtain an initial state permit on or after July 1, 2014 shall be conducted in accordance with the technical criteria found in sections 1-10 through 1-19 of this Ordinance, except as provided for above. Such projects shall remain subject to these technical criteria for two (2) additional state permit cycles. After such time, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to any new technical criteria adopted by the State Board. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3618, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1-21. - Variances. 
A.  The Administrator may grant variances to the technical requirements of sections 1-10 through 1-19 and 1-22 through 1-27, provided that: 
1.  The variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief; 
2.  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed so that the intent of the Act, the Regulations, and this Ordinance are preserved; 
3.  Granting the variance will not confer any special privileges that are denied in other similar circumstances; 
4.  Variance requests are not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-imposed or self-created; 
5.  The variance will not substantially increase the flow rate of stormwater runoff; 
6.  The variance will not have an adverse impact on a wetland, channel, water body or upstream or downstream of a receiving body of water; 
7.  The variance will not contribute to the degradation of water quality; 
8.  Will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property or adversely affect the character of adjoining neighborhoods; 
9.  Economic hardship alone is not sufficient reason to grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance; 
10.  No variance to the requirement that the land-disturbing activity obtain required VSMP authority permit shall be given by the Administrator, nor shall the Administrator approve the use of a BMP not found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website, or any other control measure not duly approved by the Department of Environmental Quality; and 
11.  No variance to requirements for phosphorus reductions shall be allowed unless offsite options otherwise permitted pursuant to 9VAC25-870-69 have been considered and found not available. 
B.  The Administrator may grant variances to the City requirements of this Ordinance, provided that: 
1.  The variance does not involve any requirements imposed under the State Code or Regulations; and 
2.  Reasonable and appropriate conditions may be imposed so that the intent of the Act, the Regulations and this Ordinance are preserved. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at their discretion. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-22. - Applicability. 
The following sections 1-22 through 1-27 specify the technical criteria for regulated land-disturbing activities that are not subject to the technical criteria of sections 1-10 through 1-19. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-23. - General. 
A.  Determination of flooding and channel erosion impacts to receiving streams due to land-disturbing activities shall be measured at each point of discharge from the land disturbance and such determination shall include any runoff from the balance of the watershed that also contributes to that point of discharge. 
B.  The specified design storms shall be defined as a twenty-four-hour storm using the NOAA Type "C" twenty-four-hour, twenty-five-year rainfall distribution recommended by the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) when using NRCS methods or as the storm of critical duration that produces the greatest required storage volume at the site. 
C.  For purposes of computing runoff, all pervious lands in the site shall be assumed prior to development to be in good condition (if the lands are pastures, lawns, or parks), with good cover (if the lands are woods), or with conservation treatment (if the lands are cultivated); regardless of conditions existing at the time of computation. 
D.  Construction of stormwater management facilities or modifications to channels shall comply with all applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances. Evidence of approval of all necessary permits shall be presented. 
E.  Impounding structures that are not covered by the Impounding Structure Regulations (4VAC50-20) shall be engineered for structural integrity during the 100-year storm event. 
F.  Predevelopment and postdevelopment runoff rates shall be verified by calculations that are consistent with good engineering practices. 
G.  Outflows from a stormwater management facility or stormwater conveyance system shall be discharged to an adequate channel. 
H.  Proposed residential, commercial or industrial subdivisions shall apply these stormwater management criteria to the land disturbance as a whole. Individual lots in new subdivisions shall not be considered separate land-disturbing activities, but rather the entire subdivision shall be considered a single land development project. Hydrologic parameters shall reflect the ultimate land disturbance shall be used in all engineering calculations. 
I.  All stormwater management facilities shall have an inspection and maintenance plan that identifies the owner and the responsible party for carrying out the inspection and maintenance plan. 
J.  Construction of stormwater management impoundment structures within a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) designated 100-year floodplain shall be avoided to the extent possible. When this is unavoidable, all stormwater management facility construction shall be in compliance with all applicable regulations under the National Flood Insurance Program, 44CFR Part 59. 
K.  Natural channel characteristics shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. 
L.  Land-disturbing activities shall comply with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law and attendant regulations. 
M.  Flood control and stormwater management facilities that drain or treat water from multiple development projects or from a significant portion of a watershed may be allowed in resource protection areas defined in the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act provided such facilities are allowed and constructed in accordance with the Stormwater Management Act and this chapter, and provided that (i) the local government has conclusively established that the location of the facility within the resource protection area is the optimum location; (ii) the size of the facility is the minimum necessary to provide necessary flood control, stormwater treatment, or both; (iii) the facility must be consistent with a comprehensive stormwater management plan developed and approved in accordance with Section 1-19 or with a VSMP that has been approved prior to July 1, 2012, by the board, the Chesapeake Bay Local Assistance Board prior to its abolishment on July 1, 2012, or the Board of Conservation and Recreation; (iv) all applicable permits for construction in state or federal waters must be obtained from the appropriate state and federal agencies, such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission; (v) approval must be received from the local government prior to construction; and (vi) routine maintenance is allowed to be performed on such facilities to assure that they continue to function as designed. It is not the intent of this subdivision to allow a best management practice that collects and treats runoff from only an individual lot or some portion of the lot to be located within a resource protection area. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3618, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1-24. - Water quality. 
A.  Compliance with the water quality criteria may be achieved by applying the performance-based criteria or the technology-based criteria to either the site or a planning area. 
B.  Performance-based criteria. For land-disturbing activities, the calculated postdevelopment nonpoint source pollutant runoff load shall be compared to the calculated predevelopment load based upon the average land cover condition or the existing site condition. A BMP shall be located, designed, and maintained to achieve the target pollutant removal efficiencies specified in Table 1 of this section to effectively reduce the pollutant load to the required level based upon the following four applicable land development situations for which the performance criteria apply: 
1.  Situation 1 consists of land-disturbing activities where the existing percent impervious cover is less than or equal to the average land cover condition and the proposed improvements will create a total percent impervious cover that is less than the average land cover condition. 
Requirement: No reduction in the after disturbance pollutant discharge is required. 
2.  Situation 2 consists of land-disturbing activities where the existing percent impervious cover is less than or equal to the average land cover condition and the proposed improvements will create a total percent impervious cover that is greater than the average land cover condition. 
Requirement: The pollutant discharge after disturbance shall not exceed the existing pollutant discharge based on the average land cover condition. 
3.  Situation 3 consists of land-disturbing activities where the existing percent impervious cover is greater than the average land cover condition. 
Requirement: The pollutant discharge after disturbance shall not exceed (i) the pollutant discharge based on existing conditions less 10% or (ii) the pollutant discharge based on the average land cover condition, whichever is greater. 
4.  Situation 4 consists of land-disturbing activities where the existing percent impervious cover is served by an existing stormwater management BMP that addresses water quality. 
Requirement: The pollutant discharge after disturbance shall not exceed the existing pollutant discharge based on the existing percent impervious cover while served by the existing BMP. The existing BMP shall be shown to have been designed and constructed in accordance with proper design standards and specifications, and to be in proper functioning condition. 
C.  Technology-based criteria. For land-disturbing activities, the postdeveloped stormwater runoff from the impervious cover shall be treated by an appropriate BMP as required by the postdeveloped condition percent impervious cover as specified in Table 1 of this section. The selected BMP shall be located, designed, and maintained to perform at the target pollutant removal efficiency specified in Table 1 or those found in Section 1-12. Design standards and specifications for the BMPs in Table 1 that meet the required target pollutant removal efficiency are available in the 1999 Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook. Other approved BMPs available on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website may also be utilized. 
Table 1* 
Water Quality BMP 	Target Phosphorus Removal Efficiency 	Percent Impervious Cover 
Vegetated filter strip 	10% 	16—21% 
Grassed Swale 	15% 	
Constructed wetlands 	20% 	22—37% 
Extended detention (2 × WQ Vol) 	35% 	
Retention basin I (3 × WQ Vol) 	40% 	
Bioretention basin 	50% 	38—66% 
Bioretention filter 	50% 	
Extended detention-enhanced 	50% 	
Retention basin II (4 × WQ Vol) 	50% 	
Infiltration (1 × WQ Vol) 	50% 	
Sand filter 	65% 	67—100% 
Infiltration (2 × WQ Vol) 	65% 	
Retention basin III (4 × WQ Vol with aquatic bench) 	65% 	
*Innovative or alternate BMPs not included in this table may be allowed at the discretion of local program administrator or the department. 
Innovative or alternate BMPs not included in this table that target appropriate nonpoint source pollution other than phosphorous may be allowed at the discretion of the local program administrator or the department. 
 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3618, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1-25. - Stream channel erosion. 
A.  Properties and receiving waterways, both upstream and downstream of any land-disturbing activity shall be protected from erosion and damage due to changes in runoff rate of flow and hydrologic characteristics, including, but not limited to, changes in volume, velocity, frequency, duration, and peak flow rate of stormwater runoff in accordance with the minimum design standards set out in this section. 
B.  The VSMP authority shall require compliance with subdivision 19 of 9VAC25-840-40 of the Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations, promulgated pursuant to the Erosion and Sediment Control Law. 
C.  The VSMP authority may determine that some watersheds or receiving stream systems require enhanced criteria in order to address the increased frequency of bankfull flow conditions (top of bank) brought on by land-disturbing activities or where more stringent requirements are necessary to address total maximum daily load requirements or to protect exceptional waters. Therefore, in lieu of the reduction of the two-year postdeveloped peak rate of runoff as required in subsection B. of this section, the land development project being considered shall provide twenty-four-hour extended detention of the runoff generated by the one-year, twenty-four-hour duration storm, as defined in this ordinance. 
D.  In addition to subsection B. and C. of this section, the VSMP authority by local ordinance may in accordance with § 62.1-44.15:33 of the Code of Virginia, or the board by state regulation may, adopt more stringent channel analysis criteria or design standards to ensure that the natural level of channel erosion, to the maximum extent practicable, will not increase due to the land-disturbing activities. These criteria may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Criteria and procedures for channel analysis and classification. 
2.  Procedures for channel data collection. 
3.  Criteria and procedures for the determination of the magnitude and frequency of natural sediment transport loads. 
4.  Criteria for the selection of proposed natural or manmade channel linings. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3618, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1-26. - Flooding. 
A.  Upstream, downstream and adjacent properties and waterways shall be protected from damages from localized flooding due to changes in runoff rate of flow and hydrologic characteristics, including, but not limited to, changes in volume, velocity, frequency, duration, and peak flow rate of stormwater runoff in accordance with the minimum design standards set out in this section. 
B.  The ten-year postdeveloped peak rate of runoff from the development site shall not exceed the ten-year predeveloped peak rate of runoff nor provide any increase in HGL upstream to the watershed limits and adjoining parcels downstream contributing to the point of adequacy. 
C.  In lieu of subsection B. of this section, the City may, by ordinance in accordance with § 62.1-44.15:33 of the Code of Virginia, adopt alternate design criteria based upon geographic, land use, topographic, geologic factors, or other downstream conveyance factors as appropriate. 
D.  Linear development projects shall not be required to control postdeveloped stormwater runoff for flooding, except in accordance with a watershed or regional stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3618, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1-27. - Regional (watershed-wide) stormwater management plans. 
Water quality requirements and where allowed, water quantity requirements, may be achieved in accordance with sections 1-14 and 1-19. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-28. - Long-term maintenance of permanent stormwater facilities. 
A.  The Administrator shall require the provision of long-term responsibility for and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and other techniques specified to manage the quality and quantity of runoff. Such requirements shall be set forth in a Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Agreement recorded in the local land records of the Virginia Beach Circuit Court, prior to issuance of a VSMP permit and shall: 
1.  Be submitted to the Administrator for review, approval and recordation prior to the issuance of the VSMP permit; 
2.  Be stated to run with the land; 
3.  Provide for all necessary access to the property for purposes of maintenance and regulatory inspections; 
4.  Provide for inspections and maintenance and the submission of inspection and maintenance reports to the Administrator; 
5.  Be enforceable by all appropriate governmental parties; and 
6.  Be approved for legal sufficiency by the City Attorney. 
B.  At the discretion of the Administrator, such recorded instruments need not be required for stormwater management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff primarily from an individual residential lot on which they are located, provided it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Administrator that future maintenance of such facilities will be addressed through an enforceable mechanism. 
C.  If a recorded instrument is not required pursuant to the subsection above, the Administrator shall develop a strategy for addressing maintenance of stormwater management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff primarily from an individual residential lot on which they are located. Such a strategy may include periodic homeowner inspections, homeowner outreach and education, or other method targeted at promoting the long-term maintenance of such facilities. Such facilities shall not be subject to the requirement for an inspection to be conducted by the Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-29. - Monitoring and inspections. 
A.  The Administrator shall inspect the land-disturbing activity during construction for: 
1.  Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
2.  Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
3.  Development, updating, and implementation of a pollution prevention plan; and 
4.  Development and implementation of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL. 
B.  The Administrator may, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
C.  In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement or instrument, the Administrator may also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land-disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified. 
D.  Pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:40 of the Code of Virginia, the Administrator may require every VSMP authority permit applicant or permittee, or any such person subject to VSMP authority permit requirements under this Ordinance, to furnish when requested such application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the effect of his discharge on the quality of state waters, or such other information as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Ordinance. 
E.  Post-construction inspections of stormwater management facilities required by the provisions of this Ordinance shall be conducted by the Administrator pursuant to the City's adopted and State Board approved inspection program, and shall occur, at minimum, at least once every five (5) years. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-30. - Hearings. 
A.  Any permit applicant or permittee, or person subject to Ordinance requirements, aggrieved by any action of the City taken in regard to the Ordinance without a formal hearing, may demand in writing a formal hearing by the Stormwater Appeals Board, who is designated by the City Council as its appeals body, provided a petition requesting such hearing is filed with the Administrator within thirty (30) days after notice of such action is given by the Administrator. 
B.  The hearings held under this Section shall be conducted by the Stormwater Appeals Board at any time and place authorized by the Stormwater Appeals Board. 
C.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of such hearings shall be taken and filed with the Stormwater Appeals Board. Depositions may be taken and read as in actions at law. 
D.  The Stormwater Appeals Board, shall have power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, and at the request of any party shall issue such subpoenas. The failure of a witness without legal excuse to appear or to testify or to produce documents shall be acted upon by the Stormwater Appeals Board, whose action may include the procurement of an order of enforcement from the circuit court. Witnesses who are subpoenaed shall receive the same fees and reimbursement for mileage as in civil actions. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3618, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1-31. - Appeals. 
Within thirty (30) days of the decision of the Stormwater Appeals Board a decision entered pursuant to section 1-30 may be appealed to the Circuit Court of the City of Virginia Beach. The petition for appeal shall be filed in writing within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision, determination or action, shall state clearly the grounds on which the appeal is based. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-32. - Enforcement. 
A.  If the Administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the VSMP authority permit conditions or determines there is an unauthorized discharge, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the permit conditions by any of the following: verbal warnings and inspection reports, notices of corrective action, consent special orders, and notices to comply. Written notices shall be served by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or by delivery at the site of the development activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. 
1.  The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the permit conditions and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, a stop work order may be issued in accordance with subsection B. or the permit may be revoked by the Administrator. 
2.  If a permittee fails to comply with a notice issued in accordance with this section within the time specified, the Administrator may issue an order requiring the owner, permittee, person responsible for carrying out an approved plan, or the person conducting the land-disturbing activities without an approved plan or required permit to cease all land-disturbing activities until the violation of the permit has ceased, or an approved plan and required permits are obtained, and specified corrective measures have been completed. 
Such orders shall become effective upon service on the person by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to his address specified in the land records of the locality, or by personal delivery by an agent of the Administrator. However, if the Administrator finds that any such violation is grossly affecting or presents an imminent and substantial danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the Commonwealth or otherwise substantially impacting water quality, it may issue, without advance notice or hearing, an emergency order directing such person to cease immediately all land-disturbing activities on the site and shall provide an opportunity for a hearing, after reasonable notice as to the time and place thereof, to such person, to affirm, modify, amend, or cancel such emergency order. If a person who has been issued an order is not complying with the terms thereof, the Administrator may institute a proceeding for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy in accordance with this section. 
B.  In addition to any other remedy provided by this Ordinance, if the Administrator or his designee determines that there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, they may initiate such informal or formal administrative enforcement procedures in a manner that is consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, State law and regulations. 
C.  Any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any rule, regulation, ordinance, order, approved standard or specification, or any permit condition issued by the Administrator may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the Circuit Court of the City of Virginia Beach by the City to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. 
D.  Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance or who fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with any order of the Administrator, shall be subject to a civil penalty, ordered by the Circuit Court, not to exceed thirty-two thousand five hundred dollars ($32,500.00) for each violation within the discretion of the court. Each day of violation of each requirement shall constitute a separate offense. 
1.  Violations for which a penalty may be imposed under this Subsection shall include but not be limited to the following: 
i.  No state permit registration; 
ii.  No SWPPP; 
iii.  Incomplete SWPPP; 
iv.  SWPPP not available for review; 
v.  No approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
vi.  Failure to install stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls; 
vii.  Stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls improperly installed or maintained; 
viii.  Operational deficiencies; 
ix.  Failure to conduct required inspections; 
x.  Incomplete, improper, or missed inspections; and 
xi.  Discharges not in compliance with the requirements of Section 9VAC 25-870-1170 of the general permit. 
2.  The Administrator may institute proceedings for collection of the civil penalty and the action may be prosecuted in the appropriate court. 
3.  In imposing a civil penalty pursuant to this Subsection, the court may consider the degree of harm caused by the violation and also the economic benefit to the violator from noncompliance. 
4.  Any civil penalties assessed by a court as a result of a summons issued by the City shall be paid into a segregated account into the treasury of the City of Virginia Beach to be used for the purpose of minimizing, preventing, managing, or mitigating pollution of the waters of the locality and abating environmental pollution therein. 
5.  Notwithstanding any other civil or equitable remedy provided by this Section or by law, any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this Ordinance, any order of the Administrator, any condition of a permit, or any order of a court shall, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not more than twelve (12) months or a fine of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or both. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-33. - Fees. 
A.  Fees to cover costs associated with implementation of a VSMP related to land disturbing activities and issuance of general permit coverage and VSMP authority permits shall be imposed in accordance with the fees in Table 1. When a site or sites has been purchased for development within a previously permitted common plan of development or sale, the Applicant shall be subject to fees in accordance with the disturbed acreage of their site or sites according to Table 1. 
Table 1: Fees for stormwater plan review 
Fee type 	City Stormwater Plan Review Fee 	Fee paid directly to the Commonwealth 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act Land-Disturbing Activity (not subject to General Permit coverage; sites within designated areas of Chesapeake Bay Act localities with land-disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet and less than 1 acre) 	Single family: $205 
Duplex: $205 
All others: $600 	$0 
General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre.) 	Single family: $205 
Duplex: $205 
All others: $600 	$81 
Single family: $0 
General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 1 acre and less than 5 Acres) 	Single family: $205 
Duplex: $205 
All others: $1944 	$756 
Single family: $0 
General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres) 	$2,448 	$952 
General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres) 	$3,240 	$1,260 
General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) 	$4,392 	$1,708 
General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 100 acres) 	$6,912 	$2,688 
 
* If the project is completely administered by the Department such as may be the case for a state or federal project or projects covered by individual permits, the entire applicant fee shall be paid to the Commonwealth. 
B.  Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements from the general permit issued by the State Board shall be imposed in accordance with Table 2. If the general permit modifications result in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the City of Virginia Beach, such reviews shall be subject to the fees set out in Table 2. The fee assessed shall be based on the total disturbed acreage of the site. In addition to the general permit modification fee, modifications resulting in an increase in total disturbed acreage shall pay the difference in the initial permit fee paid and the permit fee that would have applied for the total disturbed acreage in Table 1. 
Table 2: Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements for the General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities 
Type of Permit 	Fee Amount 
General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre) 	$20 
General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 1 and less than 5 acres) 	$200 
General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres) 	$250 
General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres) 	$300 
General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) 	$450 
General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 100 acres) 	$700 
 
C.  The following annual permit maintenance shall be imposed in accordance with Table 3, including fees imposed on expired permits that have been administratively continued. With respect to the general permit, these fees shall apply until the permit coverage is terminated. 
Table 3: Permit Maintenance Fees 
Type of Permit 	Fee Amount 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act Land-Disturbing Activity (not subject to General Permit coverage; sites within designated areas of Chesapeake Bay Act localities with land-disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet and less than 1 acre) 	$50 
General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre) 	$50 
General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites with land disturbance equal to or greater than 1 acre and less than 5 acres) 	$400 
General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres) 	$500 
General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres) 	$650 
General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) 	$900 
General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater 100 acres) 	$1,400 
 
General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be paid annually to the City of Virginia Beach, by the anniversary date of general permit coverage. No permit will be reissued or automatically continued without payment of the required fee. General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be applied until a Notice of Termination is effective. 
D.  The fees set forth in subsections A. through C. above, shall apply to: 
1.  All persons seeking coverage under the general permit, if required. 
2.  All permittees who request modifications to or transfers of their existing registration statement for coverage under a general permit. 
3.  Persons whose coverage under the general permit has been revoked shall apply to the Department for an Individual Permit for Discharges of Stormwater From Construction Activities. 
4.  Permit and permit coverage maintenance fees outlined under section 1-33 C. may apply to each general permit holder. 
E.  No general permit application fees will be assessed to: 
1.  Permittees who request minor modifications to general permits as defined in section 1-3 of this Ordinance. Permit modifications at the request of the permittee resulting in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the Administrator shall not be exempt pursuant to this Section. 
2.  Permittees whose general permits are modified or amended at the initiative of the Department, excluding errors in the registration statement identified by the Administrator or errors related to the acreage of the site. 
F.  All incomplete payments will be deemed as nonpayments, and the applicant shall be notified of any incomplete payments. Interest may be charged for late payments at the underpayment rate set forth in § 58.1-15 of the Code of Virginia and is calculated on a monthly basis at the applicable periodic rate. A ten (10) percent late payment fee shall be charged to any delinquent (over ninety (90) days past due) account. The City of Virginia Beach shall be entitled to all remedies available under the Code of Virginia in collecting any past due amount. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-34. - Performance bond. 
Prior to issuance of any permit, the Applicant may be required to submit a reasonable performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement acceptable to the City Attorney, to ensure that measures could be taken by the City at the Applicant's expense should he fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate actions which may be required of him by the permit conditions as a result of his land-disturbing activity. If the City takes such action upon such failure by the Applicant, the City may collect from the Applicant for the difference should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of the security held, if any. Within sixty (60) days of the completion of the requirements of the permit conditions, such bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be refunded to the Applicant or terminated. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-35. - Public Works Design Standards Manual. 
The Public Works Design Standards Manual, including all future amendments thereto is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3618, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 1-36. - Severability. 
Each separate provision of this Ordinance is deemed independent of all other provisions herein so that if any provision or provisions of this Ordinance be declared invalid, all other provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 1-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3618, adopted June 16, 2020 repealed § 1-37, which pertained to effective date and derived from Ord. No. 3337, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14.  
APPENDIX E - TREE PLANTING, PRESERVATION AND REPLACEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1965, adopted June 11, 1990, added App. E to the Code. Said appendix is set out herein as enacted, with minor editorial emendation in brackets [ ] added for clarity. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8; housing and building maintenance code, Ch. 16; soil removal and other land-disturbing activities, Ch. 30; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 33; city zoning ordinance, App. A; subdivision regulations, App. B; site plan ordinance, App. C. 
 
Sec. 1.1. - Narrative. 
Trees are proven producers of oxygen, a necessary element for the survival of man. Trees appreciably reduce the ever-increasing and environmentally dangerous carbon dioxide contents in the air, and they play a vital role in purifying the air that man breathes. 
Trees precipitate dust and other particulate airborne pollutants to settle on the ground. 
Trees, through their root systems, stabilize the water table and play an important and effective part in soil conservation and erosion control. 
Trees are an invaluable physical and psychological counterpart to the urban setting, make urban life more comfortable by providing shade and cooling of the air and land, and reducing noise levels and glare. 
The city council of Virginia Beach has determined that the planting and preservation of trees within Virginia Beach is not only desirable but essential to the present and future health, safety and welfare of all the citizens. 
(Ord. No. 1965, 6-11-90)  
Sec. 1.2. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the City of Virginia Beach to require the planting of trees on residential lots and along residential streets. It is further intended to perpetuate tree growth through these provisions, to encourage tree preservation, provide adequate tree canopy and numbers, in the best interests of the health, safety and welfare of present and future citizens. 
(Ord. No. 1965, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2330, 5-23-95)  
Sec. 1.3. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this ordinance [appendix], certain terms as defined as follows: 
Caliper: The diameter of a tree measured six (6) inches above existing grade. 
Canopy cover: The crown "branch" area of a tree measured in square feet after ten (10) years from installation as specified in this ordinance [appendix]. 
Cultivar: A "variety" of plant denoting an assemblage of cultivated individuals which are distinguished by any significant characteristics and which, reproduced, retain their distinguishing characteristics. 
Drip line: An imaginary, perpendicular line that extends downward from the outermost tips of the branches to the ground. 
Lot size: That portion of the lot allowed for use in determining the minimum lot size requirements as stated in section 200 of the city zoning ordinance. 
Multistem tree: A tree having more than one stem "trunk" emerging from the root system. 
Planning director: The director of the department of planning or his designee. 
Residential lot: A piece or parcel of land abutting on a street and created by proper legal instrument upon which is to be built one or more dwelling units and shall include single-family condominiums. 
Resubdivision: Subdividing an existing subdivision to change the shape or size of the lots without increasing density. 
Species: The unit in the botanical classification of plants. 
Standard tree: A tree grown with a single erect stem. 
Tree: Any self-supporting woody plant of a species which normally grows, in Virginia Beach, at a commonly accepted maturity, to an overall height of a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1965, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2153, 6-23-92)  
Sec. 1.4. - Application. 
The terms and provisions of this ordinance [appendix] shall apply to property as follows: 
A.  Residential. 
1.  All residential lots shall have trees planted, or canopy cover provided, based upon the following minimum requirements by lot size: 
a.  1—4,999 square feet: 
(1)  One small tree per attached townhouse interior lot. 
(2)  Two (2) small, or medium, trees for attached townhouse end lots. 
(3)  Two (2) small or medium trees for all other lots. 
b.  5,000—7,499 square feet: 300 square-foot canopy cover. 
c.  7,500—9,999 square feet: 400 square-foot canopy cover. 
d.  10,000—14,999 square feet: 600 square-foot canopy cover. 
e.  15,000—19,999 square feet: 750 square-foot canopy cover. 
f.  20,000—29,999 square feet: 900 square-foot canopy cover. 
g.  30,000—65,339 square feet: 1,000 square-foot canopy cover. 
h.  65,340—87,119 square feet: 1500 square-foot canopy cover. 
i.  87,200 square feet and greater: 2,000 square-foot canopy cover. 
2.  Trees shall be selected from the specifications and standards and shall be a minimum of five (5) to six (6) feet in height for small trees at the time of planting and one and one-half (1½) inches to two (2) inches caliper for medium and large trees at the time of planting. Planting shall be accomplished in accordance with the specifications and standards. 
3.  Existing or relocated trees on individual lots may be used to satisfy section 1.4.A., provided that: 
a.  The trees meet or exceed the quantities required for lots one to four thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (4,999) square feet or canopy cover as listed in section 1.4.A.1.; and 
b.  The trees have been protected in accordance with section 1.4.A.5. during construction and are physically and structurally in good condition per the city arborist or his designee; 
c.  Trees that have canopy extending over adjoining lots will receive credit for only that portion of canopy covering the lot from which the tree is growing. Credit for canopy cover will be given when tree on adjoining lots have canopy extending over an individual lot, but only that portion extending will be credited towards the required canopy cover for the individual lot. Canopy cover for street trees shall be credited toward residential lots in the amount of area on the individual lot measured from the right-of-way line. This credit will be considered only if the outline of the tree canopy, square footage of the tree canopy and type of tree are shown on the site plan when presented to obtain a building permit. 
4.  Nonacceptable trees: Trees selected for residential use shall not be of a species, variety or cultivar from the nonacceptable tree list in the specifications and standards. 
5.  Tree protection during construction: Existing trees that are to be used to meet the requirements of section 1.4 shall be protected in accordance with the following: Before construction activity begins, protective barriers must be securely in place. Minimum undisturbed areas shall be determined by multiplying the tree's diameter breast height (DBH), measured at four and one-half (4½) feet, by one foot. This is the minimum diameter that must be left undisturbed around each tree. This area is approximately the area of the outermost branches (drip line). All construction activities shall be prohibited within the minimum undisturbed areas provided for any tree(s) for which credit is given toward satisfying the residential canopy requirements. All temporary construction activities shall also be prohibited with the minimum undisturbed areas, including all excavating, filling, trenching, construction storage and dumping, and parking of construction equipment/vehicles or employee vehicles. 
6.  Inspection and bonding: Each lot shall be inspected and approved prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or final inspection approval. All new trees must be identified with species identification tags and must remain tagged until after the inspection is complete. The inspection shall be performed by the permits and inspections division of the department of planning. Where additional residential lot trees are required, no certificate of occupancy or final inspection approval shall be issued until the required trees have been planted in accordance with City of Virginia Beach typical planting standards. When the occupancy of a structure is desired prior to the completion of the residential lot tree planting requirement, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued if the owner or developer provides to the permits and inspections division of the department of planning a disclosure statement accepting responsibility for the installation of the required trees. 
B.  Street tree planting: 
1.  Trees shall be planted within all public rights-of-way in conjunction with new residential development except resubdivisions, undeveloped rights-of-way and townhouse developments where the street design does not provide greenspace for street trees. Trees shall be planted in accordance with a master street tree plan, section 1.4.B.4, that is to be included with the subdivision construction plans. The master street tree plan is to be prepared in accordance with section 1.4.B.4. and approved by the planning director. 
2.  All street trees shall be a minimum of one and three-fourths (1¾) to two (2) inch caliper at time of planting for standard trees and five (5) feet to six (6) feet in height for multistem trees at time of planting. Trees shall be guaranteed to be in good physical condition as determined by the city arborist or his designee, for a period of one year by the developer. The one-year period shall commence from the time of final inspection. 
3.  Tree selection: Trees shall be selected from the specifications and standards. Tree selection shall be small or medium size and spaced according to the recommended list of street trees in the specifications and standards when distance between sidewalk and curb is four (4) feet. Tree selection shall be medium or large size and spaced according to the recommended list of street trees in the specifications and standards where the distances between sidewalk and curb is greater than four (4) feet or if a sidewalk is not required. 
4.  Master street tree plan: A master street tree plan shall be prepared and contain the following information: 
a.  A landscape plan drawn to the same scale as the subdivision plan showing the location and spacing of all trees to be planted. 
b.  Botanical names, common names, sizes and quantities. 
c.  Planting details. 
d.  Location of all curb lines, sidewalks and major utilities. Utilities conflicting with placement of trees shall require an adjustment of tree spacing. When adjustment is necessary, spacing shall not exceed the maximum allowable spacing. No trees shall be placed within ten (10) feet of a streetlight pole nor encroach within the visibility triangle as defined by section 201(f) of the city zoning ordinance. Generally, a minimum of four (4) feet of greenspace on either side of the sidewalk shall be required. 
e.  Trees on residential lots shall not be used to meet the requirements of street tree planting, except when a lot or group of lots are heavily wooded and the planting of street trees would physically conflict with the canopy of the residential trees. The street tree requirements may be deleted in these areas only. The planning director or his designee shall determine if such a conflict exists. 
5.  Bonding: Prior to the recordation of any final subdivision plat, the developer shall provide a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, irrevocable letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement acceptable to the city attorney to cover the costs of such trees and their planting. In the event that the developer fails to plant such trees as required by this ordinance, the city may use the performance bond to cover the cost of purchase and planting of all required street trees. In such event, the developer shall reimburse the city for any excess cost should the cost of purchase and planting of the trees exceed the amount of security provided. A bond shall be required to cover the guarantee period. 
C.  Exemptions: 
1.  The requirements of section 1.4.B. of this appendix shall not apply to resubdivisions or to unimproved rights-of-way. 
2.  The requirements of section 1.4.B. shall not apply to townhouse developments where the street design does not provide adequate greenspace for street trees. 
D.  Compatibility with best management practices (BMPS). In no case shall a subdivision be approved wherein the design calls for the planting of trees over any underground water retention areas. 
(Ord. No. 1965, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2153, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2330, 5-23-95)  
Sec. 1.5. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance [appendix] shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1965, 6-11-90)  
Sec. 1.6. - Variances and appeals. 
A.  The city manager or his designee is authorized, upon appeal in specific cases, to grant a variance from the terms of the ordinance [appendix] as will not be contrary to the public interest, when owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions will result in unnecessary hardship, provided that the spirit of the ordinance [appendix] shall be observed and substantial justice done, as follows: 
1.  Strict application of the terms of the ordinance [appendix] will effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the use of the property. 
2.  Granting of such variance will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship approaching confiscation as distinguished from a special privilege. 
In authorizing a variance, the city manager or his designee may impose such conditions as may be necessary in the public interest. 
B.  It is further provided that any decision of the city manager or his designee may be modified, reversed or affirmed by the city council upon appeal by any aggrieved party to such decision, if such appeal is filed within thirty (30) days of such decision. 
C.  Final decision under this ordinance [appendix] shall be subject to review by the appropriate court of record, if filed within thirty (30) days from the date of council action. 
D.  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, variances and appeals arising from provisions of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance [Appendix F] included or incorporated in this ordinance [appendix] shall be in accordance with Section 110 or Section 111 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 1965, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 2153, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2794, 12-9-03)  
APPENDIX F - CHESAPEAKE BAY PRESERVATION AREA ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006, adopted Nov. 6, 1990, added App. F to the Code. The appendix is set out as enacted, with the exception that obvious misspellings have been corrected and minor editorial emendations have been made for the sake of clarity. 
Cross reference— Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Board, § 2-452.1; beaches, boats and waterways, Ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28; soil removal and other land-disturbing activities, Ch. 30; city zoning ordinance, App. A; subdivision regulations, App. B; site plan ordinance, App. C; stormwater management, App. D; southern watersheds management ordinance, App. G; storm sewer system discharge ordinance, App. H. 
 
Sec. 100. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03)  
Sec. 101. - Findings of fact. 
The Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries constitute one of the most important and productive estuarine systems in the world, providing economic and social benefits to the citizens of the City of Virginia Beach and the Commonwealth of Virginia. The health of the Bay and its tributaries is vital to maintaining the City of Virginia Beach's economy and the welfare of its citizens. 
The waters of the Chesapeake Bay watershed have been degraded significantly by many sources of pollution, including nonpoint source pollution from land development. These waters are worthy of protection from further degradation. Certain lands that are proximate to shorelines have an intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform. With proper management, they offer significant ecological benefits by providing water quality maintenance and pollution control, as well as flood and shoreline erosion control. These lands, designated by the City Council as Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas, shall be developed in such manner as to protect the quality of water in the Bay. 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03)  
Sec. 102. - Purpose and intent. 
(A)  This ordinance is adopted in order to implement the requirements and stated purposes of The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act (Sections 62.1-44.15:67 through 62.1-44.15:79 of the Code of Virginia) and the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Designation and Management Regulations (9VAC 25-830-10 et seq.) promulgated thereunder. 
The intent of the City Council and the purpose of this ordinance are to: (1) protect existing high quality state waters; (2) prevent any increase in pollution; and (3) restore state waters to a condition or quality that will permit all reasonable public uses and will support the propagation and growth of all aquatic life, including game fish, which might reasonably be expected to inhabit them. 
The performance standards established by this ordinance provide the means to minimize erosion and sedimentation potential, reduce land application of nutrients and toxins, and maximize rainwater infiltration. Indigenous ground cover, especially woody vegetation, is effective in holding soil in place and preventing site erosion. Existing vegetation filters stormwater runoff. By minimizing impervious cover, rainwater infiltration is enhanced and stormwater runoff is reduced. 
(B)  The designation of any area as a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the zoning district classification of such area, such that any parcel of land situated within a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall also lie in one or more of the zoning districts established pursuant to Section 102 of the City Zoning Ordinance (Appendix A) and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this ordinance and the City Zoning Ordinance (Appendix A). 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 3341, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 103. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in this ordinance shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Accessory structure. Any structure located on a lot or parcel not identified as a principal structure as defined herein. 
Agricultural lands. Those lands used for the planting and harvesting of crops or plant growth of any kind in the open, pasture, horticulture, dairy farming, floriculture, or the raising of poultry or livestock. 
Applicant. Any person submitting any application required or permitted pursuant to any of the provisions of this ordinance, and any person on whose behalf such an application is submitted. 
Best management practice. A practice, or a combination of practices, determined to be the most effective practicable means of preventing or reducing the amount of pollution generated by nonpoint sources to a level compatible with water quality goals. 
Best management practice, structural. A best management practice that requires the design and certification of a licensed design professional. 
Board. The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Board. 
Buffer area. An area of existing or established vegetation managed to protect other components of a Resource Protection Area and state waters from significant degradation due to land disturbances. 
Caliper. The diameter of a tree measured six (6) inches above existing grade. 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area. Any land designated as such on the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map adopted by the City Council, subject to the determination of the City Manager on a site-specific basis. A Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall consist of a Resource Protection Area and a Resource Management Area. 
Manager. The City Manager or such other person or persons as he may designate to perform the duties, or to exercise the authority, of the City Manager pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance. 
Construction footprint. The area of all impervious surface created by development or redevelopment of land, including, but not limited to, buildings, roads, drives, parking areas and sidewalks, and any other land disturbed for the construction of such improvements. 
Development. The construction or installation of any improvement upon a parcel of land, or any land disturbance associated therewith. For floodplain management purposes, development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, the placement of manufactured homes, streets, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, or the subdivision of land. 
Diameter at breast height. The diameter of a tree measured at a point four and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the existing grade. 
Dripline. An imaginary perpendicular line extending downward from the outermost tips of the branches of a tree to the ground. 
Highly erodible soils. Those soils on slopes seaward of the point at which the slope of the ground changes from less than six (6) percent to greater than six (6) percent and the toe of the slope is located within one hundred (100) feet of tidal wetlands, nontidal wetlands or tidal shores. The top of bank shall be the landward limit of highly erodible soils. 
Impervious cover. A surface composed of any material which significantly impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into the soil, including, but not limited to, buildings and other structures and the components thereof, concrete, asphalt, or compacted gravel surface. 
Land disturbance. Any activity upon land which causes, contributes to, or results in the destruction, removal or covering of the vegetation upon such land, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, filling, grading or excavating. The term shall not include minor activities such as home gardening, individual home landscaping and home maintenance. 
Nonpoint source pollution. Pollution consisting of constituents such as sediment, nutrients, and organic and toxic substances from diffuse sources, such as runoff from agriculture and urban land development and use. 
Nontidal wetlands. Those wetlands other than tidal wetlands that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions identified or referred to in the City of Virginia Beach Soil Survey by soil names Backbay Mucky Peat; Duckston portion of Corolla-Duckston Fine Sand; Dorovan Mucky Peat; Duckston Fine Sand; Nawney Silt Loam; Pamlico Mucky Peat; Pamlico-Lakehurst Variant Complex; Pocaty Peat; or Rappahannock Mucky Peat, Strongly Saline; and any other lands which under normal conditions are saturated to the ground surface and connected by surface flow and contiguous to tidal wetlands or adjacent to waterbodies with perennial flow. 
Noxious weeds. Plants such as Johnson grass, kudzu, and multiflora rose. 
Person. An individual, fiduciary, corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, or any other entity or combination thereof. 
Principal structure. A structure that encloses or houses any principal use. For the purposes of this ordinance the term principal structure shall not include appurtenances including (i) a required parking area as set forth in Sections 203 (a) and (b) of the City Zoning Ordinance (Appendix A), (ii) a driveway connecting the required parking area to the public right-of-way, and (iii) a sidewalk connecting any outside entrance or exit of the principal structure to the required parking area. 
Public road. A publicly owned road designed and constructed in accordance with water quality protection criteria at least as stringent as requirements applicable to the Virginia Department of Transportation, including regulations promulgated pursuant to (i) the Erosion and Sediment Control Law (Section 10.1-560 et seq. of the Code of Virginia), and (ii) the Virginia Stormwater Management Act (Section 10.1-603.1 et seq. of the Code of Virginia). This definition includes those roads where the Virginia Department of Transportation exercises direct supervision over the design or construction activities, or both, and cases where roads are constructed or maintained, or both, by the City in accordance with the Public Works Design Standards Manual. 
Redevelopment. The construction, substantial alteration or installation of any improvement upon a lot or parcel of land, that is or has been previously developed. 
Resource Management Area. That component of a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area not classified as a Resource Protection Area. Resource Management Areas include land types which, if improperly used or developed, have the potential for causing significant water quality degradation or for diminishing the functional value of a Resource Protection Area. 
Resource Protection Area. That component of a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area comprised of lands adjacent to waterbodies with perennial flow which have an intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform or are sensitive to impacts which may result in significant degradation to the quality of state waters. 
Silvicultural activities. Forest management activities, including but not limited to the harvesting of timber, the construction of roads and trails for forest management purposes, and the preparation of property for reforestation that are constructed in accordance with the silvicultural best management practices developed and enforced by the State Forester pursuant to Section 10.1-1105 of the Code of Virginia and are located on property defined as real estate devoted to forest use under Section 58.1-3230 of the Code of Virginia. 
Subdivision. The division of any parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels. The term shall include all changes in lot lines, the creation of new lots involving any division of an existing lot or lots and, if a new street is involved in such division, any division of a parcel of land. When appropriate to the context, the term shall also include the process of subdividing and the territory subdivided. 
Substantial Alteration. The expansion or modification of a building or development that would result in a disturbance of land exceeding an area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in the Resource Management Protection Area only. 
Tidal shore. The area between the mean low water and mean high water levels of tidal waters. 
Tidal wetlands. Vegetated and nonvegetated wetlands as defined in Section 1401 of the City Zoning Ordinance (Appendix A). 
Water-dependent facility. A development of land which cannot exist outside of a Resource Protection Area and which must be located on the shoreline by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operation. These facilities include, but are not limited to, ports, the intake and outfall structures of power plants, water treatment plants, sewage treatment plants, storm sewers, marinas and other boat docking structures, beaches and other public water-oriented recreation areas, fisheries or other marine resources facilities, and shoreline protection measures as authorized under the provisions of Sections 1400—1418 of the City Zoning Ordinance (Appendix A). 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2086, 7-9-91; Ord. No. 2154, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2190, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 2663, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2855, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 3030, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 3314, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3623, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 104. - Areas of applicability. 
(A)  The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance shall apply to all lands which are included in the Chesapeake Bay watershed within the City of Virginia Beach. Such lands are designated as Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas on the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map. 
(B)  Resource Protection Areas shall include the following components: 
(1)  Tidal wetlands; 
(2)  Nontidal wetlands; 
(3)  Tidal shores; and 
(4)  A variable width buffer area not less than one hundred (100) feet in width. 
The variable width buffer area shall be located: (i) adjacent to and landward of the components listed in (1) through (3) above and (ii) along both sides of any water body with perennial flow. The variable width buffer area shall also include highly erodible soils where present and shall extend one hundred (100) feet landward of the landward limit of highly erodible soils. 
(C)  Resource Management Areas shall consist of all lands within Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas which are not designated as Resource Protection Areas. These lands, if improperly used or developed, have a potential for causing significant water quality degradation or for diminishing the functional value of the Resource Protection Area. 
(D)  The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map shall delineate the general locations of Resource Protection Areas and Resource Management Areas. The City Manager shall have the final authority in cases of uncertainty to determine the extent of Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas by application of the criteria set forth in this section. Site-specific determination shall be made by or confirmed by the City for all proposed development. 
(E)  If the area encompassed by a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area includes a portion of a lot less than or equal to three (3) acres in size, the entire lot shall be subject to the requirements of this ordinance. Any lot subdivided after October 1, 1989 out of a lot lying partially within a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall also be subject to the requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2154, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2190, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 2663, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2855, 12-7-04)  
Sec. 105. - Interpretation of Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area boundaries. 
The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map adopted by the City Council shall be used as a guide to the general location of Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas. The site-specific boundaries of a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall initially be delineated by the applicant, and shall be subject to approval and modification by the City Manager on the basis of the criteria set forth in Section 104 of this ordinance. In making such a determination, the City Manager may consider any relevant information and may perform site inspections. When a delineation of a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area, or any component thereof, has been approved or established by the City Manager, the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map shall be amended by the Board to reflect such delineation. 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2154, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2190, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2790, adopted Dec. 9, 2003, repealed former § 105 of this appendix and renumbered former § 107 as § 105. Former § 105 pertained to resource protection area regulations and derived from Ord. No. 2006, adopted Nov. 6, 1990; and Ord. No. 2190, adopted Nov. 10, 1992.  
Sec. 106. - Performance standards. 
The performance standards set forth in this Section are intended to prevent a net increase in nonpoint source pollution from new development and development on previously developed land where the runoff was treated by a water quality protection best management practice. Stormwater management criteria shall be consistent with the provisions of the Stormwater Management Ordinance [Appendix D]. 
(A)  General performance standards for development and redevelopment. Except as otherwise provided herein, the following standards shall apply to all development and redevelopment in both Resource Protection Areas and Resource Management Areas of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area: 
(1)  Land disturbance shall be limited to the area necessary to provide for the proposed use or development. The limits of land disturbance, including clearing or grading, shall be strictly defined by the construction footprint as shown on the approved plan of development. Clearing shall be allowed only to provide necessary access, site drainage, water quality best management practices, installation of utilities and primary and reserve drainfield sites as detailed on a Virginia Department of Health sewage disposal construction permit. These limits shall be clearly shown on all plans submitted and physically marked on the site. 
(2)  Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable consistent with the use or development proposed and in accordance with the current edition of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook. 
(a)  Where areas to be preserved are considered to be part of the stormwater management plan for that site, diseased trees or trees weakened by age, storm, fire, or other injury may be removed. 
(b)  Prior to clearing or grading, suitable protective barriers, such as safety fencing, shall be erected outside of the dripline of any tree or stand of trees to be preserved. These protective barriers shall remain so erected throughout all phases of construction. The storage of equipment, materials, debris, or fill shall not be allowed within the area protected by the barrier. 
(3)  Land development shall minimize impervious cover to promote infiltration of stormwater into the ground consistent with the use or development proposed through the incorporation of structural or nonstructural urban best management practices: 
(a)  As described in the current edition of the Virginia Stormwater Management Practices Handbook; or 
(b)  As described in the City of Virginia Beach Stormwater Management Ordinance (Appendix D). 
(c)  During the design phase of development, consideration should be given to the following means of minimizing impervious cover: 
1.  Placement of parking areas under multiple-family, office or commercial buildings; 
2.  Construction of no more than the minimum number of parking spaces required by the City Zoning Ordinance (Appendix A); 
3.  Utilization of modular grid pavers on private property and in low-traffic zones; and 
4.  Cluster development in lieu of conventional development by use of conditional zoning or the open space promotion option as set forth in the City Zoning Ordinance (Appendix A). 
(4)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, any land disturbance, as defined in Section 10.1-560 of the Code of Virginia, exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, including, but not limited to, construction of all single-family houses, septic tanks, and drainfields, shall comply with the requirements of Article III of Chapter 30 of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach (City Code Sections 30-56 through 30-78). 
(5)  All on-site sewage treatment systems not requiring a Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit shall be pumped out at least once every five (5) years, provided, however, that: 
(a)  Subject to conditions established by the Virginia Beach Health District of the Virginia Department of Health, the owners of such systems may, in lieu of pumping out such systems every five (5) years, have a plastic filter installed and maintained in the outflow pipe from the septic tank to filter solid material from the effluent while sustaining adequate flow to the drainfield to permit normal use of the septic system. Such a filter shall satisfy standards established in the Sewage Handling and Disposal Regulations (12 VAC 5-610) administered by the Virginia Department of Health; and 
(b)  In lieu of requiring proof of septic tank pump out every five (5) years, the City may allow owners of on-site sewage treatment systems to submit documentation every five (5) years, certified by a sewage handler permitted by the Virginia Department of Health, to the effect that the septic system has been inspected and is functioning properly and that the effluent does not need to be pumped out of the tank. 
(6)  For new construction not served by public sewer or other system requiring a VPDES permit, a reserve sewage disposal site with a capacity at least equal to that of the primary sewage disposal site shall be provided. This requirement shall not apply to any lot or parcel recorded prior to October 1, 1989, if such lot or parcel is not sufficient in capacity to accommodate a reserve sewage disposal site, as determined by the Virginia Beach Health District . Building or construction of any impervious surface shall be prohibited on the area of all sewage disposal sites, including reserve sewage disposal sites, until the property is served by public sewer or an on-site sewage treatment system operating under a VPDES permit. All sewage disposal site records shall be administered to provide adequate notice and enforcement. As an alternative to the reserve sewage disposal site, the owners of such systems may install an alternative drainfield system meeting the following conditions: 
(a)  Each of the two (2) alternating drainfields in the system shall have, at a minimum, an area not less than fifty (50) percent of the area that would otherwise be required if a single primary drainfield were constructed; 
(b)  An area equal to fifty (50) percent of the area that would otherwise be required for the primary drainfield site shall be reserved for subsurface absorption systems that utilize a flow diversion device, in order to provide for future replacement or repair to meet the requirements for a sewage disposal system. Expansion of the primary system shall require an expansion of the reserve system; 
(c)  The two (2) alternating drainfields shall be connected by a diversion valve, approved by the Virginia Beach Health District, located in the pipe between the septic tank and the distribution boxes. The diversion valve shall be used to alternate the direction of effluent flow to one (1) drainfield or the other at a time. Diversion valves shall not be used for the following types of treatment systems: 
(1)  Sand mounds; 
(2)  Low pressure distribution systems; 
(3)  Repair situations when installation of a valve is not feasible; and 
(4)  Any other approved system for which the use of a valve would adversely affect the design of the system, as determined by the Virginia Beach Health District; 
(d)  The diversion valve shall have three (3) port, two (2) way valve of materials resistant to sewage, leakproof and designed so that the effluent from the tank can be directed to flow into either one (1) of the two (2) distribution boxes; 
(e)  There shall be a conduit from the top of the valve to the ground surface with an appropriate cover to be level with or above the ground surface; and 
(f)  The valve shall not be located in driveways, recreational courts, parking lots, or beneath sheds or other structures. In lieu of a diversion valve, any device that can be designed and constructed to direct the flow of effluent from the tank into either one (1) of the two (2) distribution boxes may be approved if plans are submitted to the Virginia Beach Health District and determined to be satisfactory; 
[(g)  Reserved;] 
(h)  Owners shall alternate using the drainfields every twelve (12) months to permit the yearly resting of half of the absorption system. 
(i)  The City shall ensure that the owners are notified annually of the requirement to switch the valve to the opposite drainfield. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Prior to the authorization and initiation of grading or other on-site activities, all permits required by Sections 1400 through 1418 of the City Zoning Ordinance (Appendix A) and Sections 401 and 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Sections 1341 and 1344) shall be obtained and evidence of such submitted by the applicant to the City. 
(10)  Land upon which agricultural activities are conducted shall have a soil and water quality conservation assessment conducted that evaluates the effectiveness of existing practices pertaining to soil erosion and sediment control, nutrient management, and management of pesticides and, where necessary, outlines additional practices needed to ensure that water quality protection is accomplished consistent with this ordinance. Such assessment shall be based upon the standards set forth in the January 1999 Field Office Technical Guide of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service or the January 2001 Virginia Agricultural BMP Manual of the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation and accomplish water quality protection consistent with this ordinance. 
(11)  Proposed revegetation of disturbed areas shall provide maximum erosion and sediment control benefits. 
(12)  Access for development requiring permits under Section 6-136 of the City Code or Section 1403 of the City Zoning Ordinance, and for development authorized by Section 1402 of the City Zoning Ordinance, shall be limited to a single accessway so as to maintain the integrity of the buffer area. Fill for such development shall be limited to minimize disturbance of existing vegetation and contours so as to effectively maintain the integrity of the buffer area. 
(13)  Disposal sites for dredged material shall be located and stabilized landward of the buffer area. 
(14)  Excavation material from construction, including dredged material, shall be disposed of in a lawful manner. 
(15)  Silvicultural activities within Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas shall be exempt from this ordinance, provided that silvicultural operations adhere to water quality protection procedures prescribed in the January 1997 "Forestry Best Management Practices for Water Quality in Virginia Technical Guide" of the Virginia Department of Forestry. 
(16)  All development exceeding two thousand, five hundred (2,500) square feet of land disturbance shall be accomplished through a plan of development review process consistent with Section 15.2-2286 (A)(8) of the Code of Virginia and 9VAC25-830-240 (Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Designation and Management Regulations). 
(17)  Where structural the best management practices are utilized, such maintenance shall be ensured by the City through a maintenance agreement with the owner or developer. 
(B)  Development criteria for Resource Protection Areas. In addition to the general performance standards set forth in this section, the following standards shall apply to all use, development and redevelopment in Resource Protection Areas, except as otherwise provided herein: 
(1)  Land development may be allowed in the Resource Protection Area only if such development (i) is water dependent; (ii) constitutes redevelopment; (iii) is a new use established pursuant to Subsection (B)(4) hereof; (iv) is a road or driveway crossing satisfying the conditions set forth in subdivision (d) hereof; or (v) is a flood control or stormwater management facility satisfying the conditions set forth in subdivision (e) hereof. In addition thereto, the following requirements shall apply: 
(a)  A water quality impact assessment in accordance with Section 107(C) of this ordinance shall be required for any proposed land disturbance. 
(b)  A new or expanded water dependent facility shall be allowed provided that the following criteria are met: 
1.  Such facility does not conflict with the comprehensive plan; 
2.  Such facility complies with the general performance standards set forth in this Section; 
3.  Any non-water dependent component of such facility is located outside of the Resource Protection Area; and 
4.  Access to such facility shall be provided with the minimum land disturbance necessary. Where practicable, a single point of access shall be provided. 
(c)  Redevelopment shall be permitted in the Resource Protection Area only if (i) there is no increase in the amount of imperious cover; (ii) no further encroachment within the Resource Protection Area; and (iii) such redevelopment conforms to applicable erosion and sediment control criteria set for in Chapter 30 and stormwater management criteria set forth in the Stormwater Management Ordinance [Appendix D] to applicable stormwater management requirements of all state and federal agencies. 
(d)  Roads and driveways not exempt from the provisions of Section 109(A)(1) of this ordinance may be constructed in or across Resource Protection Areas if each of the following conditions is met: 
1.  The City Manager finds that there are no reasonable alternatives to aligning the road or driveway in or across the Resource Protection Area; 
2.  The alignment and design of the road or driveway are optimized, consistent with other requirements, so as to minimize encroachment into the Resource Protection Area and adverse effects on water quality; 
3.  The design and construction of the road or driveway satisfy all applicable criteria of this ordinance, including submission of a water quality impact assessment; and 
4.  The City Manager reviews the plan for the road or driveway proposed in or across the Resource Protection Area in coordination with City site plan, subdivision and other applicable plan of development reviews. 
(e)  Flood control and stormwater management facilities that drain or treat water from multiple development projects or from a significant portion of a watershed may be allowed in Resource Protection Areas, provided that: 
1.  The City Manager conclusively establishes that the location of the facility within the Resource Protection Area is the optimum location; 
2.  The size of the facility is the minimum necessary to provide necessary flood control or stormwater treatment, or both; 
3.  The facility is consistent with a stormwater management program approved by the Virginia State Water Control Board as a Phase I modification to the City's program; 
4.  All applicable State and Federal permits are obtained from the appropriate federal and state agencies having jurisdiction; 
5.  Approval is received from the City Manager prior to construction; and 
6.  Routine maintenance is performed on such facilities to assure that they continue to function as designed. 
It is not the intent of this subdivision to allow a best management practice that collects and treats runoff from an individual lot or portion thereof to be located within a Resource Protection Area. 
(2)  Exemptions in Resource Protection Areas. The following land disturbances in Resource Protection Areas shall be exempt from the criteria of this Section provided that they comply with the applicable standards set forth in Section 110 (B) of this ordinance: 
(a)  Water wells; 
(b)  Passive recreation facilities such as boardwalks, trails and pathways; and 
(c)  Historic preservation and archaeological activities. 
(3)  Buffer area requirements. The buffer area shall be the landward component of the Resource Protection Area. Notwithstanding the existence of permitted uses, encroachments, and vegetation clearing, as set forth in this Section, the buffer area shall not be deemed to be reduced in width. To minimize the adverse effects of human activities on the other components of the Resource Protection Area, state waters, and aquatic life, a minimum one hundred (100) foot wide buffer area of vegetation that is effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution shall be retained if present and established where it does not exist. 
(a)  The one hundred (100) foot wide buffer area shall be deemed to achieve a seventy-five (75) percent reduction of sediments and a forty (40) percent reduction of nutrients. 
(b)  Where land uses such as agriculture or silviculture within the area of the buffer cease and the lands are proposed to be converted to other uses, a minimum one hundred (100) foot wide buffer shall be reestablished. In reestablishing the buffer, management measures shall be undertaken to provide woody vegetation that assures the buffer functions set forth in this ordinance. 
(4)  Permitted encroachments into the buffer area. 
(a)  When the application of the buffer area would result in the loss of a buildable area on a lot or parcel recorded prior to October 1, 1989, encroachments into the buffer area may be permitted by administrative variance, as set forth in Section 110 (B) of this ordinance and in accordance with the following criteria: 
1.  Encroachments into the buffer area shall be the minimum necessary to achieve a reasonable buildable area for a principal structure and necessary utilities. 
2.  Where practicable, a vegetated area that will maximize water quality protection, mitigate the effects of the buffer encroachment, and is equal to the area of encroachment into the buffer area shall be established elsewhere on the lot or parcel. 
3.  The encroachment may not extend into the seaward fifty (50) feet of the buffer area. 
(b)  When the application of the buffer area would result in the loss of a buildable area on a lot or parcel recorded between October 1, 1989 and January 1, 2004, encroachments into the buffer area may be permitted by administrative variance, as set forth in Section 110 (B) of this ordinance and in accordance with the following criteria: 
1.  The lot or parcel was created as a result of a legal process conducted in conformity with the Subdivision Ordinance (Appendix B); 
2.  Conditions or mitigation measures imposed through a previously approved variance shall be met; 
3.  If the use of a best management practice (BMP) was previously required, the BMP shall be evaluated to determine if it continues to function effectively and, if necessary, the BMP shall be reestablished or repaired and maintained as required; and 
4.  The criteria in subdivision 4 (a) of this section shall be met. 
(c)  Encroachments located in the variable width buffer areas as defined in Section 104(B) if this ordinance may be permitted by administrative variance, as set forth in Section 110(B) of this ordinance. 
(5)  Permitted modifications of the buffer area. 
(a)  In order to maintain the functional value of the buffer area, existing vegetation may be removed only pursuant to an administrative variance, as set forth in Section 110(B) of this ordinance, and only to provide for reasonable sight lines, access paths, general woodlot management, and best management practices, including those that prevent upland erosion and concentrated flows of stormwater, as follows: 
1.  Trees may be pruned or removed as necessary to provide for sight lines and vistas, provided that where removed, they shall be replaced with other vegetation that is equally effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution from runoff. 
2.  Any path shall be constructed and surfaced so as to effectively control erosion. 
3.  Dead, diseased, or dying trees or shrubbery and noxious weeds may be removed and thinning of trees may be allowed pursuant to sound horticultural practices incorporated into City-adopted standards. 
4.  For shoreline erosion control projects, trees and woody vegetation may be removed, necessary control techniques employed, and appropriate vegetation established to protect or stabilize the shoreline in accordance with the best available technical advice and applicable permit conditions or requirements. 
(b)  On agricultural lands, the agricultural buffer area shall be managed to prevent concentrated flows of surface water from breaching the buffer area, and appropriate measures may be taken to prevent noxious weeds from invading the buffer area. Agricultural activities may encroach into the buffer area as follows: 
1.  Agricultural activities may encroach into the landward fifty (50) feet of the buffer area if at least one (1) agricultural best management practice is being implemented on the adjacent land and such best management practice, in the opinion of the Virginia Dare Soil and Water Conservation District board, addresses the predominant water quality issue (either erosion control or nutrient management). In such cases, the combination of the undisturbed buffer area and the best management practices shall achieve water quality protection, pollutant removal, and water resource conservation at least the equivalent of the minimum one hundred (100) foot buffer area. If nutrient management is identified as the predominant water quality issue, a nutrient management plan, including soil tests, must be developed consistent with the Virginia Nutrient Management Training and Certification Regulations (4 VAC 5-15) administered by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation. 
2.  Agricultural activities may encroach within the landward seventy-five (75) feet of the buffer area when agricultural best management practices which address erosion control, nutrient management, and pest chemical control, are being implemented on the adjacent land. The erosion control practices must prevent erosion from exceeding the soil loss tolerance level, referred to as "T," as defined in the "National Soil Survey Handbook" of November 1996 in the "Field Office Technical Guide" of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service. A nutrient management plan, including soil tests, must be developed, consistent with the Virginia Nutrient Management Training and Certification Regulations (4 VAC 5-15) administered by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation. In conjunction with the remaining undisturbed portion of the buffer area, this collection of best management practices shall be presumed to achieve water quality protection at least the equivalent of that provided by the minimum one hundred (100) foot buffer area. 
3.  The buffer area shall not be required to be designated adjacent to agricultural drainage ditches if at least one (1) best management practice which, in the opinion of the Virginia Dare Soil and Water Conservation District board, addresses the more predominant water quality issue on the adjacent land (either erosion control or nutrient management) is being implemented on the adjacent land. 
(6)  Water quality impact assessment. A water quality impact assessment shall be required for any proposed land disturbance, development or redevelopment within the Resource Protection Area consistent with this Section and for any other development in Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas that may warrant such assessment because of the unique characteristics of the site or intensity of the proposed use or development. 
(a)  The purpose of the water quality impact assessment is to identify the impacts of proposed development on water quality and lands within Resource Protection Areas consistent with the goals and objectives of the Act and this ordinance, and to determine specific measures for mitigation of those impacts. 
(b)  The water quality impact assessment shall be of sufficient specificity to demonstrate compliance with the criteria of this ordinance. 
(c)  Water quality impact assessments shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 107(C) of this ordinance. 
(C)  Buffer restoration standards. The following standards shall apply in cases in which buffer restoration is required pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance as a result of development within a Resource Protection Area: 
(1)  For new impervious cover: 
(a)  Buffer restoration of an area equal to two (2) times the proposed impervious cover in the Resource Protection Area shall be provided. The City Manager or Board, as the case may be, shall allow a lesser area of buffer restoration if the property owner demonstrates that site conditions or structural treatment methods are such that a lesser buffer restoration area will adequately protect water quality; 
(b)  Pool water surface, decks, pavers and gravel driveways shall be considered impervious for buffer restoration calculations; 
(c)  In accordance with the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation, Chesapeake Bay Local Assistance "Riparian Buffers Modification & Mitigation Guidance Manual, 2003, Reprinted 2006, and all further amendments thereto and editions thereof (Guidance Manual), in order for the buffer to function as intended, it shall contain the full complement of vegetation that includes shade trees, understory trees, shrubs, and ground cover, whether the ground cover is vegetation, leaf litter, or mulch. The composition of the buffer restoration area shall be per Appendix D, Table A of the Guidance Manual; 
(d)  Salt and flood tolerant plant species shall be planted below the five-foot contour to ensure greater survival of the plantings; 
(e)  Trees shall not be planted within fifteen (15) feet of the shoreline where such planting would result in marsh shading or interference with the integrity of shoreline structures; 
(f)  Buffer restoration shall be located in the Resource Protection Area, including in areas occupied by turf or where impervious cover is removed. To the extent possible, such restoration shall be located in the fifty-foot seaward portion of the buffer. The City Manager may require a site evaluation to determine the location and extent of vegetation needed to meet this requirement where specific site conditions warrant, including, but not limited to, the presence of steep slopes and existing vegetation recommended for buffers in Appendix D, Table A of the Guidance Manual; and 
(g)  All trees, plants and groundcover, required as buffer restoration shall be maintained and not removed or allowed to revert to turf. 
(2)  For shoreline hardening projects and replacement of upland retaining walls, where construction disturbs vegetation in the Resource Protection Area, such vegetation shall be replaced and may be replaced in kind; provided that trees shall not be planted within fifteen (15) feet of the shoreline where such planting would result in marsh shading or interference with the integrity of shoreline structures. 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2154, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2190, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 2267, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2855, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 3030, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 3076, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 3341, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2790, adopted Dec. 9, 2003, repealed former § 106 of this appendix and renumbered former § 108 as § 106. Former § 106 pertained to minor projects and derived from Ord. No. 2190, adopted Nov. 10, 1992; and Ord. No. 2267, adopted June 14, 1994.  
Sec. 107. - Plan of development process. 
Any development or redevelopment in the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall be accomplished through a plan of development process consistent with Section 15.2-2286(8) of the Code of Virginia. Approval shall be rendered for a plan prior to commencement of any land-disturbing activity on site or the issuance of any building permit. Plans and information required under this section may be coordinated or combined as deemed appropriate by the City Manager. All information required in this section shall be drawn to the same scale as the preliminary site plan or final subdivision plat, and certified as complete and accurate by persons duly licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia to practice as such. Any applicant, or potential applicant, may confer with such departments and other agencies of the City as may be appropriate concerning a general development or redevelopment proposal before submission of an application. Such conference shall not be construed as an application for approval of such proposal. 
(A)  General plan of development process. Except as otherwise provided herein, the plan of development process for any development or redevelopment in a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area, except development or redevelopment requiring an administrative variance pursuant to Section 110(B), shall consist of the plans and information identified below: 
(1)  A site plan or a subdivision plat which meets the requirements of the Site Plan Ordinance (Appendix C) or Subdivision Ordinance (Appendix B), as the case may be, and which clearly delineates the following environmental features: 
(a)  Tidal wetlands; 
(b)  Tidal shores; 
(c)  Nontidal wetlands; the location and extent of which shall be determined in accordance with the procedures specified in the United States Corps of Engineers' Wetland Delineation Manual, Technical Report Y-87-1, January 1987, Final Report, and the Regional Supplement to the Army Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual; Atlantic and Gulf Coastal Plain Region ERDC/EL TR 10-20 as restricted by Section 103 of this Ordinance; 
(d)  Highly erodible soils; and 
(e)  A buffer area not less than one hundred (100) feet in width and located adjacent to and landward of: 
1.  Any land comprised of highly erodible soils; 
2.  Any land adjoining tidal wetlands, tidal shores, nontidal wetlands or highly erodible soils; and 
3.  Any land adjoining both sides of any waterbodies with perennial flow. 
(2)  A landscape plan which delineates or complies with the following: 
(a)  The location, size, and description of existing and proposed plant material. All existing trees on the site of six (6) inches or greater diameter at breast height shall be shown. Where there are groups of trees, stands may be outlined instead. The specific number of such trees to be preserved outside or within the construction footprint shall be indicated on the plan. Trees and plants to be disturbed or removed to create a desired construction footprint shall be clearly delineated. A description of the proposed measures for mitigation shall include (i) a replanting schedule for trees and other vegetation removed for construction, including a list of plants and trees to be used; (ii) a demonstration that the design of the plan will preserve to the greatest extent possible any trees and vegetation on the site and will provide maximum erosion control and overland flow benefits from such vegetation; and (iii) a demonstration that existing plants are to be used to the greatest extent possible. If no mitigation or planting is required, existing trees may be delineated on the site plan or subdivision plat. 
(b)  A delineation of any required buffer area and any plant material to be added to establish or supplement the buffer area. 
(c)  Within the buffer area, a designation of the trees to be removed for sight lines, vistas, access paths and best management practices, and any vegetation replacing trees removed from the buffer area. 
(d)  A designation of the trees to be removed for shoreline stabilization projects and any replacement vegetation. 
(e)  A depiction of grade changes or other work adjacent to trees which would adversely affect them. Specifications shall be provided as to how grade, drainage, and aeration would be maintained around trees to be preserved. 
(f)  A description of the limits of clearing of existing vegetation, based on all anticipated improvements, including buildings, drives, and utilities, and specifications for the protection of existing trees during clearing, grading, and all phases of construction. 
(g)  All supplementary or replacement plant materials shall be in a healthy condition. Plant materials shall conform to the standards of the most recent edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock, published by the American Nursery and Landscape Association, and shall be installed according to standard planting practices and procedures. 
(h)  Where areas to be preserved are encroached upon, replacement of existing trees and other vegetation shall be achieved at a ratio of three (3) trees planted to one (1) tree greater than six (6) inches diameter at breast height removed, or by such other measures as in the judgment of the City Manager will adequately compensate for the removal of such trees and other vegetation. Replacement trees shall be a minimum two (2) to two and one-half (2½) inches caliper at the time of planting. 
(3)  A stormwater management plan containing maps, charts, graphs, tables, photographs, narrative descriptions, explanations, and supporting references. At a minimum, the stormwater management plan shall contain the following: 
(a)  Location and design of all planned stormwater control devices. 
(b)  Procedures for implementing nonstructural stormwater control practices and techniques. 
(c)  A long-term schedule for inspection and maintenance of stormwater management consistent with the Stormwater Management Ordinance (Appendix D). 
(d)  A maintenance agreement as deemed necessary and appropriate by the City Manager to ensure proper maintenance of best management practices in order to continue their functions. 
(e)  Predevelopment and postdevelopment nonpoint source pollutant loadings with supporting documentation of all utilized coefficients and calculations as outlined in the Stormwater Management Ordinance [Appendix D]. 
(f)  For stormwater management facilities, verification of structural soundness, which shall be certified by a professional engineer. All engineering calculations shall be performed in accordance with the Public Works Design Standards Manual and the current edition of the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook and Virginia Beach Stormwater Management Ordinance. 
(g)  Such additional elements as are required to be contained in a stormwater management plan for Chesapeake Bay land disturbing activities by the Stormwater Management Ordinance [Appendix D]. 
(4)  An erosion and sediment control plan meeting the requirements of the provisions of Article III of Chapter 30 of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach (City Code Sections 30-56 through 30-78). 
(B)  Administrative variance plan of development process. Except as otherwise provided herein, the plan of development process for any use, development or redevelopment in a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area requiring an administrative variance shall consist of a site plan meeting the applicable requirements of the Site Plan Ordinance (Appendix C), unless deemed unnecessary by the City Manager, which shall contain the plans and information identified below: 
(1)  Limits of land disturbance and all areas of clearing, grading, accessways and staging areas. 
(2)  Location of all approved existing and proposed septic tanks and drainfield areas, including reserve areas and the location of all existing and proposed wells and utilities. 
(3)  Location of all erosion and sediment control devices. 
(4)  A statement that excavation material from construction shall be disposed of in a lawful manner. 
(5)  The total amount of impervious surface proposed for the site. 
(6)  Specifications for the protection of existing trees and vegetation during clearing, grading and all phases of construction. 
(7)  Revegetation schedule. 
(8)  Best management practices. 
(9)  Evidence that all applicable wetlands permits required by law have been obtained prior to authorization of grading or other on-site activities shall be provided. 
(10)  Identification of the Resource Protection Area. 
Additional information shall be requested and reasonable and appropriate conditions shall be imposed by the City Manager, if necessary, to preserve the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. 
(C)  Water quality impact assessment. The purpose of a water quality impact assessment is to: (i) identify the potentially adverse impacts of proposed development on water quality and lands within Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas; (ii) ensure that, where use, development or redevelopment takes place within Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas, it will be located on those portions of a site and in a manner that will be least disruptive to the natural functions of Resource Protection Areas and other sensitive lands; and (iii) specify means to avoid, minimize or mitigate the impacts of development for water quality protection. 
A water quality impact assessment shall be required (i) for any use, land disturbance, development or redevelopment within a Resource Protection Area; (ii) for any buffer area encroachment; (iii) for any variance provided for in Section 110 of this Ordinance; or (iv) where a water quality impact assessment is deemed necessary by the City Manager to evaluate the potential impacts of the use, development or redevelopment upon water quality or a Resource Protection Area by reason of the unique characteristics of the site or the intensity of the proposed use or development. 
(1)  Administrative variance water quality impact assessment. The water quality impact assessment for any administrative variance shall include a site drawing to scale which shows the following, unless one (1) or more such elements shall, in the judgment of the City Manager, not be reasonably necessary in determining the impact of the proposed use, development or redevelopment: 
(a)  Location of the components of the Resource Protection Area, including the buffer area. 
(b)  Location and nature of the proposed development into the buffer area, including: type of paving material; areas of clearing or grading; location of any structures, drives or other impervious cover; and sewage disposal systems or reserve drainfield sites. 
(c)  Type and location of proposed best management practices. 
(2)  The following elements shall be included in a water quality assessment for all uses, development or redevelopment which do not satisfy the requirements for an administrative variance, unless one (1) or more such elements shall, in the judgment of the City Manager, not be reasonably necessary in determining the impact of the proposed development or redevelopment: 
(a)  A delineation of environmental features as set forth in Section 107(A)(1) of this Ordinance; 
(b)  A landscape plan as set forth in Section 107(A)(2) of this Ordinance; 
(c)  A stormwater management plan as set forth in Section 107(A)(3) of this Ordinance; and 
(d)  A narrative that: 
1.  Describes the existing topography, soil information, including depth to groundwater and infiltration rate where appropriate, surface and groundwater hydrology, wetlands on the site and, if necessary, drainage patterns from adjacent lands; 
2.  Describes the impacts of the proposed development on topography, soils, surface and groundwater hydrology on the site and adjacent lands; 
3.  Describes potential adverse impacts on wetlands; 
4.  Indicates the source location and description of proposed excavation and fill material; 
5.  Indicates, for any water-dependent activity, the location of, and potential adverse impacts upon, shellfish beds, submerged aquatic vegetation, and fish spawning and nursery areas; 
6.  Lists all federal, state and local permits required for the development of the site; and 
7.  Describes the proposed mitigation measures for the potential adverse hydrogeological impacts of the project. 
(D)  Performance and bonding requirements. 
(1)  No approved plans required by this Section shall be released until the applicant provides performance bonds or other form of surety acceptable to the City Attorney, provided, however, that when the occupancy of a structure is desired prior to the completion of the required landscaping, stormwater management facilities, or other specifications of an approved plan, a building permit and certificate of occupancy may be issued if the applicant provides to the City of Virginia Beach a form of surety satisfactory to the City Attorney in an amount equal to the estimated cost of construction, related materials, and installation costs of the required landscaping or other specifications and maintenance costs for any required stormwater management facilities. 
(2)  All required landscaping shall be installed as approved by the end of the first planting season following issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the surety shall be forfeited to the City. 
(3)  All required stormwater management facilities or other specifications shall be installed and approved within eighteen (18) months of project commencement. Should the applicant fail, after proper notice, to initiate, complete or maintain appropriate actions required by the approved plan, the surety may be forfeited to the City, which may also collect from the applicant the amount by which the reasonable cost of required actions exceeds the amount of the surety held. 
(4)  After all required actions of the approved plan have been completed, the applicant shall submit to the City Manager a written request for a final inspection. If the requirements of the approved plan have been completed, such unexpended or unobligated portion of the surety held shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated within sixty (60) days following the receipt of the applicant's request for final inspection. 
(5)  Prior to the issuance of any grading, building or other permit for activities involving site development activities, the applicant shall furnish to the City a reasonable performance bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal surety, or any combination thereof acceptable to the City Attorney, to ensure that measures may be taken by the City, at the applicant's expense, should he fail, after proper notice, within the time specified, to initiate or maintain appropriate conservation action which may be required of him as a result of his site development. 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2080, 7-9-91; Ord. No. 2154, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2190, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 2267, 6-14-94; Ord. No 2473, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2663, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2855, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 3341, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3623, 6-16-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2790, adopted Dec. 9, 2003, renumbered former § 110 of this appendix as § 107.  
Sec. 108. - Nonconforming buildings and structures. 
(A)  Any use, building or structure which lawfully existed on the date of adoption of this ordinance and which is not in conformity with any one (1) or more of the provisions of this ordinance, and any use, building or structure which lawfully exists on the date of adoption of any amendment to this ordinance and which is not in conformity with such amendment, shall be deemed nonconforming. 
(B)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the reconstruction or restoration of any nonconforming building or structure which is destroyed or damaged by reason of casualty loss, provided that the area encompassed by such building or structure, as reconstructed or restored, is not extended or enlarged. 
(C)  A principal structure on a legal nonconforming lot may be expanded under the Administrative Variance procedures of Section 110(B) of this Ordinance provided that: 
(1)  There is no net increase in nonpoint source pollutant load; and 
(2)  Any development or land disturbance exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet complies with all erosion and sediment control requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2079, 7-9-91; Ord. No. 2154, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2190, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 2267, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2855, 12-7-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2790, adopted Dec. 9, 2003, renumbered former § 111 of this appendix as § 108.  
Sec. 109. - Exemptions. 
(A)  Exemptions for public facilities. 
(1)  Construction, installation, operation and maintenance of electric, natural gas, fiber optic, and telephone transmission lines, railroads, public roads and their appurtenant structures in accordance with (i) regulations promulgated pursuant to the Erosion and Sediment Control Law (Code of Virginia, Section 62.1-44.15:51 et seq.) and the Stormwater Management Act (Code of Virginia, Section 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.); (ii) an erosion and sediment control plan and a stormwater management plan approved by the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality; or (iii) local water quality criteria at least as stringent as the state requirements will be deemed to be exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance, provided such facilities and appurtenant structures comply with all requirements of Article III of Chapter 30 of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach (City Code Sections 30-56 through 30-78), and all stormwater management requirements of this ordinance and the Stormwater Management Ordinance (Appendix D). Exemptions for public roads shall also be subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  The road alignment and design are optimized and consistent with other applicable requirements to prevent or otherwise minimize (i) encroachments into Resource Protection Areas and (ii) adverse effects on water quality. 
(b)  Such appurtenant structures shall include, but are not limited to, bridges, guard rails, lighting and traffic-control devices, fences and berms. 
(2)  Roads or driveways not exempt from the provisions of Section 109(A)(1) may be constructed in or across Resource Protection Areas in accordance with Section 106(B)(1)(d). 
(3)  Construction, installation and maintenance of water, sewer, cable and natural gas lines and storm drains, and their appurtenant facilities, owned or permitted by the City, a licensed public utility or a regional service authority, that are an essential but incidental component of public water and sewer projects, shall be exempt from this ordinance provided that: 
(a)  To the degree practicable, the location of such utilities and facilities shall be outside Resource Protection Areas; 
(b)  No more land shall be disturbed than is necessary to provide for the proposed installation; 
(c)  All construction, installation, and maintenance of such utilities and facilities shall comply with all applicable state and federal requirements and permits and shall be designed and constructed in a manner that protects water quality; and 
(d)  Any land disturbance exceeding an area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet complies with all requirements of Article 3 of Chapter 30 of the Code of the City of Virginia Beach (City Code Sections 30-56 through 30-78). 
B.  Exemptions for silvicultural activities. Silvicultural activities shall be exempt from the requirements of this ordinance provided that such activities comply with water quality protection procedures prescribed by the Virginia Department of Forestry in the January 1997 edition of the "Forestry Best Management Practices for Water Quality in Virginia Technical Guide." 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2081, 7-9-91; Ord. No. 2154, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2190, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2855, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 3341, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2190, adopted Nov. 10, 1992, repealed former § 109 of this appendix, which pertained to water quality impact assessments and derived from Ord. No. 2006, adopted Nov. 6, 1990; Ord. No. 2080, adopted July 9, 1991; and Ord. No. 2154, adopted June 23, 1992. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2790, adopted Dec. 9, 2003, renumbered former § 112 of this appendix as § 109.  
Sec. 110. - Variances. 
(A)  General requirements. Applications for variances from any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be in writing and filed with the City Manager. Such applications shall identify the potential impacts of the proposed variance on water quality and on lands within the Resource Protection Area through the performance of a water quality impact assessment which complies with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(B)  Administrative variances. The City Manager shall approve or deny an application requesting an administrative variance after receipt of a complete application. No such application shall be accepted by the City Manager unless accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in the amount of One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00). Administrative variances may be granted only for uses, development or redevelopment described in: 
(1)  Section 106(B)(2) for water wells, passive recreation facilities and historic preservation and archaeological activities; 
(2)  Section 106(B)(4) for lots recorded prior to October 1, 1989 or between October 1, 1989 and January 1, 2004 where application of the buffer requirement would result in the loss of a buildable lot and meet the criteria enumerated; 
(3)  Section 106(B) (5) for sight lines, access paths, general woodlot management and best management practices; and 
(4)  Section 108 for additions to nonconforming principal structures. 
No administrative variance shall be granted under this subsection unless the City Manager makes all of the findings required in subsection (H) hereof. The City Manager may establish such review policies as he deems expedient in effectuating the intent of this ordinance. In approving an application, The City Manager shall, if warranted, include reasonable and appropriate conditions that will prevent the degradation of water quality. The City Manager shall record both the request and his administrative decision in a public access file to be maintained for one (1) calendar year. The plan of development process for review of administrative variance requests shall be as set forth in Section 107 (B) of this ordinance. 
The applicant shall cause to be posted on the property which is the subject of the application a sign of a size and type similar to those required for Board variances. One (1) such sign shall be posted within ten (10) feet of every public street adjoining the property and within ten (10) feet of any body of water or waterway less than five hundred (500) feet wide adjoining the property. Such sign shall state the nature of the application and shall be posted for not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the time when an application is acted upon. In the event such sign is removed, obscured, otherwise rendered illegible or if the City Manager determines that the requirements of this section have not been met prior to the hearing, he may deny or defer action on the application. 
(C)  Board variances. The City Manager shall review any other application for a variance and the water quality impact assessment and provide the Board with an evaluation of the potential impacts of the proposed variance and such other information as may aid the Board in considering the application. No such application shall be accepted by the City Manager unless accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in the amount of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00). Such fee shall include all costs of notification and advertising. The City Manager shall transmit the application and supporting information and evaluation to the members of the Board and the applicant no less than five (5) days prior to the scheduled hearing on such application. 
(D)  Not later than sixty (60) days after the receipt of an application, the Board shall hold a public hearing on such application. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published no less than once per week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to such hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in the City. The second such notice shall appear not less than five (5) days nor more than twenty-one (21) days prior to the hearing. The cost of the public notice shall be charged to the applicant. 
(E)  The Board shall notify, by first class mail, all property owners adjacent to the subject property and each waterfront property owner across the waterway from the subject property, if the water body is less than five hundred (500) feet wide, of the public hearing at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. The cost of such notification shall be charged to the applicant. 
(F)  In addition to the foregoing requirements, the applicant shall cause to be posted on the property which is the subject of the hearing a sign, of a size and type approved by the Board. One (1) such sign shall be posted within ten (10) feet of every public street adjoining the property and within ten (10) feet of any body of water or waterway less than five hundred (500) feet wide adjoining the property. Such sign shall be posted not less than fifteen (15) days from the public hearing and shall state the nature of the application and date and time of the hearing. Such signs shall be removed no later than five (5) days after the public hearing. In the event such sign is removed, obscured, otherwise rendered illegible or if the Board determines that the requirements of this section have not been met prior to the hearing, the Board may deny or defer the application. Any application deferred by the Board by reason of noncompliance with the posting requirements of this Section shall not thereafter be heard unless and until an additional fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is paid. 
(G)  The Board may make, alter and rescind rules for its procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of this Section; provided, however, that a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all of the members of the Board, and provided further, that the concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board present and voting shall be required to grant any variance. 
(H)  No variance shall be granted unless the Board finds that: 
(1)  Granting the variance will not confer upon the applicant any special privilege or convenience not accorded to other owners of property in Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas who are subject to the provisions of this ordinance and are similarly situated; 
(2)  The application is not based upon conditions or circumstances that are or have been created or imposed by the applicant or his predecessor in title; 
(3)  The variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief; 
(4)  The variance is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this ordinance, and not injurious to the neighborhood, not of substantial detriment to water quality, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare; 
(5)  There is no net increase in nonpoint source pollution load; 
(6)  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed which will prevent the variance from causing or contributing to a degradation of water quality; and 
(7)  Any development or land disturbance exceeding an area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet shall comply with all applicable erosion and sediment control requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2154, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2190, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 2267, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 2434, 12-17-96; Ord. No. 2684, 1-22-02; Ord. No. 2743, 4-22-03; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2820, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 2855, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 3279, 5-14-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 3548, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2790, adopted Dec. 9, 2003, renumbered former § 113 of this appendix as § 110.  
Sec. 111. - Appeals. 
(A)  Any order, determination or decision made by the City Manager or any administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this ordinance, including any decision on an application for an administrative variance, may be appealed by any person aggrieved by the decision to the Board by application filed with the City Manager within fifteen (15) days from the date of such order, determination or decision. Such application shall state with particularity the grounds of such appeal. Any application failing to do so shall be rejected by the City Manager. The filing of an appeal shall not stay any proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from. 
(B)  The fees and notice requirements for appeals under subsection (A) hereof shall be as set forth in Section 110. 
(C)  Any party aggrieved of a decision of the Board may, within thirty (30) days of the date of such decision, petition the circuit court to review such decision. The procedure in such cases shall be as provided in Section 15.2-2314 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. No party having failed to appear at the hearing before the Board and object to the application at that time shall be deemed to be an aggrieved party; provided, however, that the City shall have standing to appeal any decision of the Board irrespective of not having appeared before the Board as otherwise required by this ordinance. 
(D)  The circuit court may affirm, reverse or modify any decision of the Board, and may impose any reasonable conditions in its judgment; provided, however, that no decision of the Board shall be disturbed unless the court shall find: 
(1)  The decision appealed from was based upon the erroneous application of the criteria set forth in subsection (G) of Section 110 of this ordinance or was based upon grounds other than those set forth therein; 
(2)  There was no substantial evidence upon which the Board could have made all findings required by subsection (G) of Section 110 of this ordinance; 
(3)  The decision of the Board was plainly wrong; or 
(4)  The Board failed to impose reasonable and appropriate conditions intended to prevent the variance from causing or contributing to a degradation of water quality. 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2154, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2190, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 2267, 6-14-94; Ord. No 2473, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2790, adopted Dec. 9, 2003, renumbered former § 114 of this appendix as § 111.  
Sec. 112. - Violations; penalties. 
(A)  A violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or confinement in jail for a period not exceeding twelve (12) months, either or both. 
(B)  (1)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained under this ordinance, any person who violates any provision of this ordinance or who violates, fails, neglects, or refuses to obey any variance or permit condition authorized under this ordinance shall, upon such finding by the circuit court, be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each day of violation. Such penalties may, at the discretion of the court assessing them, be directed to be paid into the treasury of the City for the purpose of abating environmental damage to or restoring Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas within the City, in such a manner as the court may direct by order, except that in the event the City or its agent is the violator, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the treasury of the Commonwealth. 
(2)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained under this ordinance, and with the consent of any person who has violated any provision of this ordinance, or who has violated, failed, neglected, or refused to obey any variance or permit condition authorized under this ordinance, the Board may provide for the issuance of an order against such person for the one-time payment of civil charges for each violation in specific sums, not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each violation. Such civil charges shall be paid into the treasury of the City for the purpose of abating environmental damage or restoring Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas in the City, except that in the event the City or its agent is the violator, the civil charges shall be paid into the treasury of the Commonwealth. Civil charges shall be in lieu of any appropriate civil penalty that could be imposed under subdivision (1) of this subsection. Civil charges may be in addition to the coss of any restoration required by the Board. 
(C)  In addition to, and not in lieu of, the penalties prescribed in subsections (A) and (B) hereof, the City may apply to the Circuit Court for an injunction against the continuing violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance and may seek any other remedy authorized by law. 
(D)  Upon notice from the City Manager or his designee that any activity is being conducted in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance, such activity shall immediately be stopped. An order to stop work shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the violation and the conditions under which the activity may be resumed. No such order shall be effective until it shall have been tendered to the owner of the property upon which the activity is conducted or his agent or to any person conducting such activity. Any person who shall continue an activity ordered to be stopped, except as directed in the stop-work order, shall be guilty of a violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2154, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2190, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 2517, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2790, adopted Dec. 9, 2003, renumbered former § 115 of this appendix as § 112.  
Sec. 113. - Severability. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed to be severable, and if any of the provisions hereof are adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining portions of this ordinance shall remain in full force and effect and their validity shall remain unimpaired. 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2154, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2790, adopted Dec. 9, 2003, renumbered former § 116 of this appendix as § 113.  
Sec. 114. - Vested rights. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall not affect the vested rights of any person under existing law. 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2154, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2790, adopted Dec. 9, 2003, renumbered former § 117 of this appendix as § 114.  
Sec. 115. - Enforcement. 
This ordinance shall be enforced by the City Manager or his designee, who shall exercise all authority of police officers in the performance of their duties. Such authority shall include, without limitation, the authority to issue summonses directing the appearance before a court of competent jurisdiction of any person alleged to have violated any of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2006, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2154, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2190, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2790, adopted Dec. 9, 2003, renumbered former § 118 of this appendix as § 115.  
Sec. 116. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall become effective on the first day of January, 1991; provided, however, that the amendments to this ordinance made on the tenth day of November, 1992 shall become effective on the first day of January, 1993; and the amendments to this ordinance made on the 9th day of December, 2003 shall become effective on the first day of January, 2004. 
(Ord. No. 2154, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2190, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 2790, 12-9-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2790, adopted Dec. 9, 2003, renumbered former § 119 of this appendix as § 116.  
APPENDIX G - SOUTHERN RIVERS WATERSHED MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This appendix is derived from Ord. No. 2115, adopted Mar. 24, 1992. The text has been set out as adopted except for minor stylistic changes made for conformity with the remainder of this publication. Editorial emendations made for the purpose of clarity are included in brackets [ ]. 
Cross reference— Floodplain regulations, App. A, § 1200 et seq.; wetlands zoning ordinance, App. A, 400 et seq.; coastal primary sand dune zoning ordinance, App. A, § 1600 et seq. 
 
Sec. 1. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the Southern Rivers Watershed Management Ordinance of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(Ord. No. 3370, 9-16-14)  
Sec. 2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The watersheds of the North Landing River, the Northwest River, the Small Coastal South Watershed and Back Bay, collectively referred to herein as the Southern Rivers Watershed of the city, and the waterways they contain, constitute a unique and sensitive environment inclusive of coastal primary sand dunes, tidal wetlands, nontidal wetlands and sensitive soils. 
(b)  Extensive floodplains and marsh fringes bordering the waterways within the Southern Rivers Watershed provide a unique and valuable habitat. Lands adjacent to waterways have an intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform or which occur within them. 
(c)  Much of the land area comprising the Southern Rivers Watershed currently supports forestal, agricultural, recreational, and conservation activities. Any future development must be undertaken in a manner which encourages harmony among development, agriculture, recreation and conservation. 
(d)  The primary topographic feature characterizing the Southern Rivers Watershed is the flatness of the lands surrounding Back Bay, the North Landing River, the Northwest River, and the Small Coastal South Watershed and their respective tributaries. The lack of topographic relief is a unique characteristic of the Southern River Watershed which must be considered when undertaking development and agricultural activities within the watersheds. 
(e)  Submerged aquatic vegetation, certain migratory waterfowl and finfish populations have seriously declined within the Back Bay watershed. Proper management of existing wetland habitats and the reestablishment of aquatic vegetation can improve habitat conditions for both migratory waterfowl and aquatic life. 
(f)  Back Bay is generally shallow with a few narrow channels. Wind-driven tides often inundate the lower floodplains. Wind tides, coupled with storm events, influence the physical conditions of the Bay, including salinity, suspended solids and nutrient levels. 
(g)  The increase of nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen accelerates eutrophication of receiving waters, adversely affecting plant and animal communities. 
(h)  Land-disturbing activities resulting in the alteration of natural topography, and removal of vegetation tends to increase erosion. 
(i)  Vegetated areas adjoining waterways and wetlands protect those resources by reducing the generation and transport of sediment. 
(j)  Indigenous ground cover, especially forested floor area, is effective in holding soil in place, thereby preventing site erosion, and in filtering stormwater runoff. By minimizing impervious cover and land disturbance, rainwater infiltration is enhanced and stormwater runoff reduced. 
(k)  Unstable ditch and canal banks and eroding marsh areas contribute sediment and nutrients to receiving streams. 
(l)  The major hydraulic pathways by which pollutants generated by agricultural activities enter receiving streams are surface runoff and groundwater discharge. The major pollutants are sediment and nutrients. 
(m)  For agriculture tillage and cropping systems, nutrients, animal waste management, irrigation, drainage, pest management and other factors must be considered in conjunction with each other. 
(n)  The implementation and assessment of agricultural best management practices (BMPs) must be performed within the framework of the entire farming system. 
(o)  A realistic program for the implementation of agricultural BMPs cannot be developed in the absence of a holistic assessment of BMP effectiveness and impacts, including environmental, economic, social and other motivational factors. 
(p)  The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Program generally requires a reduction of pollutant loads in stormwater runoff to the maximum extent practicable. 
(q)  Periodic water quality monitoring has indicated elevated levels of fecal coliform bacteria in several canals, connected to Back Bay, adjacent to the Sandbridge community. These canals have, in the past, been classified Class I health hazards in violation of health department standards for primary contact waters. 
(r)  The North Landing River from the North Carolina line to the bridge at Route 165, the Pocaty River from its junction with the North Landing River to the Blackwater Road bridge, West Neck Creek from the junction with the North Landing River to Indian River Road bridge, and Blackwater Creek from the junction with the North Landing River to the confluence, approximately 4.2 miles, of an unnamed tributary approximately 1.75 miles, more or less, west of Blackwater Road, have been designated by the Virginia General Assembly as components of the Virginia Scenic Rivers System. The wetlands of the North Landing River, Northwest River and Back Bay support high concentrations of natural heritage resources and migratory waterfowl, making this area a national conservation priority. 
(s)  In 1990, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service completed an environmental assessment and land protection plan that established an acquisition boundary, within which lands that are nationally important for wildlife could be purchased for inclusion in the National Wildlife Refuge System. When acquired, these environmentally sensitive lands would be managed as part of the Back Bay National Wildlife Refuge. 
(t)  There is not an absolute relationship between soil type and topographic elevation. Some poorly drained soils, such as Acredale, may occur both at low elevations adjacent to Back Bay and at higher elevations in the interior portions of the city. These hydric soils of different elevations are not equally suitable for development. Conversely, there are a few areas of well-drained soils that occur at relatively low elevations. 
(u)  Much of the area within the Southern Rivers Watershed lies within natural areas identified in the Virginia Beach Natural Areas Inventory and contains significant natural heritage resources. 
(Ord. No. 2562, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 3370, 9-16-14)  
Sec. 3. - Objectives. 
This ordinance is intended to protect, enhance and restore the quality of waters within the Southern Rivers Watershed of the city. In order to protect, maintain, and enhance both the immediate and the long-term health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Virginia Beach, this ordinance has the following objectives: 
(a)  To encourage productive and enjoyable harmony among agricultural, recreational, developmental and conservation interests, and the natural resources of the city; 
(b)  To enhance, restore and protect the chemical, physical and biological integrity of waters within the Southern Rivers Watershed; 
(c)  To encourage the construction of drainage systems which maintain or functionally approximate existing natural systems and to prevent the alteration of existing drainage systems where such activities may adversely affect water quality or natural heritage resources; 
(d)  To encourage the protection of watercourses and the use of them in ways which do not impair their beneficial functioning; 
(e)  To minimize or reduce the transport of pollutants to the waters of the Southern Rivers Watershed; 
(f)  To protect groundwater; 
(g)  To minimize or reduce erosion and sedimentation; 
(h)  To prevent damage to wetlands and critical-edge habitat; 
(i)  To prevent damage from flooding, while recognizing that natural fluctuations in water levels are beneficial; 
(j)  To protect, restore and maintain plant and animal, including fish, communities in the Southern Rivers Watershed; 
(k)  To improve drainage systems in a manner which promotes bank stabilization, utilizing both structural and nonstructural methods; and 
(l)  To sustain and accelerate accomplishments in protecting water quality by continuing education, community involvement and incentives as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2562, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 3370, 9-16-14)  
Sec. 4. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in this ordinance shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(a)  Agricultural lands: Those lands used for the planting and harvesting of crops or plant growth of any kind in the open, pasture, horticulture, dairy farming, floriculture, or the raising of poultry or livestock. 
(b)  Best management practice (BMP): A practice, or combination of practices, determined to be the most effective practical means of preventing or reducing the amount of pollution generated by nonpoint sources to a level compatible with water quality goals. 
(c)  Clearing: The removal of vegetation from surface soils. 
(d)  Construction footprint: The area of all impervious surface created by development of land, including, but not limited to, buildings, roads, construction staging areas, drives, parking areas and sidewalks, and any other land disturbed for the construction of such improvements. 
(e)  Conventional tillage: The combined primary and secondary tillage operations normally performed in preparing a seedbed for a given crop grown in a given geographical area. 
(f)  Critical-edge habitat: Those lands adjacent to wetlands and waterways that provide for flood control, water quality enhancement, wildlife use, public access and recreation, and aesthetics. 
(g)  Detention: The collection and storage of surface water for subsequent gradual discharge. 
(h)  Developer: Any person who engages in development, either as an owner, or as the agent or representative of an owner, of property. 
(i)  Development: The construction, alteration or installation of any structure or other improvement upon a parcel of land, or any land disturbance, whether or not undertaken in connection with development, but not including activities associated with agriculture or silviculture or the construction of improvements used primarily for agricultural purposes. For floodplain management purposes, development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, the placement of manufactured homes, streets, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, or the subdivision of land. 
(j)  Drainage facility: Any manmade or artificially altered component of the drainage system. 
(k)  Drainage system: The system through which water flows from the land, including all watercourses, water bodies and wetlands. 
(l)  Erosion: The wearing or washing away of soil by the action of wind, water or other natural processes. 
(m)  Flood: A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source, or Mudflows, which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph (1)(b) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
The collapse of subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which that results in flooding as defined in paragraph 1(a) of this definition. 
(n)  Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
(o)  Forebay: An extra storage area provided near the inlet to a best management practice facility to trap incoming sediments. 
(p)  Grade control structures: A mechanical device used to collect surface water from a given elevation and outlet it at a lower elevation for purposes of minimizing erosion of a slope or ditch bank. 
(q)  Hoe drain or power take-off drain: A shallow surface drain constructed perpendicular to the orientation of rows of crops, used for the purpose of collecting and transporting excessive water. 
(r)  Impervious surface: A surface which is compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water, including, but not limited to, most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar structures. 
(s)  Land disturbance: Any activity which causes, contributes to, or results in the removal, destruction or covering of the vegetation upon any land, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, filling, grading or excavating. The term shall not include minor activity such as home gardening, individual home landscaping and home maintenance. 
(t)  Natural heritage resources: Rare, threatened or endangered species and their habitat, rare or state-significant natural communities or geologic sites, and similar features of scientific interest benefiting the welfare of the citizens of the commonwealth pursuant to the Virginia Natural Area Preserves Act of 1989. 
(u)  Natural system: A system which predominantly consists of or uses those communities of plants, animals, bacteria and other flora and fauna which occur indigenously on the land, in the soil, or in the water. 
(v)  Nontidal wetlands: Those wetlands, other than tidal wetlands, that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as identified or referred to in the City of Virginia Beach Soil Survey by soil names Backbay Mucky Peat; Duckston portion of Corolla-Duckston Fine Sands; Dorovan Mucky Peat; Duckston Fine Sand; Nawney Silt Loam; Pamlico Mucky Peat; Rapahannock Mucky Peat, Strongly Saline or Pocaty Peat; and any other lands which under normal conditions are saturated to the ground surface and connected by surface flow and contiguous to tidal wetlands or tributary streams. 
(w)  Noxious weed: A plant which is undesirable because it conflicts with, restricts or otherwise interferes with management objectives of this ordinance, including, but not limited to, Johnsongrass, Purple Loosestrife and Shattercane. 
(x)  Person: An individual, fiduciary, corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, municipal corporation or other entity or combination thereof. 
(y)  Property line ditch: A ditch or canal used as, or located upon, a boundary between adjacent properties in private ownership. 
(z)  Receiving body: Any water body, watercourse or wetland into which surface waters flow, either naturally, in manmade ditches or in a closed conduit system. 
(aa)  Retention: The collection and storage of runoff without subsequent discharge to surface waters. 
(bb)  Sediment: Particulate material, whether mineral or organic, that is in suspension or has settled in a water body. 
(cc)  Sedimentation facility: Any structure or area which is designed to hold runoff water until suspended sediments have settled. 
(dd)  Shoreline: The interface between land and the ordinary high-water mark. 
(ee)  Silviculture: The care and cultivation of forest trees. 
(ff)  Site: Any tract or parcel of land, or combination of tracts, lots or parcels of land which are in common ownership or are contiguous and in diverse ownership where development is to be performed as part of a subdivision or construction project. 
(gg)  Special flood hazard area: The land in the floodplain subject to the one (1) perfect or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as set forth in the Floodplain Ordinance (Appendix K). 
(hh)  Structure: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, but not including fences or signs. For floodplain management purposes, a structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
(ii)  Subdivision: The division of any parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels. The term shall include all changes in lot lines, the creation of new lots involving any division of an existing lot or lots and, if a new street is involved in such division, any division of a parcel of land. When appropriate to the context, the term shall also include the process of subdividing and the territory subdivided. 
(jj)  Tidal wetlands: Vegetated and nonvegetated wetlands, as defined in section 1401 of the City Zoning Ordinance [Appendix A]. 
(kk)  Tillage equipment: Farm equipment commonly used to invert the soil surface layer, including, but not limited to, disc harrows and moldboard plows. 
(ll)  Tributary stream: A watercourse contiguous to wetlands or shorelines, as defined in this ordinance. 
(mm)  Vegetation: All plant growth, including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs, vines, ferns, herbs, mosses and grasses. 
(nn)  Waters or community of waters: Any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground, including the water in any watercourse, water body or drainage system and diffused surface water and water percolating, standing or flowing beneath the surface of the ground, as well as coastal waters. 
(oo)  Watercourse: Any natural or artificial lake, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, waterway, gully, ravine, swale or wash in which water flows, either continuously, periodically, or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed or banks. 
(pp)  Water-dependent facility: A development of land which must be located on a shoreline by reason of its intrinsic nature, including, but not limited to, ports, intake and outfall structures of power plants, water treatment plants, sewage treatment plants, storm sewer outfalls, marinas and other boat docking structures, beaches and other public water-oriented recreational areas, fisheries or other marine resource facilities and shoreline protection measures as authorized under the provisions of the Wetlands Zoning Ordinance. [Appendix A, § 1400 et seq.]. In the case of facilities having both water-dependent components and components which are not water-dependent, only those portions which are water-dependent shall fail within this definition. 
(qq)  Wetlands: Tidal and nontidal wetlands as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 2562 9-14-99; Ord. No. 2673, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 3315, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 5. - Applicability. 
This ordinance shall apply to: 
(a)  Development upon any lands or waters within the watershed of the North Landing River, the Northwest River, the Small Coastal South Watershed, or Back Bay, which watersheds are collectively referred to herein as the Southern Rivers Watershed; 
(b)  Any artificial alteration of the level or flow of any watercourse or impoundment of water; and 
(c)  To the extent set forth in section 10 of this ordinance, agricultural activities within the Southern Rivers Watershed. 
(Ord. No. 2603, 7-14-2000; Ord. No. 3370, 9-16-14)  
Sec. 6. - Exemptions. 
The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance: 
(a)  Maintenance, alterations or improvements of existing structures not affecting the quality, rate, volume or location of surface water discharge or significantly altering the characteristics of natural or manmade drainage systems; provided, however, that any such activity resulting in a land disturbance exceeding an area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet shall be required to comply with the erosion and sediment control requirements set forth in sections 30-56 through 30-78 of the City Code; [and] 
(b)  Development upon any lot or parcel of land lawfully created and located within a residential zoning district permitting single-family dwellings or duplexes as a matter of right prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance [March 24, 1992]; and 
(c)  Construction, installation, operation and maintenance of water, sewer, electric, telephone, cable and gas lines and their appurtenant structures, provided that: 
(1)  To the greatest practicable degree, the location of such facilities shall be located outside of and no less than fifty (50) feet from wetlands and shorelines; 
(2)  No greater area of land shall be disturbed than is necessary; 
(3)  The construction, installation, operation and maintenance of such facilities shall comply with all applicable state and federal requirements and shall be designed and constructed in a manner which minimizes adverse effects upon water quality; and 
(4)  Any land disturbance exceeding an area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet shall comply with the erosion and sediment control requirements set forth in sections 30-56 through 30-78 of the City Code; and 
(d)  Silvicultural activities, provided that such activities comply with all applicable city, state and federal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2562, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 2603, 7-14-2000)  
Sec. 7. - Performance standards. 
(a)  Development resulting in or requiring a land disturbance exceeding an area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet shall comply with the erosion and sediment control requirements set forth in sections 30-56 through 30-78 of the City Code. 
(b)  On lots greater than or equal to one (1) acre in area and not served by the public sewer system, a reserve sewage disposal drainfield site with a capacity at least equal to that of the primary sewage disposal drainfield site shall be provided unless, in the judgment of the Virginia Beach Health District of the Virginia Health Department, the area of such lot is insufficient to accommodate such reserve drainfield site. On lots subject to the criteria for septic tank installation in poorly drained soils, a reserve sewage disposal drainfield site with a capacity no less than one-half of the primary sewage disposal drainfield site shall be provided unless, in the judgment of the Virginia Beach Health District of the Virginia Health Department, the area of such lot is insufficient to accommodate such reserve drainfield site. The construction or installation of any impervious surface shall be prohibited on the area of all sewage disposal drainfield sites, including reserve drainfield sites, until the property is served by the public sewer system. 
(c)  Development in, or within fifty (50) feet of, any wetland or shoreline, except wetlands or shorelines established in connection with structural best management practice facilities, shall be prohibited; provided, however, that vegetation may be cleared for the establishment of access paths if such removal is undertaken in a manner which minimizes land disturbance and impacts to remaining vegetation and maintains the functional value of the fifty-foot area as a stormwater filter; and provided further, that water-dependent facilities may be located within such area. Public highways may be constructed in or across wetlands or shorelines or within fifty (50) feet thereof under the following conditions: 
(1)  Any land-disturbing activity associated with such construction shall be in compliance with the erosion and sediment control requirements set forth in sections 30-56 through 30-78 of the City Code, or in the case of state agency projects, with such conservation plan or erosion and sediment control specifications as may be approved by the department of conservation and recreation; 
(2)  There is no practicable alternative location which would have less adverse impact on wetlands or waters within the Southern Rivers Watershed, taking into consideration cost, existing technology, and logistics in light of overall project purposes; and 
(3)  Appropriate and practicable measures are taken to minimize potential adverse effects of such construction, including any discharge of material associated therewith, on wetlands or waters within the Southern Rivers Watershed. 
(d)  The following design criteria shall apply to the fifty-foot area described in subsection (c): 
(1)  Such area shall consist of a mixture of indigenous evergreen and deciduous trees, grass and shrubs; 
(2)  Trees and shrubs, which may be of seedling variety, shall be planted on ten-foot centers; and 
(3)  Except as allowed in subsection (c), vegetation located in such area shall not be cleared, cut or mown. 
(e)  The following additional performance standards shall be requirements of all development, except single-family dwellings or duplexes separately built and not part of a subdivision: 
(1)  After development, runoff from the site shall be discharged in accordance with the stormwater quantity standards contained in the Stormwater Management Ordinance [Appendix D]; 
(2)  Measures ensuring compliance with the following design storm event criteria shall be incorporated: 
Parcel Size 	Design Storm 
Event 
Less than 300 acres 	10-year storm 
300 to 500 acres 	25-year storm 
Greater than 500 acres 	50-year storm 
 
(3)  The natural hydrodynamic characteristics of the watershed shall be maintained to the greatest extent practicable. 
(f)  The following additional performance standards shall be requirements of all development: 
(1)  The quality of surface waters and groundwater shall be protected and, where practicable, enhanced; 
(2)  Erosion during and after development shall be minimized; 
(3)  Groundwater levels shall be protected; 
(4)  The beneficial functioning of wetlands as areas for the natural storage of surface waters and the chemical reduction and assimilation of pollutants shall be protected; 
(5)  The location, construction or design or structures in areas prone to flooding shall be undertaken in such manner as to meet the requirements of the Floodplain Ordinance (Appendix K); 
(6)  Salt water intrusion shall be prevented or minimized; 
(7)  Natural fluctuations in salinity levels in estuarine areas shall not be altered; 
(8)  Land disturbance shall be minimized; and 
(9)  Injury to plant and animal communities and adverse impacts upon fish and wildlife habitat shall be minimized. 
(Ord. No. 2562, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 3315, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3342, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 3370, 9-16-14)  
Sec. 8. - Design criteria. 
In order to ensure that the objectives of this ordinance and the performance standards set forth hereinabove will be attained, development subject to the provisions of section 7(e) shall be in accordance with the following requirements, which shall be in addition to the requirements of subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) of section 7: 
(a)  Channeling runoff directly into water bodies shall be prohibited; and stormwater runoff shall be routed through systems designed to increase time of concentration, decrease velocity, increase infiltration, allow suspended solids to settle and remove pollutants; 
(b)  Watercourses shall not be dredged, cleared of vegetation, deepened, widened, straightened, stabilized or otherwise altered, except for the purpose of governmental flood control or water quality projects or normal maintenance. Maintenance of such watercourses shall be in accordance with the erosion and sediment control requirements of sections 30-56 through 30-78 of the City Code; 
(c)  Water shall be retained or detained before it enters any watercourse in order to prevent siltation or other pollution; 
(d)  Streambank erosion control shall be designed so as to meet or exceed the minimum state stormwater management criteria, which require that stormwater runoff be discharged into a channel which conveys runoff from a two-year storm event without flooding or erosion; 
(e)  The area of land disturbed by development shall be as small as practicable. Those areas which are not to be disturbed shall be protected from construction activity by adequate barriers. Whenever practicable, existing vegetation shall be retained and protected on the development site; 
(f)  Wetlands and watercourses shall not be used as sediment traps; 
(g)  Erosion and sedimentation facilities shall receive maintenance as prescribed by the approved management plan required by section 9 of this ordinance; 
(h)  Artificial watercourses shall be designed to reflect the degree of erodibility of soil types through which such watercourses are constructed and to result in flow velocities sufficiently low to prevent erosion of the banks or bed of such watercourses; 
(i)  Stormwater management ponds shall be used to detain or retain the increased and accelerated runoff generated by development and shall remove pollutants in stormwater to the maximum extent practicable. Water shall be released from detention pond into watercourse or wetlands at a rate and in a manner approximating the natural flow which would have occurred before development; 
(j)  The use of wetlands for storing and purifying water may be used as the final treatment as part of a comprehensive stormwater management plan, provided their capacity is not overloaded, thereby harming the wetlands and transitional vegetation. Wetlands shall not be damaged by the construction of stormwater management systems; 
(k)  Structural best management practice (BMP) facilities shall not be used as sediment traps during construction unless so designed and approved in accordance with the construction plans; 
(l)  No structural best management practice (BMP) facility shall be constructed within a special flood hazard area; 
(m)  The use of multiple best management practice (BMP) facilities, both structural and nonstructural, is encouraged; 
(n)  Stormwater management facilities incorporating the following design criteria are encouraged: 
(1)  Retention areas should be designed so that maintenance necessitated from siltation deposition is easily achieved. Forebay areas should be constructed at each stormwater inflow site, and an emergent wetlands bench should be established around the forebay perimeter; 
(2)  Retention areas should include an emergent wetlands bench area around the perimeter of the facility. Shorelines shall be designed so that benched areas are winding rather than straight, thereby maximizing the length of shoreline and offering more space for the growth of emergent vegetation; 
(3)  Retention areas and borrow pit operations should be designed to include a dewatering facility to capture all sediment; 
(4)  Maintenance access routes should be provided to all structural best management practice (BMP) facilities; 
(5)  Retention area facilities should include the planting of grasses and herbaceous and woody vegetation along the perimeter of such facilities to improve aesthetics and below the top of bank to promote water quality improvement; and 
(6)  Infiltration facilities should not be located under areas of impervious cover without design provisions for their long term inspection and maintenance of the infiltrative function of the facility as approved by the director of planning, public works, or in the case of water and sewer facilities, public utilities, as the case may be; and 
(o)  Stormwater, wastewater and potable water supply facilities and facilities used for the underground storage of petroleum products shall be designed and located so as to optimize water quality benefits while protecting potable water supplies. 
(Ord. No. 2673, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 3315, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3342, 4-22-14, eff. 7-1-14)  
Sec. 9. - Southern Rivers Watershed Management Plan. 
(a)  The developer of any land within the Southern Rivers Watershed shall, prior to undertaking any land-disturbing activity, submit a Southern Rivers Watershed Management Plan if such development is subject to the requirements of section 7(e) hereof. No such land-disturbing activity shall take place until the plan is approved and all required permits and approvals have been granted. There shall be included in the plan sufficient information for the development services center and the departments of planning, agriculture and public works to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the affected areas, the potential and predicted impacts of the proposed activity on waters and wetlands within the Southern Rivers Watershed and the effectiveness and acceptability of those measures proposed by the applicant for preventing or minimizing adverse impacts. The plan shall contain maps, charts, graphs, tables, photographs, narrative descriptions and explanations and citations to supporting references, as appropriate, to communicate the information required by this section. 
(b)  The plan shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property sought to be developed and the developer of such property and a statement signed by the owner indicating his or her consent to the proposed development. In addition, the legal description of the property shall be provided and its location with reference to such landmarks as major water bodies, adjoining roads, railroads or subdivisions shall be clearly identified by a map. 
(c)  The plan shall include a detailed description of the existing environmental and hydrologic conditions of the site and receiving waters, including the following information as appropriate to the circumstances: 
(1)  The direction, flow rate and volume of stormwater runoff under existing conditions; 
(2)  The location of areas on the site where stormwater collects or percolates into the ground; 
(3)  A description of all watercourses, water bodies and wetlands on or adjacent to the site or into which stormwater flows. Information regarding their water quality and the current water quality classification, if any, given them by the Virginia Water Control Board shall be included; 
(4)  Groundwater levels, as indicated by the Virginia Beach Soil Survey; 
(5)  Location of floodplains, including floodways and special flood hazard areas; 
(6)  Identification of vegetation existing on the site; 
(7)  The topography of the site; and 
(8)  Soil types or taxonomic units existing on the site. 
(d)  Proposed alterations of any site containing, or adjacent to, a wetland or shoreline shall be prescribed in detail. Such description shall address: 
(1)  Changes in topography resulting from development; 
(2)  Areas where vegetation will be cleared or killed; 
(3)  Areas to be covered with impervious surfaces, including a description of the surfacing material; and 
(4)  The size, location and proposed use of any buildings or other structures. 
(e)  Predicted impacts of the proposed development on existing conditions shall be described in detail. Such description shall address: 
(1)  Changes in water quality; 
(2)  Changes in groundwater levels; 
(3)  Changes in the incidence and duration of flooding on the site and upstream and downstream from it; and 
(4)  Impacts on wetlands and natural heritage resources. 
(f)  A plan for the control of stormwater runoff, identifying all components of the drainage system and any measures for the detention, retention or infiltration of water, shall be described in detail. 
(g)  The location of on-site potable water wells and wastewater facilities shall be identified. 
(h)  A plan for the maintenance of best management practice facilities. 
(i)  Erosion and sedimentation facilities shall be maintained in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook. 
(j)  Stormwater management facilities shall be inspected twice each year and following every storm which causes the capacity of the facility to be exceeded to ensure that the facility remains operational. Any failures shall be corrected immediately. 
(k)  The plan shall include any other information which the developer or the departments of planning and public works believe is reasonably necessary for an evaluation of impacts of the development upon water quality. 
(Ord. No. 2562, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 3315, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3370, 9-16-14)  
Sec. 10. - Agricultural lands. 
(a)  Persons engaged in agricultural activities are encouraged to explore and make use of all available resources offered in connection with the conversation of agricultural lands, including personal contacts, on-site field studies concerning the usage of potential agricultural best management practices, focused educational programs, demonstration and education projects, cost-share incentives and technical assistance provided by city, state and federal resource agencies. 
(b)  The director of the department of agriculture, in concert with the Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Virginia Department of Forestry and the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conversation Service, shall coordinate the exploration of all available resources as described in section 10(a) of this ordinance. The director shall maintain a record of all efforts relating to the development of individual farm conservation plans, cost-share incentives, focused educational programs and the development and implementation of agricultural best management facility projects, and shall report thereupon every six (6) months to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2562, 9-14-99)  
Sec. 11. - Procedures. 
(a)  A presubmittal meeting with the development services center to discuss the project in order to facilitate the development review process is encouraged. 
(b)  A processing fee shall be collected at the time the Southern Rivers Watershed Plan is submitted, which fee shall defray the cost of administration of this ordinance, including costs associated with plan review, issuance of permits, periodic inspection for compliance with approved plans, and necessary enforcement. Such fee shall be in an amount equal to the fee required by section 7 of the Stormwater Management Ordinance [Appendix D]. 
(c)  Within sixty (60) working days after submission of the completed Southern Rivers Watershed Plan, the development services center shall approve the plan, with or without specified conditions or modifications, or reject the plan, and shall notify the applicant accordingly. If the development services center has not rendered a decision within sixty (60) working days after submission of the plan, the plan shall be deemed approved and the applicant shall be authorized to proceed with the proposed activity. If the plan is rejected or modified, the development services center shall specify such modifications, terms or conditions as will allow approval of the plan; provided, however, that it shall not be the responsibility of the development services center to design an acceptable project. 
[(d), (e)  Reserved.] 
(f)  The Southern Rivers Watershed Management Plan shall not be approved unless it clearly indicates that the proposed development meets all requirements of this ordinance, except such requirements as have been deleted or modified pursuant to variance. 
(g)  Inspections: No Southern Rivers Watershed Management Plan shall be approved without adequate provision for inspection of the property, as follows: 
(1)  Initial inspection: prior to approval of the management plan; 
(2)  Bury inspection: prior to burial of any underground drainage structure; 
(3)  Erosion control inspection: prior to any land-disturbing activity and as deemed necessary thereafter to ensure effective control of erosion and sedimentation; and 
(4)  Finish inspection: at such time as all land-disturbing or development activities have been completed. 
(Ord. No. 3370, 9-16-14)  
Sec. 12. - Variances and appeals. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee may authorize in specific cases a variance from any requirement of this ordinance which will not be contrary to the public interest when, by reason of the existence of special conditions, a strict enforcement of such requirement will result in unnecessary hardship. No variance shall be authorized unless: 
(1)  Strict application of the ordinance will produce undue hardship; 
(2)  The condition giving rise to the asserted hardship is not of so general or recurring nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of general regulations to be adopted as an amendment to the ordinance; and 
(3)  The granting of the variance will not: 
(i)  Adversely change the rate or volume of stormwater runoff; 
(ii)  Have an adverse impact on a wetland, shoreline, watercourse or water body; 
(iii)  Contribute to the degradation of water quality; 
(iv)  Be of substantial detriment to adjacent property or adversely affect the character of adjoining neighborhoods; or 
(v)  Otherwise impair attainment of the objectives of this ordinance. 
When a variance is granted, the city manager or his designee may attach such conditions and safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect water quality in the Southern Rivers Watershed, and may require a guarantee or bond to assure compliance. Any person aggrieved of the decision of the city manager or his designee may appeal such decision to the city council within thirty (30) days of the date of such decision. Any person aggrieved of a decision of the city council may appeal such decision to the circuit court within thirty (30) days of the date of such decision. Review of such decision shall be in accordance with the procedures and standards of the Administrative Process Act. The city manager or his designee shall maintain a record of all variance actions and report thereupon biannually to the city council. 
(b)  Any decision, determination or order made by any officer in the administration or enforcement of this ordinance may be appealed to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of such decision, determination or order. Any decision of the city council may be appealed to the circuit court within thirty (30) days of the date of such decision. Review of such decision shall be in accordance with the procedures and standards of the Administrative Process Act. 
(Ord. No. 3370, 9-16-14)  
Sec. 13. - Severability. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed severable; and if any of the provisions hereof are adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining portions of this ordinance shall remain in full force and effect and their validity unimpaired.  
Sec. 14. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any development commenced without the prior approval of a Southern Rivers Watershed Management Plan or which is conducted contrary to such approved plan shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be enjoined or abated by the city in a manner provided by law without the necessity of showing that no adequate remedy at law exists. 
(b)  In addition to any other penalty or remedy herein provided, any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by confinement in jail for a period of not more than thirty (30) days, either or both. 
(c)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained pursuant to this section, the city may bring a civil action against any person for a violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance. Such action may seek the imposition of a civil penalty of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation. 
(d)  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance, the city manager or his designee may provide, in an order issued by him against such person, for the payment of a civil charge of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); provided, however, that such order shall not excuse compliance with any of the provisions of this ordinance. Monies collected pursuant to this subsection shall be dedicated to the natural resources conversation and restoration fund. 
(e)  Prior to the approval of any Southern Rivers Watershed Management Plan, there shall be required of the applicant a reasonable performance bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal surety or combination thereof acceptable to the city attorney to ensure that measures may be taken by the city, at the applicant's expense, should he fail, after reasonable notice, within the time specified in such notice, to comply with the requirements of this ordinance. Within sixty (60) days after final inspection of the development activity, such surety, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be returned to the applicant or terminated, as the case may be. 
(f)  Upon notice from the city manager or his designee that any activity is being conducted in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance, such activity shall immediately be stopped. An order to stop work shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the violation and the conditions under which activity may be resumed. No such order shall take effect until it has been tendered to the owner of the property upon which the activity is conducted or his agent or to the person conducting such activity. Any person who continues an activity ordered to be stopped, except as directed in the stop-work order, shall be guilty of a violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3370, 9-16-14)  
Sec. 15. - Vested rights. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall not affect the vested rights of any person under existing law.  
Sec. 16. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall become effective on the date of its adoption. 
Adopted by the Council of the City of Virginia Beach on the 24th day of March, 1989.  
APPENDIX H - STORM SEWER SYSTEM DISCHARGE ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This appendix is derived from Ord. No. 2189, adopted Nov. 10, 1992. The text has been set out as adopted except for minor stylistic changes made for conformity with the remainder of this publication. Editorial emendations made for the purpose of clarity are included in brackets [ ]. 
Cross reference— Sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28; solid waste, Ch. 31; stormwater management utility, Ch. 32.5; water supply, Ch. 37; sanitary sewers in subdivisions, App. B, § 5.9; site plan ordinance, App. C; stormwater management, App. D. 
 
Sec. 1. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the Virginia Beach Storm Sewer System Discharge Ordinance.  
Sec. 2. - Findings of fact. 
The city council finds that the uncontrolled discharge of pollutants to the storm sewer system has an adverse impact upon the water quality of the receiving waters. More specifically: 
(a)  The water quality of discharges from separate storm sewers draining residential, commercial and light industrial sites was characterized by the National Urban Runoff Program (NURP), which conducted sampling programs from 1978 through 1983. NURP concluded that the quality or urban runoff can be adversely impacted by several sources of pollutants, including illicit connections, industrial site runoff and illegal dumping. Other studies have shown that storm sewers contain illicit discharges of substances other than stormwater and that large amounts of waste, particularly used oils, are improperly disposed of in storm sewers. 
(b)  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly known as the Clean Water Act, established the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program, which requires permits for discharges from municipal storm sewers into waters of the United States. The Environmental Protection Agency has promulgated regulations implementing the NPDES program. 
(c)  The NPDES regulations for stormwater discharges require certain municipalities, including the City of Virginia Beach, to: 
(1)  Control through ordinance, permit, contract, order or similar means, the contribution of pollutants to municipal storm sewers by stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity and the quality of stormwater discharged from sites of industrial activity; 
(2)  Prohibit through ordinance, order or similar means, illicit discharges to municipal storm sewers; 
(3)  Control through ordinance, order or similar means discharges to municipal storm sewers of spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater; 
(4)  Require compliance with conditions in ordinances, permits, contracts or orders; and 
(5)  Carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with permit conditions, including the prohibition on illicit discharges to the municipal storm sewer system.  
Sec. 3. - Objectives. 
This ordinance is adopted as part of the city stormwater management program in order to prevent certain non-stormwater discharges to, and improper disposal of substances in, the storm sewers system, so as to reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, pollutants that may be present in discharges from the storm sewer system.  
Sec. 4. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in this ordinance shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(a)  Director: The director of public works or his designee. 
(b)  Discharge: Dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, dump, leak or place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, dumped, leaked or placed by any means. 
(c)  Industrial wastes: Liquid or other wastes resulting from any process of industry, manufacture, trade or business, or from the development of any natural resources. 
(d)  Other wastes: Decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, leaves, lawn clippings, lime, garbage, refuse, ashes, offal, tar, paint, solvents, petroleum products, antifreeze and chemicals. 
(e)  Person: Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, organization or other entity, including governmental entities, or any combination thereof. 
(f)  Sanitary sewer: A system of underground conduits that collect and deliver sanitary wastewater to a wastewater treatment plant. 
(g)  Sanitary wastewater: Wastewater from toilets, sinks and other plumbing fixtures. 
(h)  Sewage: The water-carried human wastes from residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places, together with such industrial wastes, stormwater or other water as may be present. 
(i)  Storm sewer system: The system of roads, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, pipes, lakes, ponds, channels, storm drains and other facilities located within the City of Virginia Beach which are designed or used for collecting, storing or conveying stormwater or through which stormwater is collected, stored or conveyed. 
(j)  Stormwater: Runoff from rain, snow or other forms of precipitation, and surface runoff and drainage.  
Sec. 5. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this ordinance to: 
(1)  Discharge, or cause or allow to be discharged, sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the storm sewer system, or any component thereof, or onto driveways, sidewalks, parking lots or other areas draining to the storm sewer system; or 
(2)  Connect, or cause or allow to be connected, any sanitary sewer to the storm sewer system, including any sanitary sewer connected to the storm sewer system as of the date of adoption of this ordinance [November 10, 1992]. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (c), the following activities shall not be in violation of this ordinance: 
(1)  Water line flushing; 
(2)  Landscape irrigation; 
(3)  Diverting stream flows or rising groundwater; 
(4)  Infiltration of uncontaminated groundwater; 
(5)  Pumping of uncontaminated groundwater from potable water sources, foundation drains, irrigation waters, springs, or water from crawl spaces or footing drains; 
(6)  Lawn watering; 
(7)  Individual car washing on residential properties; 
(8)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
(9)  Street washing; and 
(10)  Any activity authorized by a valid Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit or Virginia Pollution Abatement (VPA) permit. 
(c)  In the event any of the activities listed in subsection (b) are found to be cause sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes to be discharged into the storm sewer system, the director shall so notify the person performing such activities, and shall order that such activities be stopped or conducted in such manner as to avoid the discharge of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the storm sewer system. The failure to comply with any such order shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this ordinance.  
Sec. 6. - Inspections and monitoring. 
The director shall have authority to make such lawful inspections and conduct such monitoring of stormwater outfalls or other components of the storm sewer system as may be necessary or appropriate in the administration and enforcement of this ordinance.  
Sec. 7. - Penalties. 
(a)  A willful violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that a continuing violation of this ordinance is maintained or permitted to remain shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who, intentionally or otherwise, commits any of the acts prohibited by section 5 of this ordinance shall be liable to the city for all costs of containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and disposal of any substance unlawfully discharged into the storm sewer system. 
(c)  Any person who, intentionally or otherwise, commits any of the acts prohibited by section 5 of this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day that a violation of this ordinance continues. The court assessing such penalties may, at its discretion, order such penalties to be paid into the treasury of the city for the purpose of abating, preventing or mitigating environmental pollution. 
(d)  The director may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this ordinance, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or in equity, shall be no defense to any such action. 
(e)  The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative, not exclusive; and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one (1) or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted.  
Sec. 8. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect on November 16, 1992.  
APPENDIX I - AIRPORT NOISE ATTENUATION AND SAFETY ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 1. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the Airport Noise Attenuation and Safety Ordinance of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(Ord. No. 2290, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 2. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The intent of city council and the purpose of this ordinance are to: 
(1)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare from the adverse impacts associated with excessive noise from flight operations at NAS Oceana/ALF Fentress and the potential for aircraft accidents associated with proximity to airport operations; and 
(2)  Ensure that the construction of residential use group buildings or portions thereof, located within those areas of Virginia Beach likely to be affected by aircraft noise associated with flight operations at NAS Oceana/NALF Fentress provide for appropriate sound reduction to minimize the impact of such noise on occupants. 
(b)  The designation of any parcel of land as lying in an airport noise zone or in an aircraft accident potential zone, or both, shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the zoning district classification of such parcel, such that any parcel of land situated within an airport noise zone or in an aircraft accident potential zone, or both, shall also lie in one (1) or more of the zoning districts established pursuant to section 102 of the city zoning ordinance [Appendix A] and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this ordinance and the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2290, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2508, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2906, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in this ordinance shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Day-night average sound level (DNL). A twenty-four-hour energy average sound level expressed in dBA, with a ten-decibel penalty applied to noise occurring between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
Permits and inspections division or division of permits and inspections. The division of permits and inspections of the department of planning. 
Building official. The building code administrator of the permits and inspections division. 
Use group. The classification of buildings and structures as to the use and occupancy thereof as set forth in Chapter 3 of the International Building Code. 
Sound transmission class (STC) rating. A single number rating characterizing the sound reduction performance of a material tested in accordance with ASTM E 90-90, "Laboratory Measurement of Airborne Sound Transmission Loss of Building Partitions." 
(Ord. No. 2290, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2906, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 4. - Airport noise zones and boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the airport noise zones shall be as shown on the zoning map as adopted and amended by city council. 
(b)  For purposes of administering and enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, there shall be four (4) airport noise zones and three (3) aircraft accident potential zones: 
Airport noise zones shall be as follows: 
(1)  Noise Zone less than 65 dB DNL; 
(2)  Noise Zone 65-70 dB DNL; 
(3)  Noise Zone 70-75 dB DNL; 
(4)  Noise Zone greater than 75 dB DNL; 
Aircraft accident potential zones shall be as follows: 
(1)  CZ - Clear Zone (an area extending outward from the threshold of an active runway which possesses a high potential for accidents); 
(2)  APZ-I - Aircraft Accident Potential Zone I (an area extending outward from a clear zone which posses a significant potential for accidents); and 
(3)  APZ-II - Aircraft Accident Potential Zone II (an area extending outward from either a clear zone or aircraft accident potential zone I which possesses a measurable potential for an accident. 
The purpose of the establishment of four (4) airport noise zones and three (3) aircraft accident potential zones is to distinguish between the severity of the level of noise impacts so that appropriate acoustical performance standards can be employed to mitigate the adverse impacts of aircraft noise and to facilitate accurate identification of such zones. Each of the four (4) airport noise zones and three (3) aircraft accident potential zones shall be designated on the zoning map as adopted and amended by city council. 
(Ord. No. 2290, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2508, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2906, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 5. - Acoustical performance standards. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, any residential use group building or structure or portion thereof constructed or placed within an airport noise zone after January 1, 1995, and any assembly, business, educational, institutional or mercantile use group building or structure or portion thereof constructed after November 17, 2005 shall be constructed to provide acoustical treatment measures in accordance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2290, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2906, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 6. - Nonconforming buildings and structures. 
(a)  Any residential use group building which lawfully existed on the effective date of this ordinance and which is not in conformity with any one or more of the provisions of this ordinance, and any residential use group building which lawfully existed on the date of adoption of any amendment to this ordinance and which is not in conformity with such amendment, shall be deemed nonconforming. 
(b)  Any extension, enlargement, relocation, reconstruction or substantial alteration of a nonconforming residential use group building shall be subject to the acoustical performance standards as set forth in section 5 of this ordinance unless otherwise modified by the building official pursuant to applicable provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2290, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2906, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 7. - Exemptions. 
The acoustical performance standards specified in section 5 of this ordinance shall not apply to the construction of buildings or structures in any Noise Zone less than 65 dB DNL. 
(Ord. No. 2290, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2508, 9-22-98; Ord. No. 2906, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 8. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any determination or decision made by the building official or any administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this ordinance may be appealed in writing to the local board of building code appeals within thirty (30) days from the date of such determination or decision. The appeal shall be filed in the office of the building official. In the event such an appeal is filed, the local board of building code appeals shall schedule at least one (1) public hearing on the matter and render its decision in writing to the appellant within fourteen (14) working days from the date of the public hearing. 
(b)  Any party aggrieved by any decision of the local board of building code appeals, who was a party to the appeal, may appeal to the state building code technical review board. Application for review shall be made to the state building code technical review board within twenty-one (21) calendar days of receipt of the decision of the local board of building code appeals by the aggrieved party. 
(c)  Decisions of the state building code technical review board shall be final if no appeal is made. An appeal from the decision of the state building code technical review board may be filed in the circuit court of the City of Virginia Beach in accordance with applicable provisions of the Administrative Process Act. 
(Ord. No. 2290, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2906, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 9. - Required disclosures in certain real property transactions. 
(a)  The provisions of Virginia Residential Property Disclosure Act (Virginia Code Sections 55-517 thr. -525), as applicable to required disclosures regarding real property in localities in which a military air installation is located, are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(b)  The provisions of Virginia Code Section 55-248.12:1, pertaining to required disclosures in rentals of residential property in localities in which a military air installation is located, are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(c)  Any person who fails to provide the disclosure required by this section shall be subject to the remedies provided in Virginia Code Section 55-524 or 55-248.12:1, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 2930, 3-14-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2906, adopted Dec. 20, 2005, repealed section 9 of the airport noise attenuation and safety ordinance which pertained to disclosure and derived from Ord. No. 2290, adopted Aug. 23, 1994; and Ord. No. 2508, adopted Sept. 22, 1998. Ord. No. 2930, adopted March 14, 2006, added new provisions as section 9 as herein set out.  
Sec. 10. - Violations. 
Except as provided in Section 9 of this ordinance: 
(a)  A violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, Volume I. 
(b)  In addition to, and not in lieu of, the penalties prescribed in subsection (a) hereof, the city may apply to the circuit court of the City of Virginia Beach for an injunction against the continuing violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance and may seek any other remedy authorized by law. 
(c)  Upon notice from the permits and inspections division that any construction or other activity is being conducted in violation of the provisions of this ordinance, such construction or other activity shall be immediately stopped. An order to stop work shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the violation and the conditions under which the construction or other activity may be resumed. No such order shall be effective until it shall have been tendered to the owner of the property upon which the construction or other activity is conducted or his agent or to any person conducting such construction or other activity. Any person who shall continue an activity ordered to be stopped, shall be guilty of a violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2290, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 2906, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 2930, 3-14-06)  
Sec. 11. - Severability. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed to be severable, and if any of the provisions hereof are adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining portion of this ordinance shall remain in full force and effect and their validity shall remain unimpaired. 
(Ord. No. 2290, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 12. - Vested rights. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall not affect the vested rights of any person under existing law. 
(Ord. No. 2290, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 13. - Administration and enforcement. 
This ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the building official and any inspector assigned to the permits and inspections division, who shall exercise all authority of police officers in the performance of their duties. Such authority shall include, without limitation, the authority to issue summonses directing the appearance before a court of competent jurisdiction of any person alleged to have violated any of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2290, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 14. - Avigation easements. 
Any owner of property located wholly or partially in a Noise Zone of 65 dB DNL or greater is encouraged to provide the United States Navy with an avigation easement prior to development of the property, either as a proffer made as part of a conditional zoning application or as part of the subdivision review process. Such avigation easement shall acknowledge the right of the United States Navy to conduct military operations in the airspace above the property and shall include a covenant not to bring legal action for damages or other relief as a result of noise levels from overflights. The avigation easement shall be in a form recommended by the Planning Director and shall be approved by the City Attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2933, 3-28-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2906, adopted Dec. 20, 2005, repealed section 14 of the airport noise attenuation and safety ordinance which pertained to effective date and derived from Ord. No. 2290, adopted Aug. 23, 1994. Ord. No. 2933, adopted March 28, 2006, added new provisions to the airport noise attenuation and safety ordinance as § 14.  
APPENDIX J. - AGRICULTURAL RESERVE PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 1. - Title. 
This Ordinance shall be known as the "Agricultural Lands Preservation Ordinance of the City of Virginia Beach."  
Sec. 2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote and encourage the preservation of farmland in the rural southern portion of the City, where agricultural uses predominate, by means which are voluntary, rather than regulatory. The preservation of farmland will promote and enhance agriculture as an important industry which contributes to the maintenance of a diverse and healthy local economy. In addition, the preservation of farmland will: 
(a)  Preserve the rural character of the southern portion of the City; 
(b)  Conserve and protect environmentally sensitive lands, waters and other resources; 
(c)  Reduce and defer the need for major urban infrastructure improvements in the southern portion of the City and the expenditure of public funds for such improvements; 
(d)  Preserve open space; and 
(e)  Assist in shaping the character, direction and timing of community development.  
Sec. 3. - Findings. 
Agriculture is an integral component of the City's economy. Agriculture, tourism and the military are the three major industries in Virginia Beach, and maintaining the continued vitality of all three is necessary in order to achieve and preserve a balanced tax base and a diverse, healthy economy benefitting all of the citizens of the City. 
Agriculture is more, however, than just an important facet of the City's economy. It is an equally important part of the City's cultural heritage, having existed, and flourished, in Virginia Beach for more than three centuries. Just as agriculture contributes to the diversity of the City's economy, so does it contribute to the diversity of the City's character. 
Notwithstanding the economic and cultural importance of agriculture, its continued viability in Virginia Beach is unsure. The amount of farmland within the City, both north and south of the Green Line, has dwindled from approximately fifty-one thousand (51,000) acres in 1982 to about thirty thousand (30,000) acres in 1993. More farmland is converted to residential and other nonagricultural uses every year. Because of the fundamental incompatibility between agricultural and residential uses, as more and more farmland is converted to residential subdivisions, farmers are often forced to alter or cease certain practices, to the detriment of their businesses, or are discouraged from making investments in farm improvements, or both. The result is the decline of agriculture. 
As the Comprehensive Plan recognizes, effective and affirmative agricultural preservation strategies must be implemented. Agricultural preservation is an important economic, environmental, land use, and cultural issue. 
(Ord. No. 2585, 6-6-00)  
Sec. 4. - Definitions. 
(a)  Accessory use means a use which is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with, the principal use of the same parcel or group of contiguous parcels under common ownership and operated as an agricultural enterprise. 
(b)  Agricultural land preservation easement or preservation easement means a nonpossessory interest in land, perpetual in duration, pursuant to which the exercise of development rights on the subject property is restricted in accordance with the provisions of such easement. 
(c)  Agricultural support service means a commercial operation upon which the agricultural industry generally depends. The term includes, but is not limited to, suppliers of fertilizer, seed and plant protection products, equipment dealers and large-scale buyers of farm products. 
(d)  Agricultural use means the bona fide production of crops, animal or fowl, including, but not limited to, the production of fruits, vegetables, honey, grains, meat, poultry and dairy products; the raising of livestock and poultry; and the production and harvest of products from horticultural, silvicultural or aquacultural activity. The term also includes (i) the repair, expansion or replacement of no more than one bona fide dwelling occupied by the landowner or tenant as of the date of application for entry in the agricultural reserve program and no more than one freestanding mobile home, as permitted by section 19-19 of the City Code; (ii) uses directly related to agricultural activities conducted on the same property, including the sale of agricultural products and agricultural-related products as permitted by section 401 (a) of the City Zoning Ordinance, dog kennels, riding academies, horses for hire or boarding of horses and incidental sales of tack, riding apparel and similar items as allowed by Section 401(a) of the City Zoning Ordinance; (iii) agritourism activities allowed in accordance with section 401(a) of the City Zoning Ordinance; and (iv) septic tanks and drainfields approved by the health department and which cannot be located within an area not encumbered by an agricultural land preservation easement. The term does not include the processing of agricultural, silvicultural, horticultural or aquacultural products, except as an accessory use. 
(e)  Animal unit, as used in the farmland ranking system, means a unit of measurement equal to one thousand (1,000) pounds of live body weight of livestock. 
(f)  Batch means a grouping of contiguous parcels for purposes of making application for the sale of development rights. 
(g)  City attorney means the city attorney or his designee. 
(h)  City manager means the city manager or his designee. 
(i)  Commission means the agricultural advisory commission. 
(j)  Development right means the right to develop property for any use other than an agricultural use. The term includes, but is not limited to, the right to develop property for any commercial, industrial or residential use except as expressly permitted by this Ordinance. 
(k)  Director means the director of the department of agriculture or his designee. 
(l)  Farmland ranking system or system means the formula by which applications for the sale of development rights are ranked in order of priority of acquisition of such rights. 
(m)  High-value crops means crops which require intensive management and greater than normal inputs. Examples include, but are not limited to, strawberries, blackberries, sweet corn, sweet potatoes, tomatoes, lima beans, green beans, pumpkins, watermelons, cantaloupes and Christmas trees. 
(n)  Landowner means the equitable owner of the fee simple title to a parcel of land or, with respect to a parcel not encumbered by a deed of trust or mortgage, the legal owner of such title. Where more than one person or entity is the legal or equitable owner, the term refers to all such persons jointly. 
(o)  Parcel means a lot or tract of land, lawfully recorded in the clerk's office of the circuit court of the City of Virginia Beach. 
(p)  Program means the agricultural reserve program established by this Ordinance. 
(q)  Significant timber harvest means a merchantable harvest for the commercial market. The term does not include minor harvests for such things as firewood, poles, posts, blind material or greenery. 
(Ord. No. 2585, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 2825, 6-1-04; Ord. No. 3332, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 3356, 6-17-14)  
Sec. 5. - Agricultural reserve program. 
There is hereby established the agricultural reserve program of the City of Virginia Beach, which shall be a program by which the City acquires, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and to the extent of available funding, the development rights on eligible parcels of farmland in the areas of the City described in section 6. The acquisition of development rights shall be accomplished by the purchase of agricultural land preservation easements upon such parcels. In conjunction with the program, the city manager is hereby authorized and directed to establish, subject to the approval of the city council and applicable requirements of law, methods of payment for such easements, including, but not limited to, incurring long-term obligations in the nature of installment purchase agreements pursuant to which the City pays to the landowner interest only on an annual basis for a period of years and principal at the expiration of such period.  
Sec. 6. - Applicability. 
The agricultural reserve program shall apply in that portion of the city delineated on the map entitled "Area of Applicability, Agricultural Reserve Program," dated February 2005, which map has been exhibited to the City Council and is on file in the department of agriculture, except in those areas under the ownership or control of the United States of America or the Commonwealth of Virginia, or an agency or instrumentality thereof. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as a limitation upon the City's authority to acquire land or public purposes other than those set forth in this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2585, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 2863, 2-8-05)  
Sec. 7. - Eligibility criteria. 
Preservation easements may be purchased only upon property meeting all of the following criteria: 
(a)  The property shall be no less than ten (10) acres in area, or be included in a batch in which the combined area of contiguous property is no less than ten (10) acres in area. 
(b)  The property shall be wholly located within a residential zoning district, an AG-1 or AG-1 Agricultural District or a P-1 Preservation District, or any combination of such zoning districts; 
(c)  The property shall be capable of being subdivided or developed for nonagricultural uses without the approval of the city council; 
(d)  The property shall be located within that portion of the city described in section 6; 
(e)  The property shall not contain any land required to be reserved or set aside for open space, recreation or similar purposes pursuant to the provisions of a conditional use permit, conditional zoning agreement, subdivision variance, or other action by the city council, or any ordinance or regulation; 
(f)  No uses or structures, other than those permitted by preservation easements, shall be located upon the property; and 
(g)  No portion of the property shall contain any of the following soil types: 
(1)  Back Bay Mucky Peat; 
(2)  Dorovan Mucky Peat; 
(3)  Nawney Silt Loam; or 
(4)  Pamlico Mucky Peat, Ponded. 
(Ord. No. 2585, 6-6-00)  
Sec. 8. - Application; evaluation. 
(a)  Applications to sell development rights shall be on a form prescribed by the director and shall be signed by the landowner and submitted to the director. The director may require supporting documentation, including deeds, surveys or other legal instruments, to be submitted with the application. A landowner may submit an application for each parcel or may submit a single application for more than one contiguous parcel. Applications for batched parcels shall follow the same procedure, but shall be signed by all landowners. 
(b)  The director shall review each application to determine whether the eligibility criteria set forth in section 7 are met and all required information is provided, and shall notify the landowner of his determination. Incomplete or otherwise deficient applications shall be rejected and returned to the landowner with a statement of reasons for the rejection. 
(c)  In the event a parcel, or portion thereof, fails to meet the eligibility criteria set forth in section 7, such parcel, or portion thereof, shall not be considered for inclusion in the program. In the event the ineligibility of a parcel, or portion thereof, renders the remaining property which is the subject of the application ineligible, none of the property shall be considered for inclusion. 
(d)  In the event available funding is insufficient to purchase the development rights on all properties which are the subject of pending applications under this ordinance, the director shall evaluate each application, using the criteria of the farmland ranking system set forth in section 12, and shall ascertain all necessary facts and information for ranking the priority of acquisition of the lands included in the application. In performing such evaluation, the director may request the assistance of such other city departments and agencies as may be appropriate and beneficial. The evaluation shall include a recommendation for the number of farmland ranking system points to be assigned to the application. No later than ninety (90) days after receipt of the completed application, he shall forward a copy of the evaluation to each member of the commission and to the city manager and the landowner. 
(e)  The submission of an application shall not be deemed to constitute a binding contractual offer to convey any interest in the landowner's property, but shall be revocable at will by the landowner prior to the execution of an installment purchase agreement, without penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2585, 6-6-00)  
Sec. 9. - Review of applications by commission. 
(a)  In the event available funding is insufficient to purchase the development rights on all properties which are the subject of pending applications, the commission shall, at a regular or special meeting called for such purpose, review applications and evaluations provided by the director and shall make a determination of farmland ranking system points to be assigned to each application. Its determination shall be final and unappealable. In the event of disagreement among the members of the commission as to the number of points to be assigned to a given application, each member shall state the number of points he believes should be assigned and the average number of points so obtained, rounded upwards to the nearest point, shall constitute the action of the commission. The secretary of the commission shall promptly transmit a report of the commission's action to the city manager. 
(b)  All discussion and deliberation concerning the evaluation of applications and assigning of points shall be conducted in open session, notwithstanding any contrary provision of the Virginia Freedom of Information Act. 
(c)  No member of the commission shall be disqualified from selling the development rights on any parcel in which he has a financial interest by reason of his membership, but such transactions shall be governed by the Virginia State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act. 
(Ord. No. 2585, 6-6-00)  
Sec. 10. - Procedure for acquisition of development rights. 
(a)  The city manager shall ascertain the value of the development rights of the property, which value shall be equal to the difference between the fair market value of the property without encumbrance by a preservation easement and the fair market value of the property so encumbered. The city manager is hereby authorized, but not required, to contract with qualified appraisers in ascertaining the value of the development rights. 
(b)  The city manager shall communicate to the landowner, or the designee of the landowner, in writing, an offer to purchase the development rights of the subject property. Prior to communicating any such offer, however, the city manager may seek the approval of the city council therefor. Such offer shall be in an amount determined by the city manager to represent the value of such development rights and shall be subject to available funding, the approval of the city council, and such other terms and conditions as the city manager may deem appropriate. It shall also be conditioned upon the absence of any defects in title or other restrictions or encumbrances which may, in the opinion of the city attorney, adversely affect the city's interests in accomplishing the purposes of this ordinance. 
(c)  In the event the offer is accepted by the landowner, the city manager shall place the matter before the city council for approval. The city council may approve the purchase of development rights only with respect to such applications for which there is available funding, in a priority determined by points assigned under the farmland ranking system, and only upon finding that the proposed terms and conditions of purchase, including the purchase price and manner of payment, are fair and reasonable and in furtherance of the purposes of this ordinance. In the event there is sufficient available funding for the purchase of only a portion of the property included in an application, the landowner shall be given the opportunity to submit a revised application including a lesser amount of property. 
(d)  Consideration of applications which are the subject of an agreement of purchase, but for which there is insufficient available funding in the then-current fiscal year, shall be deferred to the next fiscal year or until such other time as available funding is sufficient unless the landowner withdraws the application. No preference shall be given to such applications except as indicated by the farmland ranking system. 
(e)  Within ten (10) days after the acquisition of a preservation easement, the planning director shall cause to be made on the official zoning map a notation of such acquisition and the date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2585, 6-6-00)  
Sec. 11. - Nature of rights acquired; repurchases; exchanges. 
(a)  No interest in land other than a perpetual agricultural land preservation easement shall be acquired by the city pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance, and no such interest shall be acquired by the exercise of the power of eminent domain. The acquisition of a preservation easement by the city shall not confer upon the public any right of entry or access, or any other rights, express or implied. 
(b)  The acquisition of a preservation easement by the city shall extinguish the right of the landowner to develop the property for any use other than: 
(1)  An agricultural use, as defined in section 4; and 
(2)  Upon proper subdivision of the property, one (1) single-family dwelling on each building site reserved for such purposes in the preservation easement and accessory uses as allowed by Section 401(b) of the City Zoning Ordinance. Lots so subdivided shall, to the extent possible, contain no more than three (3) acres of land encumbered by the preservation easement. 
(c)  Upon the expiration of twenty-five (25) years from the date on which a preservation easement is recorded, the landowner or successor in interest to the property which is subject to the easement may petition the city council to repurchase the development rights and thereby extinguish the agricultural lands preservation easement on such property. The city council may, by vote of no less than three-fourths (¾) of all of its members, and in accordance with all other procedural requirements then governing the sale of municipal interests in land, authorize the repurchase of such development rights by the petitioning party at the then-current fair market value of such development rights and upon such other terms and conditions as may be fair and reasonable. Any such repurchase of development rights shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (d) or (d1), as the case may be. 
(d)  Where no state or federal funds were used by the city in connection with the acquisition of the preservation easement that is the subject of the repurchase petition, no repurchase of development rights shall be authorized unless other preservation easements of (i) at least equal fair market value, (ii) of greater value as permanent open space, and (iii) of as nearly as feasible equivalent usefulness and location for use as permanent open-space land as the property which is the subject of the petition are substituted. No such substitution, however, shall be required if the city council determines by ordinance that: 
(1)  The repurchase of such development rights is essential to the orderly development and growth of the city and in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan then in effect; and 
(2)  The property that is the subject of the repurchase is no longer needed for open-space purposes, and the substitution of other real property is not feasible. 
(d1)  Where state or federal funds were used by the city in connection with the acquisition of the preservation easement that is the subject of the repurchase petition, no repurchase of development rights shall be authorized unless: 
(1)  The city council determines by ordinance that the repurchase of such development rights is essential to the orderly development and growth of the city and in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan then in effect; and 
(2)  Other preservation easements or open-space lands of (i) at least equal fair market value, (ii) greater value as permanent open space and (iii) of as nearly as feasible equivalent usefulness and location for use as permanent open-space land as the subject property are acquired by the city. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, at any time after a preservation easement on a parcel has been acquired, the landowner may petition the city council for the extinguishment of such easement in exchange for the conveyance to the city of a preservation easement on a different portion of the landowner's property meeting all of the eligibility criteria set forth in section 7. The city council shall approve such exchange upon a finding that: 
(1)  The acquisition of the proposed preservation easement in lieu of the existing easement does not adversely affect the City's interests in accomplishing the purposes of this Ordinance; 
(2)  The proposed easement area meets all of the eligibility requirements set forth in section 7 of this Ordinance; and 
(3)  The exchange complies with the requirements of subsection (d). 
(f)  The consideration for any acquisition of a preservation easement pursuant to subsection (e) shall consist solely of the extinguishment of the existing preservation easement. 
(Ord. No. 2585, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 2825, 6-1-04; Ord. No. 3035, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 3064, 1-27-09)  
Sec. 12. - Farmland ranking system. 
(a)  The farmland ranking system is hereby adopted. The system shall be the sole means by which the priority of acquisition of development rights under the program is determined when available funding is insufficient to purchase the development rights on all available property which is the subject of applications for the sale of such rights. The number of farmland ranking system points assigned to property shall not be used in determining the value of development rights or the amount of any offer to purchase such rights. 
(b)  There shall be five (5) categories of criteria for evaluation under the system. In each such category, certain factors descriptive of the characteristics of property sought to be included in the agricultural reserve program are included. Each factor is assigned a numerical weight signifying its importance relative to all other factors in that category. Each factor is also stratified into a range of possible point values ranging from zero (0) to ten (10). To determine the total points assigned to such property, the values for all five (5) categories are added. Property having the highest total scores shall rank highest in priority of acquisition. The maximum total score is one hundred (100) points. The categories, with their respective factors and weights, are as follows: 
(1)  Quality of the farmland (productivity capability) constitutes thirty-five (35) percent of the number of points in the system. Factors and weights are as follows: 
A.  Size of farm (Weight = 10) 
100 acres or more 	10 
60 to 99 acres 	7 
20 to 59 acres 	4 
10 to 19 acres 	2 
Less than 10 acres 	0 
 
B.  Soils—Percentage in United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service Land Capability Classification System Land Capability Class 1, 2E, 2W, 3W, and 4W undrained (Weight = 10) 
80% or more 	10 
60 to 79% 	8 
40 to 59% 	6 
20 to 39% 	3 
Less than 20% 	0 
 
C.  Percentage of farm in cropland or pasture (Weight = 8) 
80% or more 	10 
60 to 79% 	7 
40 to 59% 	4 
20 to 39% 	2 
Less than 20% 	0 
 
D.  On-farm agricultural infrastructure and improvements (Weight = 8) 
Unique regional services 	10 
Headquarters farm 	9 
Good farm buildings 	7 
Adequate farm buildings 	3 
 
No farm buildings 	0 
 
E.  Percentage of farm in high-value crops (Weight = 6) 
80% or more 	10 
60 to 79% 	7 
40 to 59% 	5 
20 to 39% 	3 
Less than 20% 	0 
 
F.  Amount of animal units produced on the farm (Weight = 6) 
250 animal units or more 	10 
150 to 249 animal units 	8 
75 to 149 animal units 	5 
25 to 74 animal units 	3 
Less than 25 animal units 	0 
 
(2)  Circumstances supporting agriculture constitutes twenty-five (25) percent of the number of points in the system. Factors and weights are as follows: 
A.  Number of nonfarm rural residences within one-half mile of the farm (Weight = 10) 
0 to 3 dwelling units 	10 
4 to 7 dwelling units 	8 
8 to 12 dwelling units 	5 
13 to 18 dwelling units 	3 
More than 18 units 	0 
 
B.  Proximity of parcel to other farms with agricultural reserve program or other perpetual easements (Weight = 10) 
Contiguous 	10 
Within ¼ mile 	8 
Within ½ mile 	5 
Within 1 mile 	3 
Greater than 1 mile 	0 
 
C.  Proximity to significant or unique agricultural support services (Weight = 10) 
Contiguous 	10 
Within 1 mile 	8 
Within 2 miles 	5 
Within 3 miles 	3 
Greater than 3 miles 	0 
 
D.  Batch application with contiguous parcels (Weight = 10) 
Contiguous 	10 
Not contiguous 	0 
 
(3)  Likelihood of conversion to nonfarm use (development pressure) constitutes twenty (20) percent of the number of points in the system. Factors and weights are as follows: 
A.  Urgency of circumstances favoring conversions (Weight = 10) 
Farm subject to potential forced sale 	10 
Farm subject to estate settlement sale 	8 
Farm actively marketed for voluntary sale 	6 
Other 	0 
 
B.  Farm suitability for residential conversion—Percentage of well or moderately well-drained soils on the farm (Weight = 6) 
80% or more 	10 
60 to 79% 	8 
40 to 59% 	6 
20 to 39% 	3 
Less than 20% 	0 
 
C.  Percentage of farm offered to agricultural reserve program (Weight = 10) 
90% or greater 	10 
70 to 89% 	6 
Less than 70% 	0 
 
D.  Amount of public road contiguous to farm (Weight = 10) 
1,000 linear feet or more 	10 
600 to 999 feet 	8 
300 to 599 feet 	7 
100 to 299 feet 	4 
Less than 100 feet 	0 
 
E.  Aesthetic value of forest on the farm (Weight = 8) 
No significant timber harvest within 20 years 	10 
Significant timber harvest within 10 to 20 years 	4 
Significant timber harvest within 5 to 10 years 	2 
Significant timber harvest within 5 years, land cut over within 10 years and not reforested, or land cut over within 5 years and not reforested 	0 
 
(4)  Environmental quality constitutes fifteen (15) percent of the number of points in the system. Factors and weights are as follows: 
A.  Percentage of farm in upland forest (excluding swamp) (Weight = 10) 
80% or more 	10 
60 to 79% 	8 
40 to 59% 	6 
20 to 39% 	3 
Less than 20% 	0 
 
B.  Proximity to areas identified as having high environmental value, such as state or federal parks, areas within the Back Bay National Wildlife Refuge designated expansion boundary, exemplary wetlands, critical areas and endangered species habitat, as shown in "A Natural Areas Inventory of the City of Virginia Beach", Natural Heritage Technical Report 93-14 (Weight = 10) 
Contiguous 	10 
Within ½ mile 	8 
Within 1 mile 	5 
Within 1½ miles 	2 
Greater than 1½ miles 	0 
 
C.  Proximity of farm to perennial stream or waterway (Weight = 10) 
Farm either includes or is adjacent to perennial waterway 	10 
All other 	0 
 
(5)  Historic, scenic, and application frequency constitutes five (5) percent of the number of points in the system. Factors and weights are as follows: 
A.  Proximity to historic or cultural features (Weight = 6) 
On-farm exceptional features favorable to preservation, as noted in the Reconnaissance Architectural Survey Report, City of Virginia Beach 	10 
Exceptional features favorable to preservation within ¼ mile 	8 
Exceptional features within ½ mile 	7 
Exceptional features further than ½ mile 	0 
 
B.  Frequency of application submittal (Weight = 10) 
Third or more time 	10 
Second time 	5 
First time 	0 
 
(Ord. No. 2585, 6-6-00)  
APPENDIX K - FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1.1. - Statutory authorization and purpose. 
A.  This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to localities by Code of Virginia § 10.1-600 et seq. 
B.  The city council finds the purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of life and property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by: 
1.  Regulating uses, activities, and development that, alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities, and frequencies; 
2.  Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within districts subject to flooding; 
3.  Requiring all uses, activities, and developments that do occur in flood-prone districts be protected or flood-proofed against flooding and flood damage; 
4.  Protecting individuals from buying land and structures that are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards; and 
5.  Acknowledging that the tide data over the last one hundred (100) years shows that Virginia Beach is facing an increased danger of flooding caused by both sea level rise and subsidence. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 1.2. - Applicability. 
These provisions shall apply to all privately and publicly owned lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Virginia Beach and identified as areas of special flood hazard according to the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) that is provided to the City of Virginia Beach by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and dated January 16, 2015 or identified as floodplains subject to special restrictions in section 4.10 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3376, 10-7-14)  
Sec. 1.3. - Definitions. 
Base flood. The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year; also referred to as the one hundred (100) year flood. 
Base flood elevation. The FEMA designated one (1) percent annual chance water surface elevation. The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the datum specified on the city's FIRM. 
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended, through its design and construction, to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
City council. The body designated to review appeals made by individuals with regard to decisions of the floodplain administrator in the interpretation of this ordinance. 
City manager. The City Manager of the City of Virginia Beach, or his designees. 
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, the placement of manufactured homes, streets, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, or the subdivision of land. 
Elevated building. A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, or columns (posts and piers). 
Encroachment. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
Existing construction. Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the most recent FIRM (January 16, 2015) "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Flood or flooding. 
1.  A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or 
c.  Mudflows, which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph 1.b. of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
2.  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, an unanticipated force of nature such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event that results in flooding as defined in paragraph 1.a. of this definition. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map of the city, on which FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM). 
Flood Insurance Study (FIS). A report by FEMA that examines, evaluates, and determines flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation, and determination of mudflow and flood-related erosion hazards. 
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
Flood proofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that shall be reserved to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. The "floodway" may also be referred to as the "regulatory floodway". 
Freeboard. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above the base flood elevation for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization in the watershed. When a freeboard is included in the height of a structure, the flood insurance premiums may be less expensive. 
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs that have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Hydrologic and Hydraulic Engineering Analysis. Analyses performed by a professional engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia, in accordance with standard engineering practices that are accepted by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation and FEMA, used to determine the base flood, other frequency floods, flood elevations, floodway information and boundaries, and flood profiles. 
Letters of map change (LOMC). A letter of map change is an official FEMA determination, by letter, that amends or revises an effective FIRM or FIS. Letters of map change include: 
1.  Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area (SFHA). A LOMA amends the current effective FIRM and establishes that a land as defined by metes and bounds or a structure is not located in a SFHA. 
2.  Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. A letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) is a determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer exposed to flooding associated with the base flood. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the city's floodplain management ordinance. 
3.  Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of SFHAs. A CLOMR does not revise the effective FIRM or FIS. 
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Federal Code 44CFR § 60.3. 
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, but does not include a recreational vehicle. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value. The value of a structure, established prior to the damage in question, as determined by property values used for tax assessment purposes (assessment) as adjusted by the Virginia Beach Real Estate Assessor (market factor) to reflect current market conditions, or as determined by an independent appraisal done by a professional appraiser. 
New construction. For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after October 3, 1970 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management ordinance adopted by the city and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
Post-FIRM structures. A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred after October 3, 1970. 
Pre-FIRM structures. A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before October 3, 1970. 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle that is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory flood protection elevation (design flood elevation). The base flood elevation plus the freeboard required by this ordinance. 
Repetitive loss. Flood-related damages to a structure sustained on two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each flood event, on average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the most recent damage occurred. 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as set forth in this ordinance. These areas are designated as AE, AH, AO, A, and VE on the FIRM. 
Start of construction. For other than new construction and substantial improvement under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of the construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement official and are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
3.  Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as defined above, shall comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic places shall be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the provisions of the floodplain ordinance in effect at the time of construction or development. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial lake, river, creek, stream, ditch, channel, waterway, gully, ravine, swale, or wash in which water flows, either continuously, periodically, or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed, or banks. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3376, 10-7-14; Ord. No. 3580, 2-5-19)  
Sec. 1.4. - Compliance and liability. 
A.  No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this ordinance and any other applicable ordinances and regulations that apply to uses within the city. 
B.  The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study, but does not imply total flood protection. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This ordinance does not imply that districts outside the floodplain district or land uses permitted within such district will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
C.  This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Virginia Beach or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 1.5. - Records. 
Records of actions associated with administering this ordinance shall be kept on file and maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 1.6. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This ordinance supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in the floodplain. Any ordinance, however, shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 1.7. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 1.8. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person who fails to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of this ordinance or directions of the directors of planning or public works or any authorized employee of the City of Virginia Beach shall be guilty of the appropriate violation and subject to the penalties therefore. Any violation of the provision of this ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is committed. 
The Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (VA USBC) addresses building code violations and the associated penalties in section 104 and section 115. 
In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this ordinance. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this ordinance shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in noncompliance with this ordinance may be declared by the City of Virginia Beach to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. Flood insurance may be withheld from structures constructed in violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 2.1. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The City Manager of the City of Virginia Beach is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement this ordinance. The floodplain administrator has delegated the duties and responsibilities set forth in this ordinance to the departments of public works and planning, as specified below. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 2.2. - Duties and responsibilities of the department of public works. 
The duties and responsibilities of the department of public works shall include but are not limited to: 
A.  Interpreting floodplain boundaries and providing available base flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
B.  Verifying that applicants proposing an alteration of a watercourse have notified adjacent communities, the department of conservation and recreation (division of dam safety and floodplain management), and other appropriate agencies (Virginia Department of Environmental Quality (VADEQ), United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), etc.) and have submitted copies of such notifications to FEMA; 
C.  Advising applicants for new construction or substantial improvement of structures that are located within an area of the coastal barrier resources system established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act that Federal flood insurance is not available on such structures; areas subject to this limitation are shown on FIRMs as coastal barrier resource system areas or otherwise protected areas; 
D.  Submitting to FEMA, or requiring applicants to submit to FEMA, data and information necessary to maintain FIRMs, including hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses prepared by or for the city, within six (6) months after such data and information becomes available if the analyses indicate changes in base flood elevations; 
E.  Maintaining and permanently keeping flood insurance studies, FIRMs (including historic studies and maps and current effective studies and maps) and letters of map change; 
F.  Notifying FEMA when the corporate boundaries of the City of Virginia Beach have been modified and: 
1.  Providing a map that clearly delineates the new corporate boundaries or the new area for which the authority to regulate pursuant to this ordinance has either been assumed or relinquished through annexation; and 
2.  If the FIRM for any annexed area includes SFHAs that have flood zones with regulatory requirements that are not set forth in this ordinance, prepare amendments to this ordinance to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirements, and submit the amendments to the city council for adoption; such adoption shall take place at the same time as or prior to the date of annexation and a copy of the amended ordinance shall be provided to the department of conservation and recreation (division of dam safety and floodplain management) and FEMA. 
G.  Upon the request of FEMA, completing and submitting a report concerning participation in the NFIP, which may request information regarding the number of buildings in the SFHA, the number of permits issued for development in the SFHA, and the number of variances issued for development in the SFHA. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 2.3. - Duties and responsibilities of the department of planning. 
The duties and responsibilities of the department of planning shall include but are not limited to: 
A.  Reviewing applications for permits to determine whether proposed activities will be located in the SFHA; 
B.  Reviewing applications to determine whether proposed activities will be reasonably safe from flooding and requiring new construction and substantial improvements to meet the requirements of this ordinance; 
C.  Reviewing applications to determine whether all necessary permits have been obtained from the federal, state, or local agencies from which prior or concurrent approval is required; in particular, permits from state agencies for any construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a dam, reservoir, or waterway obstruction (including bridges, culverts, structures), any alteration of a watercourse, or any change of the course, current, or cross section of a stream or body of water, including any change to the SFHAs of free-flowing non-tidal waters of the state; 
D.  Approving applications and issuing permits to develop in flood hazard areas if the provisions of this ordinance have been met, or disapproving applications if the provisions of this ordinance have not been met; 
E.  Granting administrative variances pursuant to section 6.1 of this ordinance; 
F.  Inspecting, or causing to be inspected, buildings, structures, and other development for which permits have been issued to determine compliance with this ordinance or to determine if non-compliance has occurred or violations have been committed; 
G.  Reviewing elevation certificates and requiring incomplete or deficient certificates to be corrected; 
H.  Maintaining and permanently keeping documentation supporting the issuance and denial of permits, elevation certificates, documentation of the elevation (in relation to the datum on the FIRM) to which structures have been flood proofed, and other required design certifications, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken to correct violations of this ordinance; 
I.  Enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, investigating violations, issuing notices of violations or stop work orders, and requiring permit holders to take corrective action; 
J.  Advising the city council regarding the intent of this ordinance and, for each application for a variance, preparing a staff report and recommendation; and 
K.  Administering the requirements related to proposed work on existing buildings: 
1.  Making determinations as to whether buildings and structures that are located in flood hazard areas and that are damaged by any cause have been substantially damaged; and 
2.  Making reasonable efforts to notify owners of substantially damaged structures of the need to obtain a permit to repair, rehabilitate, or reconstruct, and prohibit the non-compliant repair of substantially damaged buildings except for temporary emergency protective measures necessary to secure a property or stabilize a building or structure to prevent additional damage. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 2.4. - Shared duties and responsibilities. 
The duties and responsibilities shared by the departments of public works and Planning shall include but are not limited to: 
A.  Undertaking, as determined appropriate by the floodplain administrator due to the circumstances, other actions that may include but are not limited to: issuing press releases, public service announcements, and other public information materials related to permit requests and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations; providing owners of damaged structures information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in SFHAs; and assisting property owners with documentation necessary to file claims for increased cost of compliance coverage under National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) flood insurance policies; and 
B.  It is the duty of the city floodplain administrator to take into account flood, mudslide, and flood-related erosion hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions relating to land management and use throughout the entire jurisdictional area of the city, whether or not those hazards have been specifically delineated geographically (e.g., via mapping or surveying). 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 2.5. - Use and interpretation of FIRMs. 
The floodplain administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of SFHAs, floodplain boundaries, and floodway boundaries. The following shall apply to the use and interpretation of FIRMs and data: 
A.  Where field surveyed topography indicates that adjacent ground elevations: 
1.  Are below the base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a SFHA on a FIRM, the area shall be considered a SFHA and subject to the requirements of this ordinance; 
2.  Are above the base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as a SFHA unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the SFHA. 
B.  In FEMA-identified SFHAs where base flood elevation and floodway data have not been identified and in areas where FEMA has not identified SFHAs, any other flood hazard data available from a federal, state, local or other source shall be reviewed and reasonably used. 
C.  Base flood elevations and designated floodway boundaries on FIRMs and in Flood Insurance Studies (FISs) shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway boundaries by any other sources if such sources show reduced floodway widths or lower base flood elevations. 
D.  Other sources of data shall be reasonably used if such sources show increased base flood elevations or larger floodway areas than are shown on FIRMs and in FISs. 
E.  If a preliminary FIRM and/or a preliminary FIS has been provided by FEMA: 
1.  Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and shall replace the flood hazard data previously provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering this ordinance. 
2.  Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall be deemed the best available data pursuant to section 4.6 and used where no base flood elevations or floodway areas are provided on the effective FIRM. 
3.  Prior to issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data is permitted where the preliminary base flood elevations or floodway areas exceed the base flood elevations or designated floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided by FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to change or appeal to FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 2.6. - Jurisdictional boundary changes. 
A.  The city floodplain ordinance in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas. The city shall pass a resolution acknowledging and accepting responsibility for enforcing floodplain ordinance standards prior to annexation of any area containing identified flood hazards. If the FIRM for any annexed area includes SFHAs that have flood zones with regulatory requirements that are not set forth in this ordinance, the city shall prepare amendments to this ordinance to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirements, and submit the amendments to the city council for adoption; such adoption shall take place at the same time as or prior to the date of annexation and a copy of the amended ordinance shall be provided to the department of conservation and recreation (division of dam safety and floodplain management) and FEMA. 
B.  In accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 44 Subpart (B) Section 59.22(a)(9)(v), all NFIP participating communities shall notify FEMA and, optionally, the department of conservation and recreation in writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified by annexation or the community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. 
C.  So that all FIRMs accurately represent the community's boundaries, a copy of a map of the community suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for which the community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority shall be included with the notification. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 2.7. - District boundary changes. 
The delineation of any of the floodplain districts may be revised by the City of Virginia Beach where natural or man-made changes have occurred or where more detailed studies have been conducted or undertaken by the USACE or other qualified agencies, or an individual documents the need for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval shall be obtained from FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 2.8. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the floodplain administrator. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the city council shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the city council and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 2.9. - Submitting technical data. 
A community's base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 2.10. - Letters of map revision. 
When development in the floodplain causes a change in the base flood elevation, the applicant, including state agencies, shall notify FEMA by applying for a conditional letter of map revision or a letter of map revision. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 2.11. - Appeals to decisions made by the floodplain administrator. 
It is further provided that any decision of the floodplain administrator or his designee may be modified, reversed, or affirmed by the city council upon appeal by any aggrieved party to such decision, if such appeal is filed with the floodplain administrator within thirty (30) days of such decision. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
ARTICLE III. - ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 3.1. - Description of floodplain districts. 
A.  Special flood hazard areas (SFHA). The SFHAs shall include land in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the FIS and the FIRM for the City of Virginia Beach prepared by FEMA, Federal Insurance Administration, dated January 16, 2015, and any subsequent revisions or amendments thereto. 
The boundaries of the SFHAs are established as shown on the FIRM, which is declared to be a part of this ordinance and shall be kept on file at the City of Virginia Beach Department of Public Works, and include the following districts: 
1.  The Floodway District is in an AE Zone and is delineated, for the purposes of this ordinance, using the criterion that certain areas within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the one (1) percent annual chance flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point. The areas included in this district are specifically defined in Table 7 of the above-referenced FIS and shown on the accompanying FIRM. 
2.  The AE or AH Zones on the FIRM accompanying the FIS shall be those areas for which one (1) percent annual chance flood elevations have been provided and the floodway has not been delineated. 
3.  The A Zone on the FIRM accompanying the FIS shall be those areas for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but the one (1) percent annual chance floodplain boundary has been approximated. 
4.  The AO Zone on the FIRM accompanying the FIS shall be those areas of shallow flooding identified as AO on the FIRM. 
5.  Reserved. 
6.  The VE or V Zones on FIRMs accompanying the FIS shall be those areas that are known as coastal high hazard areas, extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storm or seismic sources. 
B.  Floodplain subject to special restrictions. The City of Virginia Beach may identify and regulate local flood hazard or ponding areas that are not delineated on the FIRM. These areas are identified in section 4.10 and may be delineated on a map using best available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood of record, historic high water marks, or approximate study methodologies. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3376, 10-7-14)  
ARTICLE IV. - FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 4.1. - Permit and application requirements. 
A.  Permit requirement. All uses, activities, and development occurring within any floodplain district, including placement of manufactured homes and structures, shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of the appropriate permit. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and with all other applicable codes and ordinances, as amended, such as the VA USBC and the City of Virginia Beach development ordinances. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the building official shall require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and shall review all sites to assure they are reasonably safe from flooding. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
B.  Site plans and permit applications. All applications for development within any floodplain district and all building permits issued within the floodplain shall incorporate the following information: 
1.  The elevation of the base flood at the site; 
2.  The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or, in V Zones, the lowest horizontal structural member; 
3.  For structures to be flood-proofed (non-residential only), the elevation to which the structure will be flood-proofed; and 
4.  Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground elevations. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 4.2. - General standards. 
A.  The following provisions shall apply to all permits issued in all floodplain districts: 
1.  New construction and substantial improvements of all structures shall be located, elevated, and constructed according to the VA USBC and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
2.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
3.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
4.  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
5.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities, including duct work, shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
6.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
7.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
8.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
9.  No use shall be permitted if such use will increase the amounts of potentially damaging materials, including those likely to be injurious to health, that might be transported in floods. 
B.  In all SFHAs, the following additional provisions shall apply: 
1.  Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or of any watercourse or stream, within the city a permit shall be obtained from the USACE, VADEQ, the Virginia Marine Resources Commission, and the Wetlands Board through the joint permit application process. Furthermore, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all affected adjacent jurisdictions, the department of conservation and recreation (division of dam safety and floodplain management), other required agencies, and FEMA. 
2.  The flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse shall be maintained. 
3.  Sand dunes, barrier beaches, and other natural protective barriers shall remain intact to provide protection against wind, waves, and erosion drainage. Any person who desires to use or alter any coastal primary sand dune, other than for the purpose of conducting the activities specified in section 1602 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Virginia Beach, shall first obtain a permit from the USACE, VADEQ, the Virginia Marine Resources Commission, and the Wetlands Board through the joint permit application process. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 4.3. - Elevation and construction requirements. 
In all SFHAs where base flood elevations have been provided in the FIS or generated by a licensed professional in accordance with section 4.6 of this ordinance, the following provisions shall apply: 
A.  Residential construction requirements. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure or manufactured home in Zones AE, AH, and A with detailed base flood elevations shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to a minimum of two (2) feet above the base flood level. 
B.  Non-residential construction requirements. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of two (2) feet above the base flood level. Buildings located in AE or AH Zones may be flood-proofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building components below the elevation corresponding to the base flood elevation plus a minimum of two (2) feet freeboard are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A professional engineer or architect licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification, including the specific elevation (in relation to NAVD88) to which such structures are flood proofed, shall be maintained by the building official. 
C.  Space below the lowest floor requirements. In Zones A, AE, AH, and AO, fully enclosed areas of new construction or substantially improved existing structures that are below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall: 
1.  Not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door), limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
2.  Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials below the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
3.  Include measures to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings shall either be certified by a professional engineer or architect licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia or meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria: 
a.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding. 
b.  The total net area of all openings shall be at least one (1) square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
c.  If a building has more than one (1) enclosed area, each area shall have openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit. 
d.  The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the adjacent grade. 
e.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other opening coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
f.  Foundation enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes and, therefore, do not require openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires openings as outlined above. 
D.  Manufactured homes and recreational vehicle requirements. 
1.  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels or in an existing manufactured home park or in a Recreational Resort Community must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the elevation and anchoring requirements in article 4, section 4.2, and section 4.3 of this ordinance. 
2.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites shall either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions); or 
c.  Meet all the requirements for manufactured homes in article 4 section 4.3 D.1., and the provisions of section 4.9 if located in a V or VE Zone. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3376, 10-7-14; Ord. No. 3417, 6-2-15)  
Sec. 4.4. - Floodway requirements. 
The following provisions shall apply within the Floodway District of an AE zone: 
A.  Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment will not affect normal flood flow, result in any increase in flood levels within the community, increase erosion within or adjoining to the floodway, cause the diversion of floodwaters during the occurrence of the base flood discharge, increase peak flows or velocities in a manner likely to lead to added property damage or hazards to life, or increase the amounts of damaging materials that might be transported in floods. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently-accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the floodplain administrator. 
Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development within the floodway that would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge is specifically prohibited. No variance shall be granted for any development, use, or activity that would cause any increase in the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
If the above provisions are satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable provisions of article 4. 
B.  The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes (mobile homes) is prohibited. 
C.  The following uses and structures may be permitted in the floodway district, subject to the requirements of articles III, IV, V, and VI of this ordinance: 
1.  Public and private outdoor recreational facilities; 
2.  Agricultural uses, including farming, grazing, and the raising of poultry or livestock; provided, that poultry or livestock shall not be housed within five hundred (500) feet of any residential, apartment, or hotel district; 
3.  Open uses, such as public and private roadways, off street parking, or loading and unloading areas related to uses in adjoining districts; 
4.  Commercial mining, soil removal, and sand pits subject to regulations applicable to extractive industries as set forth in the conditional use provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Virginia Beach; 
5.  Public improvements, such as dams, levees and channel improvements, and utilities installations and substations, including temporary storage of materials, except flammable, toxic or noxious materials, and temporary location of maintenance installations; and 
6.  Uses and structures customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to uses listed above, including in connection with agricultural uses; roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products produced on the premises; provided that: 
a.  Only one (1) such stand shall be permitted per lot; 
b.  No such stand shall exceed five hundred (500) square feet in floor area; and 
c.  No such stand on the street frontage shall be erected within twenty (20) feet of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 4.5. - AE or AH Zone requirements. 
The following provisions shall apply in the AE or AH Zones: 
A.  Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within the areas of special flood hazard, designated as Zone AE or AH on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the city. 
B.  Notwithstanding the criteria set forth in section 4.10, development activities in Zones AE or AH on the City of Virginia Beach FIRM that increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot may be allowed, provided that the applicant first applies, with the City of Virginia Beach's endorsement, for a conditional letter of map revision, and receives the approval of FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3376, 10-7-14)  
Sec. 4.6. - A Zone requirements. 
The following provisions shall apply within an A Zone: 
A.  For these areas, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevations and floodway information from federal, state, and other acceptable sources, when available. Where the specific one (1) percent annual chance flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data, such as the USACE Floodplain Information Reports, the U.S. Geological Survey Floodprone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use, development, and/or activity shall determine this base flood elevation. For development proposed in the A Zone the applicant shall use technical methods that correctly reflect currently accepted non-detailed technical concepts, such as flood hazard analyses, point on boundary, known high water marks from past floods, or detailed methodologies including hydrologic and hydraulic analyses. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the floodplain administrator. 
B.  The floodplain administrator reserves the right to require a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for any development and to determine the base flood elevation. When such base flood elevation data is utilized, the lowest floor shall be elevated to minimum of two (2) feet above the base flood level. During the permitting process, the floodplain administrator shall obtain: 
1.  The elevation of the lowest floor (including the basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and 
2.  If the structure has been flood-proofed in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance, the elevation (in relation to NAVD88) to which the structure has been flood-proofed. 
C.  When the data is not available from any source, the lowest floor of the structure shall be elevated to not less than two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 4.7. - AO Zone requirements. 
The following provisions shall apply within an AO Zone: 
A.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade an amount not less than the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated no less than two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
B.  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall: 
1.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade an amount not less than the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade; or 
2.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely flood-proofed to the specified flood level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
C.  Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 4.8. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4.9. - V and VE Zone requirements. 
The following provisions shall apply within V and VE Zones: 
A.  All new construction and substantial improvements, including to manufactured homes, shall be elevated on pilings or columns so that: 
1.  The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to a minimum of two (2) feet above the base flood level; and 
2.  The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Wind and water loading values shall each have a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
B.  A professional engineer or architect licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia shall develop or review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of article IV, section 4.6 A. 
C.  The floodplain administrator shall obtain the elevation (in relation to NAVD88) of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns) of all new and substantially improved structures in Zones V and VE. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all such information. 
D.  All new construction shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
E.  A professional engineer or architect licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia shall develop and seal the structural design, specifications and plans for construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used meet the following requirements: 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls, open wood-lattice work, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
2.  Breakaway walls shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. 
3.  The use of breakaway walls that exceed a design safe loading resistance of twenty (20) pounds per square foot may be permitted only if a professional engineer or architect licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia certifies that the designs proposed meet the following conditions: 
a.  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
b.  The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Water loading values shall be those associated with the base flood elevation on the FIRMs. Wind loading values shall be those required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (VA USBC). 
F.  The enclosed space below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage. Such space shall not be partitioned into multiple rooms, temperature-controlled, or used for human habitation. 
G.  The use of fill for structural support of buildings is prohibited. When non-structural fill is proposed in a coastal high hazard area, appropriate engineering analyses shall be conducted to evaluate the impacts of the fill prior to issuance of a development permit. 
H.  Existing nonconforming uses and structures located below the level of the base flood elevation, as shown in the FIS and accompanying FIRMs, shall not be expanded. 
I.  The man-made alteration of sand dunes, which would increase potential flood damage, is prohibited. 
J.  Manufactured homes are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3376, 10-7-14; Ord. No. 3417, 6-2-15)  
Sec. 4.10. - Floodplain subject to special restrictions. 
A.  All FIRM delineated SFHAs located in the following areas shall be identified as a floodplain subject to special restrictions: 
1.  North Landing River and its tributaries south of Lynnhaven Parkway; 
2.  West Neck Creek and its tributaries south of Shipps Corner Road, London Bridge Road, and the portion of Dam Neck Road east of its intersection with London Bridge Road; and 
3.  Bays, creeks, lakes, guts, coves, wetlands, marshes and swamps and their tributaries comprising the Back Bay and Small Coastal South watersheds south of South Birdneck Road and east of Princess Anne Road and General Booth Boulevard. 
B.  The following provisions shall apply within the floodplain subject to special restrictions: 
1.  Notwithstanding any provision of this ordinance to the contrary, no filling shall be permitted, including filling with material excavated from the same floodplain except for: 
a.  The purpose of public roadway or other similar public works construction; 
b.  The maintenance, alteration, or relocation of bona fide agricultural ditches, swales, or agricultural pathways or those ditches required for proper lot drainage; 
c.  For shoreline stabilization or maintenance projects, such as riprap revetment, bulkheads, or other treatment used to stabilize and protect the banks of waterways, the city manager or his designee may approve the placement of fill provided the following criteria are met: 
i.  A joint permit application is submitted; 
ii.  The alignment of the stabilization structure is along the escarpment or in line with adjacent stabilization structures; and 
iii.  Fill must be the minimum necessary to support the stabilization project. 
2.  The city manager, or his designee, may approve the placement of fill provided that the following criteria are met: 
a.  Proposed fill within the floodplain: 
i.  Shall be mitigated to result in no decrease in flood storage volume on the site; 
ii.  Shall be mitigated entirely on the same site that will incur the fill; 
iii.  Shall be contiguous to the existing floodplain that is being filled; and 
iv.  Shall be limited to the smallest amount of area and volume possible to correct irregularities within the boundary of the project. 
b.  The combined areas of fill and mitigation shall not exceed five (5) percent of the total area within the floodplain located on the site that will incur the fill. 
3.  Residential dwelling structures shall not be located within the floodplains subject to special restrictions on lots created after October 23, 2001. Residential dwelling structures located in local flood hazard areas as of October 23, 2001 may be expanded with attached additions to a total footprint of less than one thousand (1,000) square feet; such additions shall also comply with the requirements set forth in article V of this ordinance. 
4.  On lots where single family dwellings are permitted by right and which were recorded on or before October 23, 2001 and meet the requirements of section 402(b) of the city zoning ordinance, the minimum fill necessary shall be permitted only for the following: 
a.  A driveway or other on-site parking area; 
b.  To ensure the proper functioning of a septic system; 
c.  To ensure proper lot drainage given the existing and proposed development in the immediate area; and 
d.  To meet the VA USBC requirements for slab or crawl foundations. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3371, 9-16-14)  
Sec. 4.11. - Subdivision proposal requirements. 
A.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
B.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
C.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
D.  Base flood elevation data shall be obtained from the most recent FIRM (January 16, 2015) or developed using detailed methodologies, including hydraulic and hydrologic analysis, comparable to those contained in a FIS for all final plats and other development proposals (including manufactured home parks and neighborhoods). 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3376, 10-7-14)  
ARTICLE V. - EXISTING STRUCTURES IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS 
 
Sec. 5.1. - Existing structures. 
A structure or use of a structure or premises that lawfully existed prior to the adoption of this ordinance, but which is not in conformity with this ordinance, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Any existing structures in the floodway area shall not be expanded or enlarged unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed expansion or enlargement would not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
B.  Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use located in any floodplain areas to an extent or amount of less than fifty (50) percent of its market value shall conform to the VA USBC and meet the freeboard height in effect at the start of construction for the original structure. 
C.  Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use, in a floodplain area to an extent or amount of fifty (50) percent or more of its market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with this ordinance and shall require the entire structure to conform to the VA USBC. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3417, 6-2-15)  
ARTICLE VI. - VARIANCES AND APPEALS 
 
Sec. 6.1. - Administrative variances. 
The floodplain administrator shall approve or deny an application requesting an administrative variance after receipt of a complete application. Administrative variances may only be granted for the following uses, development, or redevelopment: 
A.  As defined in section 4.10, floodplains subject to special restrictions, for filling only. 
B.  Any structure or use sustaining damage not caused by flood to an extent or amount of fifty (50) percent or more of its market value to allow the structure to be rebuilt to the freeboard height in effect at the start of construction for the original structure. If the structure is a pre-FIRM structure, full compliance with the current VAUSBC freeboard above the base flood elevation is required. Structures that are utilizing an approved land management plan for their on-site waste disposal may be allowed to continue the use of the land management plan as long as it is approved by the city and the health department, even for damage or destruction resulting from flood. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3417, 6-2-15)  
Sec. 6.2. - City council variances. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, the city council shall have the authority to grant such variances from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest in cases in which the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the use of the subject property. No variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within any Floodway District that will cause any increase of the base flood elevation. 
B.  In acting upon applications for variances, the city council shall satisfy all relevant factors and procedures specified in other sections of this ordinance and shall consider the following additional factors: 
1.  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. 
2.  The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or transported in floods posing the risk of injury to others. 
3.  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions. 
4.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners. 
5.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
6.  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location. 
7.  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
8.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
9.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
10.  The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the property in time of flood. 
11.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site. 
12.  The historic nature of a structure. Variances for repair or rehabilitation of historic structures may be granted upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
13.  Such other factors that are relevant to the purposes of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 6.3. - Application process. 
A.  Applications for variances from the requirements of this ordinance shall be made to the city council and filed with the director of planning. The fee for such applications shall be six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00). Such fee shall include all costs of notifications and advertising. Except in cases in which such fee is waived, the director shall not accept any application not accompanied by payment of the required fee. The procedure for the advertising, hearing and determination of applications for floodplain variances shall be in accordance with the requirements pertaining to applications for subdivision variances, as set forth in section 9.4 of the subdivision ordinance. In cases in which a variance application is filed by reason of a natural disaster that is the subject of a federal declaration of emergency, application and associated advertising fees shall be waived and such application shall be given expedited processing to the maximum practical extent. 
B.  All applications shall be accompanied by the following: 
1.  A separate map, on a 1? = 100' or greater scale, identifying all proposed land disturbance, including fill and mitigation areas, and the limits of the existing and proposed SFHAs, tidal and non-tidal wetlands, Southern Rivers Watershed Management Area Buffer, and CBPA Resource Protection Area Buffer; and 
2.  A preliminary floodplain study addressing the physical and environmental characteristics of the floodplain located on adjoining properties and in the general area. Such study shall be sufficient to show that the variance, if granted, will meet the standards defined in section 6.3 and in addition thereto, shall: 
a.  Contain supporting data and calculations as appropriate, given the preliminary nature of the floodplain study; 
b.  Comply with the Public Works Design Standards Manual; and 
c.  Be certified by a professional engineer, architect, surveyor, landscape architect or practitioner of a related field having a valid license issued by the Commonwealth of Virginia or who is exempt from licensure pursuant to applicable provisions of the Virginia Code. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3371, 9-16-14; Ord. No. 3547, 5-15-18, eff. 7-1-18; Ord. No. 3624, 6-16-20)  
Sec. 6.4. - Requirements. 
No variance shall be granted unless the following requirements are met: 
A.  Such variance will not create or result in: 
1.  Unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights; 
2.  Additional threats to public safety; 
3.  Extraordinary public expense; 
4.  Nuisances; or 
5.  Fraud or victimization of the public. 
B.  The granting of such variance will not be detrimental to other property in the vicinity. 
C.  The circumstances giving rise to the variance application are not of a general or recurring nature. 
D.  Such circumstances arise from the physical character of the property or from the use or development of adjacent property and not from the personal situation of the applicant. 
E.  The granting of such variance will not be in conflict with any city ordinance or regulation. 
F.  Variances shall be the minimum necessary to provide relief. 
G.  All variances shall meet all of the requirements for the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Ordinance (Appendix F) and the Southern Rivers Watershed Management Ordinance (Appendix G), unless a variance therefrom is granted. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13; Ord. No. 3371, 9-16-14)  
Sec. 6.5. - Notification. 
The floodplain administrator shall notify the applicant for a variance in writing that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation a) increases the risks to life and property and b) will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 6.6. - Records. 
A record of all variance actions, including justifications for the granting of variances and notifications issued pursuant to this section shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. Any variances that are issued shall be noted in the annual or biennial report submitted to FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13)  
Sec. 6.7. - Appeals to variance decisions. 
Appeals of decisions by the city council under this ordinance shall be subject to review by the Circuit Court of the City of Virginia Beach, if filed within thirty (30) days from the date of city council action. 
(Ord. No. 3309, 11-26-13) 
